
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one ‘human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace, friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need,
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumadra acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabhari manusam janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

ix


--- Page 2 ---
3 Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-sitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos, because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another.

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface xi
namany anantasya yaso nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard.
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Orn tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam 15
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-siitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as ‘“‘the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami:

“You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. I am therefore begging you to show the
way of perfection for all persons, and especially for
one who is about to die. Please let me know what a
man should hear, chant, remember and worship,
and also what he should not do. Please explain all
this to me.”

xiii


--- Page 5 ---
xiv Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages
in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Sata Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, ৩008 Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit. .

The reader of Srimad-Bhdgavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sata Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Resi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Siita Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since philo-
sophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the text,
one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam
to appreciate fully its profound message.

The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy — wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable. Therefore, to taste the sweetness of the Bhagavatam, one may
begin by reading any of its volumes. After such an introductory taste,
however, the serious reader is best advised to go back to Volume One of
the First Canto and then proceed through the Bhagavatam, volume after
volume, in its natural order.


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction xv

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER ONE
The Manus,
Administrators of the Universe
First of all, let me offer my humble, respectful obeisances unto the lotus
feet of my spiritual master, His Divine Grace Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami Prabhupada. Sometime in the year 1935 when His
Divine Grace was staying at Radha-kunda, I went to see him from Bom-
bay. At that time, he gave me many important instructions in regard to
constructing temples and publishing books. He personally told me that
publishing books is more important than constructing temples. Of
course, those same instructions remained within my mind for many
years. In 1944 I began publishing my Back to Godhead, and when I
retired from family life in 1958 I began publishing Srimad-Bhagavatarn
in Delhi. When three parts of Srimad-Bhagavatam had been published
in India, I then started for the United States of America on the thirteenth
of August, 1965.

I am continuously trying to publish books, as suggested by my spiri-
tual master. Now, in this year, 1976, I have completed the Seventh Canto
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and a summary of the Tenth Canto has already
been published as Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, the
Eighth Canto, Ninth Canto, Tenth Canto, Eleventh Canto and Twelfth
Canto are yet to be published. On this occasion, therefore, I am praying
to my spiritual master to give me strength to finish this work. I am
neither a great scholar nor a great devotee; I am simply a humble servant
of my spiritual master, and to the best of my ability I am trying to please
him by publishing these books, with the cooperation of my disciples in
America. Fortunately, scholars all over the world are appreciating these
publications. Let us cooperatively publish more and more volumes of
Srimad-Bhagavatam just to please His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura.

This First Chapter of the Eighth Canto may be summarized as a de-
scription of four Manus, namely Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Uttama and

1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
Tamasa. After hearing descriptions of the dynasty of Svayambhuva
Manu until the end of the Seventh Canto, Maharaja Pariksit desired to
know about other Manus. He desired to understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead descends—not only in the past but at the present
and in the future—and how He acts in various pastimes as Manu. Since
Pariksit Maharaja was eager to know all this, Sukadeva Gosvami gradu-
ally described all the Manus, beginning with the six Manus who had ap-
peared in the past.

The first Manu was Svayambhuva Manu. His two daughters, namely
Akiti and Devahiti, gave birth to two sons, named Yajiia and Kapila re-
spectively. Because Sukadeva Gosvami had already described the ac-
tivities of Kapila in the Third Canto, he now described the activities of
Yajiia. The original Manu, along with his wife, Satariipa, went into the
forest to practice austerities on the bank of the River Sunanda. They
practiced austerities for a hundred years, and then Manu, in a trance,
formed prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Raksasas and
asuras then attempted to devour him, but Yajiia, accompanied by his sons
the Yamas and the demigods, killed them. Then Yajiia personally took
the post of Indra, the King of the heavenly planets.

The second Manu, whose name was Svarocisa, was the son of Agni,
and His sons were headed by Dyumat, Susena and Rocismat. In the age of
this Manu, Rocana became Indra, the ruler of the heavenly planets, and
there were many demigods, headed by Tusita. There were also many
saintly persons, such as Urja and Stambha. Among them was Vedasira,
whose wife, Tusita, gave birth to Vibhu. Vibhu instructed eighty-eight
thousand drdha-vratas, or saintly persons, on self-control and austerity.

Uttama, the son of Priyavrata, was the third Manu. Among his sons
were Pavana, Sriijaya and Yajfiahotra. During the reign of this Manu, the
sons of Vasistha, headed by Pramada, became the seven saintly persons.
The Satyas, Devasrutas and Bhadras became the demigods, and Satyajit
became Indra. From the womb of Sunrti, the wife of Dharma, the Lord
appeared as Satyasena, and He killed all the Yaksas and Raksasas who
were fighting with Satyajit.

Tamasa, the brother of the third Manu, was the fourth Manu, and he
had ten sons, including Prthu, Khyati, Nara and Ketu. During his reign,
the Satyakas, Haris, Viras and others were demigods, the seven great
saints were headed by Jyotirdhima, and TriSikha became Indra.


--- Page 9 ---
Text 2] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 3
Harimedha begot a son named Hari in the womb of his wife Harini. This
Hari, an incarnation of God, saved the devotee Gajendra. This incident is
described as gajendra-moksana. At the end of this chapter, Pariksit
Maharaja particularly asks about this incident.
TEXT 1
श्रीराजोवाच
WIRE गुरो वंशोऽयं विस्तराच्छ्रुतः |
यत्र विश्वसुजां सर्गो मनूलन्यान्वदसख নঃ।। १॥
Sri-rajovaca
svayambhuvasyeha guro
varii$o yar vistarac chrutah
yatra viSva-srjam sargo
maniin anyan vadasva nah
sri-raja uvaca—the King (Maharaja Pariksit) said;
svayambhuvasya—of the great personality Sviyambhuva Manu; tha—
in this connection; guro—O my spiritual master; varmsah—dynasty;
ayam—this; vistarat—extensively; Srutah—I have heard (from you);
yatra—wherein; visva-srjam—of the great personalities known as the
prajapatis, such as Marici; sargah—creation, involving the birth of
many sons and grandsons from the daughters of Manu; manin—Manus;
anyan—other; vadasva—kindly describe; nah—to us.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit said: O my lord, my spiritual master, now I have
fully heard from Your Grace about the dynasty of Svayambhuva
Manu. But there are also other Manus, and I want to hear about
their dynasties. Kindly describe them to us.
TEXT 2
मन्वन्तरे RE कर्माणि च महीयसः |
गृणन्ति कवयो ब्रह्मंस्तानि नो बद्‌ शृण्वताम्‌ ॥ २॥


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
manvantare harer janma
karmani ca mahtyasah
grnanti kavayo brahmarns
tani no vada Srnvatam

manvantare—during the change of manvantaras (one Manu following
another); hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; janma—ap-
pearance; karmani—and activities; ca—also; mahiyasah—of the
supremely glorified; grnanti—describe; kavayah—the great learned
persons who have perfect intelligence; brahman—O learned brahmana
(Sukadeva Gosvami); tani—all of them; nah—to us; vada—please de-
scribe; Srnvatam—who are very eager to hear.

TRANSLATION

O learned brahmana, Sukadeva Gosvami, the great learned per-
sons who are completely intelligent describe the activities and ap-
pearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead during the
various manvantaras. We are very eager to hear about these narra-
tions. Kindly describe them.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has different varieties of incar-
nations, including the guna-avataras, manvantara-avataras, lila-
avataras and yuga-avatdras, all of which are described in the sastras.
Without reference to the sastras there can be no question of accepting
anyone as an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, as especially mentioned here, grnanti kavayah: the descrip-
tions of various incarnations are accepted by great learned scholars with
perfect intelligence. At the present time, especially in India, so many ras-
cals are claiming to be incarnations, and people are being misled.
Therefore, the identity of an incarnation should be confirmed by the de-
scriptions of the Sastras and by wonderful activities. As described in this
verse by the word mahiyasah, the activities of an incarnation are not or-
dinary magic or jugglery, but are wonderful activities. Thus any incarna-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead must be supported by the
statements of the astra and must actually perform wonderful activities.
Pariksit Maharaja was eager to hear about the Manus of different ages.


--- Page 11 ---
Text 3] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 5
There are fourteen Manus during a day of Brahma, and the age of each
Manu lasts for seventy-one yugas. Thus there are thousands of Manus
during the life of Brahma.
TEXT 3
यद्यसिनन्तरे नहान्भगवान्विश्वमावनः |
छृतवान्डरुते करतां द्यतीतेऽनागतेऽद्य वा ॥ ३ ॥
yad yasminn antare brahman
bhagavan visva-bhavanah
krtavan kurute karta
hy atite ’nagate ‘dya va

yat—whatever activities; yasmin—in a particular age; antare—
manvantara; brahman—O great brahmana; bhagavan—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; visva-bhavanah—who has created this cosmic
manifestation; krtavan—has done; kurute—is doing; karta—and will
do; hi—indeed; atite—in the past; andgate—in the future; adya—at
the present; va—either.

TRANSLATION

O learned brahmana, kindly describe to us whatever activities
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who created this cosmic
manifestation, has performed in the past manvantaras, is perform-
ing at present, and will perform in the future manvantaras.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita the Supreme Personality of Godhead said that both
He and the other living entities present on the battlefield had existed in
the past, they existed at present, and they would continue to exist in the
future. Past, present and future always exist, both for the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and for ordinary living entities. Nityo nityanar
cetanas cetananam. Both the Lord and the living entities are eternal and
sentient, but the difference is that the Lord is unlimited whereas the liv-
ing entities are limited. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cre-
ator of everything, and although the living entities are not created but
exist with the Lord eternally, their bodies are created, whereas the


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
Supreme Lord’s body is never created. There is no difference between
the Supreme Lord and His body, but the conditioned soul, although eter-
nal, is different from his body.
TEXT 4
भ्रीक्रषिरुवाच
मनवोऽखिन्व्यतीताः षट्‌ कल्पे खायम्थुवादयः।
आस्ते कथितो यत्र देवादीनां च सम्भवः ॥ ४॥
अ7-75प्र uvaca
manavo ’smin vyatitah sat
kalpe svayambhuvadayah
adyas te kathito yatra
devadinam ca sambhavah
Sri-rsih uvaca—the great saint Sukadeva Gosvami said; manavah—
Manus; asmin—during this period (one day of Brahma); vyatitah—
already past; sat—six; kalpe—in this duration of Brahma’s day;
svayambhuva —Svayambhuva Manu; adayah—and others; adyah—the
first one (Svayambhuva); te—unto you; kathitah—I have already de-
scribed; yatra—wherein; deva-adinam—of all the demigods; ca—also;
sambhavah—the appearance.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: In the present kalpa there have already
been six Manus. I have described to you Svayambhuva Manu and
the appearance of many demigods. In this kalpa of Brahma,
Svayambhuva is the first Manu.
TEXT 5
ET देवहूत्यां च दुहित्रोस्तस्य वै मनोः |
घमन्ञानोपदेशाथं भगवान्पुत्रतां गतः ॥ ५ ॥
akatyarn devahityarn ca
duhitros tasya vai manoh


--- Page 13 ---
Text 6] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 7
dharma-jiianopadesarthar
bhagavan putratam gatah
akiatyam—from the womb of Akiiti; devahiityam ca—and from the
womb of Devahiti; duhitroh—of the two daughters; tasya—of him;
vai—indeed; manoh—of Svayambhuva Manu; dharma—religion;
jiana—and knowledge; upadesa-artham—for instructing; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; putrataim—sonhood under Akuti
and Devahiti; gatah—accepted.
TRANSLATION
Svayambhuva Manu had two daughters, named Akuti and
Devahiiti. From their wombs, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared as two sons named Yajfiamiirti and Kapila respectively.
These sons were entrusted with preaching about religion and
knowledge.
PURPORT
Devahiiti’s son was known as Kapila, and Akiti’s son was known as
Yajiamiirti. Both of Them taught about religion and philosophical
knowledge.
TEXT 6
कृतं पुरा भगवतः कपिलस्याजुव्णितम्‌ |
आख्यास्ये भगवान्यज्ञो यच्चकार इरूद्ह || ६॥
krtari pura bhagavatah
kapilasyanuvarnitam
akhyasye bhagavan yajiio
yac cakara kuridvaha
krtam—already done; pura—before; bhagavatah—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kapilasya—Kapila, the son of Devahiti;
anuvarnitam—fully described; akhyasye—I shall describe now;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajiah—of the name
Yajfiapati or Yajiamirti; yat—whatever; cakara—executed; hkuru-
udvaha—O best of the Kurus.


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, I have already described [in the Third
Canto] the activities of Kapila, the son of Devahiti. Now I shall de-
scribe the activities of Yajniapati, the son of Akati.
TEXT 7
विरक्तः कामभोगेषु शतरूपापतिः प्रथः ।
विसृज्य राज्यं तपसे सभार्यो वनमाविशत्‌ ॥ ७॥
viraktah kama-bhogesu
Sataripa-patih prabhuh
visTjya rajyam tapase
sabharyo vanam avisat
viraktah—without attachment; kama-bhogesu—in sense gratification
(in grhastha life); Sataripa-patih—the husband of Satariipa, namely
Svayambhuva Manu; prabhuh—who was the master or king of the
world; wvisyjya—after renouncing totally; rajyam—his kingdom;
tapase—for practicing austerities; sa-bharyah—with his wife; vanam—
the forest; avisat—entered.
TRANSLATION
Svayambhuva Manu, the husband of Satariipa, was by nature not
at all attached to enjoyment of the senses. Thus he gave up his
kingdom of sense enjoyment and entered the forest with his wife
to practice austerities. ति
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.2), 6৮07 parampara-praptam ima
rajarsayo viduh: “The supreme science was thus received through the
chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that
way.” All the Manus were perfect kings. They were rajarsis. In other
words, although they held posts as kings of the world, they were as good
as great saints. Svayambhuva Manu, for example, was the emperor of the
world, yet he had no desire for sense gratification. This is the meaning of
monarchy. The king of the country or the emperor of the empire must be
so trained that by nature he renounces sense gratification. It is not that


--- Page 15 ---
Text 8] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 9
because one becomes king he should unnecessarily spend money for
sense gratification. As soon as kings became degraded, spending money
for sense gratification, they were lost. Similarly, at the present moment,
monarchy having been lost, the people have created democracy, which is
also failing. Now, by the laws of nature, the time is coming when dic-
tatorship will put the citizens into more and more difficulty. If the king
or dictator individually, or the members of the government collectively,
cannot maintain the state or kingdom according to the rules of Manu-
sarithitda, certainly their government will not endure.
TEXT 8
सुनन्दायां वषशतं RIA वं स्पृशन्‌ ।
=
तप्यमानस्तपो घोरमिदमन्वाह भारत ॥ ८ ॥
sunandayarm varsa-satariv
padaikena bhuvarh sprsan
tapyamanas tapo ghoram
idam anvaha bharata

sunandayam—on the bank of the River Sunanda; varsa-satam —for
one hundred years; pada-ekena—on one leg; bhuvam—the earth;
sprsan—touching; tapyamanah—he performed austerities; tapah—
austerities; ghoram—very severe; idam—the following; anvaha—and
spoke; bharata—O scion of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, after Svayambhuva Manu had thus entered
the forest with his wife, he stood on one leg on the bank of the
River Sunanda, and in this way, with only one leg touching the
earth, he performed great austerities for one hundred years.
While performing these austerities, he spoke as follows.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that the word anvaha
means that he chanted or murmured to himself, not that he lectured to
anyone.


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
TEXT 9
श्रीमन॒रुवाच
येन चेतयते विश्वं विदं चेतयते न यम्‌ ।
यो जागतिं शयानेऽसिन्नायं त॑ वेद वेद सः॥ ९॥
Sri-manur uvaca
yena cetayate visvam
viSvarn cetayate na yam
yo jagarti Sayane ‘smin
nayam tar veda veda sah
sri-manuh uvaca—Svayambhuva Manu chanted; yena—by whom
(the Personality of Godhead); cetayate—is brought into animation;
visvam—the whole universe; visvam —the whole universe (the material
world); cetayale —animates; na—not; yam —He whom; yah—He who;
jagarti—is always awake (watching all activities); sayane —while sleep-
ing; asmin—in this body; na—not; ayam—this living entity; tam—
Him; veda—knows; veda—knows; sah—He.
TRANSLATION
Lord Manu said: The supreme living being has created this ma-
terial world of animation; it is not that He was created by this ma-
terial world. When everything is silent, the Supreme Being stays
awake as a witness. The living entity does not know Him, but He
knows everything.
PURPORT
Here is a distinction between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
the living entities. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. According to the
Vedic version, the Lord is the supreme eternal, the supreme living being.
The difference between the Supreme Being and the ordinary living being
is that when this material world is annihilated, all the living entities
remain silent in oblivion, in a dreaming or unconscious condition,
whereas the Supreme Being stays awake as the witness of everything.
This material world is created, it stays for some time, and then it is an-


--- Page 17 ---
Text 10] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 11
nihilated. Throughout these changes, however, the Supreme Being
remains awake. In the material condition of all living entities, there are
three stages of dreaming. When the material world is awake and put in
working order, this is a kind of dream, a waking dream. When the living
entities go to sleep, they dream again. And when unconscious at the time
of annihilation, when this material world is unmanifested, they enter
another stage of dreaming. At any stage in the material world, therefore,
they are all dreaming. In the spiritual world, however, everything is
awake.
TEXT 10
आटमावासखमिदं নিহন यत्‌ किञ्चिज्जगत्यां जगत्‌ ।
तेन त्यक्तेन GFN मा गृधः कखखिद्धनम्‌ ॥१०॥
atmavasyam idam visvarm
yat kincy jagatyam jagat
tena tyaktena bhunjitha
ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam
atma—the Supersoul; avasyam—living everywhere; idam —this uni-
verse; viSvam—all universes, all places; yat—whatever; kinicit—every-
thing that exists; jagatyam—in this world, everywhere; jagat—every-
thing, animate and inanimate; tena—by Him; tyaktena—allotted;
bhunjithah—you may enjoy; ma—do not; grdhah—accept; kasya
svit—of anyone else; dhanam —the property.
TRANSLATION
Within this universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
His Supersoul feature is present everywhere, wherever there are
animate or inanimate beings. Therefore, one should accept only
that which is allotted to him; one should not desire to infringe
upon the property of others.
PURPORT
Having described the situation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as transcendental, Svayambhuva Manu, for the instruction of the sons


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
and grandsons in his dynasty, is now describing all the property of the
universe as belonging to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Manu’s
instructions are not only for his own sons and grandsons, but for all of
human society. The word ““man’ —or, in Sanskrit, manusya—has been
derived from the name Manu, for all the members of human society are
descendants of the original Manu. Manu is also mentioned in Bhagavad-
gita (4.1), where the Lord says:
imam vivasvate yoga
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave ’bravit
“I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvan,
and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in
turn instructed it to lksvaku.” Svayambhuva Manu and Vaivasvata
Manu have similar duties. Vaivasvata Manu was born of the sun-god,
Vivasvan, and his son was Iksvaku, the King of the earth. Since Manu is
understood to be the original father of humanity, human society should
follow his instructions.

Svayambhuva Manu instructs that whatever exists, not only in the
spiritual world but even within this material world, is the property of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is present everywhere as the
Superconsciousness. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (13.3), ksetra-jiam
capi mar viddhi sarva-ksetresu bharata: in every field—in other words,
in every body —the Supreme Lord is existing as the Supersoul. The in-
dividual soul is given a body in which to live and act according to the in-
structions of the Supreme Person, and therefore the Supreme Person
also exists within every body. We should not think that we are indepen-
dent; rather, we should understand that we are allotted a certain portion
of the total property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

This understanding will lead to perfect communism. Communists
think in terms of their own nations, but the spiritual communism in-
structed here is not only nationwide but universal. Nothing belongs to
any nation or any individual person; everything belongs to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the meaning of this verse. Atmavasyam
ida visvam: whatever exists within this universe is the property of the


--- Page 19 ---
Text 10] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 13
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The modern communistic theory, and
also the idea of the United Nations, can be reformed —indeed, rectified —
by the understanding that everything belongs to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The Lord is not a creation of our intelligence;
rather, He has created us. Atmavisyam idam visvam. avasyam ida
sarvam. This universal communism can solve all the problems of the
world.

One should learn from the Vedic literature that one’s body is also not
the property of the individual soul, but is given to the individual soul ac-
cording to his karma. Karmana daiva-netrena jantur dehopapattaye.
The 8,400,000 different bodily forms are machines given to the in-
dividual soul. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (18.61):

iSvarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhitani
yantraradhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” The Lord, as the Supersoul, sits
in everyone’s heart and observes the various desires of the individual
soul. The Lord is so merciful that He gives the living entity the oppor-
tunity to enjoy varieties of desires in suitable bodies, which are nothing
but machines (yantrarudhani mayaya). These machines are manufac-
tured by the material ingredients of the external energy, and thus the
living entity enjoys or suffers according to his desires. This opportunity
is given by the Supersoul.

Everything belongs to the Supreme, and therefore one should not
usurp another’s property. We have a tendency to manufacture many
things. Especially nowadays, we are building skyscrapers and developing
other material facilities. We should know, however, that the ingredients
of the skyscrapers and machines cannot be manufactured by anyone but
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The whole world is nothing but a
combination of the five material elements (tejo-vari-mrdar yatha
vinimayah). A skyscraper is a transformation of earth, water and fire.
Earth and water are combined and burnt into bricks by fire, and a


--- Page 20 ---
14. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
skyscraper is essentially a tall construction of bricks. Although the bricks
may be manufactured by man, the ingredients of the bricks are not. Of
course, man, as a manufacturer, may accept a salary from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is stated here: tena tyaktena bhunjithah.
One may construct a big skyscraper, but neither the constructor, the
merchant nor the worker can claim proprietorship. Proprietorship
belongs to the person who has spent for the building. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead has manufactured water, earth, air, fire and the sky,
and one can use these and take a salary (tena tyaktena bhuijithah).
However, one cannot claim proprietorship. This is perfect communism.
Our tendency to construct great buildings should be used only for con-
structing large and valuable temples in which to install the Deity of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then our desire for construction will
be fulfilled.

Since all property belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
everything should be offered to the Lord, and we should take only
prasada (tena tyaktena bhuijithah). We should not fight among our-
selves to take more than we need. As Narada said to Maharaja
Yudhisthira:

yavad bhriyeta jatharam
tavat svatvari hi dehinam
adhikarih yo ’bhimanyeta
sa steno dandam arhati
“One may claim proprietorship to as much wealth as required to main-
tain body and soul together, but one who desires proprietorship over
more than that must be considered a thief, and he deserves to be
punished by the laws of nature.” (Bhag. 7.14.8) Of course, we need to
be maintained in eating, sleeping, mating and defending (ahdra-nidra-
bhaya-maithuna), but since the Supreme Lord, the Personality of God-
head, has provided these necessities of life for the birds and bees, why
not for mankind? There is no need for economic development; every-
thing is provided. Therefore one should understand that everything
belongs to Krsna, and with this idea, one may take prasada. However, if
one interferes with the allotments of others, he is a thief. We should not
accept more than what we actually need. Therefore, if by chance we get


--- Page 21 ---
Text 11] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 15
an abundance of money, we should always consider that it belongs to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Krsna consciousness we are getting
sufficient money, but we should never think that the money belongs to
us; it belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and should be
equally distributed to the workers, the devotees. No devotee should claim
that any money or property belongs to him. If one thinks that any portion
of property of this huge universe belongs to anyone, he is to be con-
sidered a thief and is punishable by the laws of nature. Daivi hy esa
gunamayi mama maya duratyaya: no one can surpass the vigilance of
material nature or hide his intentions from material nature. If human
society unlawfully claims that the property of the universe, either par-
tially or wholly, belongs to mankind, all of human society will be cursed
as a society of thieves and will be punished by the laws of nature.
TEXT 11
. + ও
यं परयति न a चक्षुयंस्य न रिष्यति ।
+ . + ९
तं भूतनिलयं देवं सुपणष्चपधावत ॥११॥
yam pasyati na pasyantari
caksur yasya na risyati
tari bhita-nilayarn devam
suparnam upadhdvata
yam—He who; pasyati—the living entity sees; na—not; pasyantam-
—although always seeing; caksuh—eye; yasya—whose; na—never;
risyati—diminishes; tam—Him; bhita-nilayam—the original source of
all living entities; devam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
suparnam—who accompanies the living entity as a friend;
upadhavata—everyone should worship.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly
watches the activities of the world, no one sees Him. However, one
should not think that because no one sees Him, He does not see,
for His power to see is never diminished. Therefore, everyone


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
should worship the Supersoul, who always stays with the in-
dividual soul as a friend.
PURPORT

Offering prayers to Krsna, Srimati Kuntidevi, the mother of the
Pandavas, said, alaksyarn sarva-bhitanam antar bahir avasthitam:
“Krsna, You reside both inside and outside of everything, yet the unin-
telligent conditioned souls cannot see You.” In Bhagavad-gita it is said
that one can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead through jAana-
caksusah, eyes of knowledge. He who opens these eyes of knowledge is
called a spiritual master. Thus we offer our prayers to the spiritual
master with the following $loka:

om gjiidana-timirandhasya
JjAananjana-salakaya
caksur unmilitarn yena
tasmai $ri-gurave namah

“I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the
torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by
the darkness of ignorance.” (Gautamiya Tantra) The guru’s task is to
open the disciple’s eyes of knowledge. When the disciple is awakened
from ignorance to knowledge, he can see the Supreme Personality
of Godhead everywhere because the Lord actually is everywhere.
Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham. The Lord resides within
this universe, He resides within the hearts of all living entities, and He
resides even within the atom. Because we lack perfect knowledge, we
cannot see God, but a little deliberation can help us to see God every-
where. This requires training. With a little deliberation, even the most
degraded person can perceive the presence of God. If we take into ac-
count whose property is the vast ocean, whose property is the vast land,
how the sky exists, how the numberless millions of stars and planets are
set in the sky, who has made this universe and whose property it is, we
should certainly come to the conclusion that there is a proprietor of
everything. When we claim proprietorship over a certain piece of land,
whether individually or for our families or nations, we should also con-
sider how we became the proprietors. The land was there before our


--- Page 23 ---
Text 11] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 17
birth, before we came to the land. How did it become our property? Such
deliberation will help us understand that there is a supreme proprietor of
everything —the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The Supreme Godhead is always awake. In the conditioned stage we
forget things because we change our bodies, but because the Supreme
Personality of Godhead does not change His body, He remembers past,
present and future. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (4.1), imarn vivasvate
yogam proktavan aham avyayam: (न spoke this science of God—
Bhagavad-gita—to the sun-god at least forty million years ago.” When
Arjuna inquired from Krsna how He could remember incidents that had
taken place so long ago, the Lord answered that Arjuna was also present
at that time. Because Arjuna is Krsna’s friend, wherever Krsna goes, Ar-
juna goes. But the difference is that Krsna remembers everything,
whereas the living entity like Arjuna, being a minute particle of the
Supreme Lord, forgets. Therefore it is said, the Lord’s vigilance is never
diminished. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.15). Sarvasya
caharn hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jidnam apohanari ca: the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His Paramatma feature is always present
within the hearts of all living entities, and from Him come memory,
knowledge and forgetfulness. This is also indicated in this verse by the
word suparnam, which means “friend.” In the Svetasvatara Upanisad
(4.6) it is therefore said, dva suparna sayuja sakhaya samanam vrksam
parisasvajate: two birds are sitting on the same tree as friends. One bird
is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other is simply observing. This ob-
serving bird is always present as a friend to the eating bird and giving
him remembrance of things he wanted to do. Thus if we take into ac-
count the Supreme Personality of Godhead in our daily affairs, we can
see Him or at least perceive His presence everywhere.

The words caksur yasya na risyati mean that although we cannot see
Him, this does not mean that He cannot see us. Nor does He die when the
cosmic manifestation is annihilated. The example is given in this connec-
tion that the sunshine is present when the sun is present, but when the
sun is not present, or when we cannot see the sun, this does not mean
that the sun is lost. The sun is there, but we cannot see it. Similarly, al-
though we cannot see the Supreme Personality of Godhead in our present
darkness, our lack of knowledge, He is always present, seeing our ac-
tivities. As the Paramatma, He is the witness and adviser (upadrasta and


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
anumanta). Therefore, by following the instructions of the spiritual
master and studying authorized literatures, one can understand that God
is present before us, seeing everything, although we have no eyes with
which to see Him.
TEXT 12
न EE मध्यं च खः परो नान्तरं बहिः |
विश्वस्यामूनि यद्‌ यसखाद्‌ বিহন च বছব महत्‌| १२॥
na yasyady-antau madhyari ca
svah paro 72272007078 bahih
visvasyamini yad yasmad
visvamn ca tad rtam mahat

na—neither; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of God-
head); adi—a beginning; antau—end; madhyam—middle; ca—also;
svah—own; parah—others; na—nor; antaram—inside; bahih—out-
side; visvasya—of the whole cosmic manifestation; amiini—all such
considerations; yat—whose form; yasmat—from He who is the cause of
everything; visvam—the whole universe; ca—and; tat—all of them;
rtam—truth; mahat—very, very great.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no beginning, no end
and no middle. Nor does He belong to a particular person or
nation. He has no inside or outside. The dualities found within this
material world, such as beginning and end, mine and theirs, are all
absent from the personality of the Supreme Lord. The universe,
which emanates from Him, is another feature of the Lord.
Therefore the Supreme Lord is the ultimate truth, and He is com-
plete in greatness. =

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described in the

Brahma-sarihita (5.1):


--- Page 25 ---
Text 13] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 19
Svarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for
He is the prime cause of all causes.” For the Lord’s existence there is no
cause, for He is the cause of everything. He is in everything (maya tatam
80277 sarvam), He is expanded in everything, but He is not everything.
He is acintya-bhedabheda, simultaneously one and different. That is ex-
plained in this verse. In the material condition we have a conception of
beginning, end and middle, but for the Supreme Personality of Godhead
there are no such things. The universal cosmic manifestation is also the
virad-ripa that was shown to Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita. Therefore, since
the Lord is present everywhere and all the time, He is the Absolute
Truth and the greatest. He is complete in greatness. God is great, and
how He is great is explained here.
TEXT 13
a विश्वकायः पुरुहूत ईशः
सत्यः खयंज्योतिरजः पुराणः |
धत्तेऽस्य जन्माद्यजयात्मशक्त्या
तां विद्ययोदस्य निरीह आस्ते 1230
sa visva-kayah puru-hiita Sah
satyah svayam-jyotir ajah puranah
dhatte sya janmady-ajayatma-saktya
tar vidyayodasya nirtha aste
sah—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; visva-kayah—the total
form of the universe (the whole universe is the external body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); puru-hitah—known by so many
names; #Sah—the supreme controller (with full power); satyah—the
ultimate truth; svayam—personally; jyotih—self-effulgent; ajah—


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
unborn, beginningless; puranah—the oldest; dhatte—He performs;
asya—of this universe; janma-adi—the creation, maintenance and an-
nihilation; ajaya—by His external energy; atma-saktya—by His per-
sonal potency; tam—that external material energy; vidyaya—by His
spiritual potency; udasya—giving up; nirthah—without any desire or
activity; aste—He is existing (untouched by the material energy).
TRANSLATION

The entire cosmic manifestation is the body of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, who has millions of
names and unlimited potencies. He is self-effulgent, unborn and
changeless. He is the beginning of everything, but He has no
beginning. Because He has created this cosmic manifestation by
His external energy, the universe appears to be created, main-
tained and annihilated by Him. Nonetheless, He remains inactive
in His spiritual energy and is untouched by the activities of the
material energy.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says in His Siksastaka, namnam akari
bahudha nija-sarva-saktih: the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
many names, which are all nondifferent from the Supreme Person. This
is spiritual existence. By chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, consist-
ing of names of the Supreme Lord, we find that the name has all the
potencies of the person. The Lord’s activities are many, and according to
His activities He has many names. He appeared as the son of mother
Yasoda, and also as the son of mother Devaki, and therefore He is named
Devaki-nandana and Ya$oda-nandana. Parasya Saktir vividhaiva
srizyate: the Lord has a multitude of energies, and therefore He acts in
multifarious ways. Yet He has a particular name. The $astras recommend
which names we should chant, such as Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare. It is not that we have to search for some name or
manufacture one. Rather, we must follow the saintly persons and the
sastras in chanting His holy name.

Although the material and spiritual energies both belong to the Lord,
He is impossible to understand as long as we are in the material energy.
And when we come to the spiritual energy, He is very easy to know. As


--- Page 27 ---
Text 14] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 21
stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.7.23): mayan vyudasya cic-chaktya
kaivalye sthita atmani. Although the external energy belongs to the
Lord, when one is in the external energy (mama maya duratyaya) He is
very difficult to understand. However, when one comes to the spiritual
energy, one can understand Him. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita (18.55) it
is said, bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah: one who
wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in reality must
take to the platform of bhakti, or Krsna consciousness. This bhakti con-
sists of various activities (§ravanari kirtanam visnoh smaranar pada-
sevanam/ arcana vandanari dasyari sakhyam atma-nivedanam), and
to understand the Lord one must take to this path of devotional service.
Even though the people of the world have forgotten God and may say
that God is dead, this is not a fact. One can understand God when one
takes to the Krsna consciousness movement, and thus one can be happy.
TEXT 14
अथाग्रे ऋषयः कर्माणीहन्तेऽकरमहेतवे |
ईहमानो হি पुरुषः प्रायोऽनीहां प्रप्ते | Rl
athagre rsayah karman-
thante ’karma-hetave
thamano hi purusah
prayo ’'niharh prapadyate

atha—therefore; agre—in the beginning; rsayah—all learned rsis,
saintly persons; karmdni—fruitive activities; thante—execute;
akarma—freedom from fruitive results; hetave—for the purpose of;
thamanah—engaging in such activities; hi—indeed; purusah—a per-
son; prayah—almost always; aniham—liberation from karma;
prapadyate—attains.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, to enable people to reach the stage of activities that
are not tinged by fruitive results, great saints first engage people
in fruitive activities, for unless one begins by performing activities
as recommended in the §astras, one cannot reach the stage of
liberation, or activities that produce no reactions.


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (3.9) Lord Krsna advises, yajiarthat karmano
’nyatra loko ’yari karma-bandhanah: “Work done as a sacrifice for
Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one to this material
world.” Generally, everyone is attracted to hard labor for becoming
happy in this material world, but although various activities are going on
all over the world simply for the sake of happiness, unfortunately only
problems are being created from such fruitive activities. Therefore it is
advised that active persons engage in activities of Krsna consciousness,
which are called yajiia, because then they will gradually come to the plat-
form of devotional service. Yajiia means Lord Visnu, the yajia-purusa,
the enjoyer of all sacrifices (bhoktaram yajia-tapasarm sarva-loka-
mahesvaram). The Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the en-
joyer, and therefore if we begin our activities for His satisfaction, we will
gradually lose our taste for material activities.
Sita Gosvami declared to the great assembly of sages at Naimisaranya:
atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
varndasrama-vibhagasah
svanusthitasya dharmasya
sarisiddhir hari-tosanam
“‘O best among the twiceborn, it is concluded that the highest perfection
one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties [dharma] accord-
ing to caste divisions and order of life, is to please the Lord Hari.”
(Bhag. 1.2.13) According to Vedic principles, everyone must act accord-
ing to his classification as brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya, Sidra,
brahmacari, grhastha, vanaprastha or sannyasi. Everyone should
progress toward perfection by acting in such a way that Krsna will be
pleased (samsiddhir hari-tosanam). One cannot please Krsna by sitting
idly; one must act according to the directions of the spiritual master for
the sake of pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and then one
will gradually come to the stage of pure devotional service. As confirmed
in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.12):
naiskarmyam apy acyuta-bhava-varjitarn
na 506101९ jiianam alam niranijanam


--- Page 29 ---
Text 14] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 23
“Knowledge of self-realization, even though freed from all material
affinity, does not look well if devoid of a conception of the Infallible
[God].” Janis recommend that one adopt naiskarmya by not doing any-
thing but simply meditating and thinking of Brahman, but this is im-
possible unless one realizes Parabrahman, Krsna. If there is no Krsna
consciousness, any kind of activity, be it philanthropic, political or social,
simply causes karma-bandhana, bondage to material work.

As long as one is entangled in karma-bandhana, one must accept dif-
ferent types of bodies that spoil the human form of facility. Therefore, in
Bhagavad-gita (6.3) karma-yoga is recommended:

aruruksor muner yogari
karma karanam ucyate
yogariudhasya tasyaiva
samah karanam ucyate
“For one who is a neophyte in the yoga system, work is said to be the
means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessation of all ma-
terial activities is said to be the means.” Nonetheless:
karmendriyani samyamya
ya aste manasa smaran
indriyarthan vimadhatma
mithyacarah sa ucyate
“One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind
dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a pre-
tender.” (Bg. 3.6) One should act for Krsna very seriously in order to
become fully Krsna conscious and should not sit down to imitate
such great personalities as Haridasa Thakura. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thikura condemned such imitation. He said:
dusta mana! tumi kisera vaisnava?
pratisthara tare, nirjanera ghare,
tava hari-nama kevala kaitava.
“My dear mind, what kind of devotee are you? Simply for cheap adora-
tion, you sit in a solitary place and pretend to chant the Hare Krsna


--- Page 30 ---
24. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
maha-mantra, but this is all cheating.”” Recently at Mayapur an African
devotee wanted to imitate Haridasa Thakura, but after fifteen days he
became restless and went away. Do not suddenly try to imitate Haridasa
Thakura. Engage yourself in Krsna conscious activities, and gradually
you will come to the stage of liberation (muktir hitvanyatha ripar
svarapena vyavasthitih).
TEXT 15
ईहते भगवानीशो न॒हि तत्र विसजते ।
आत्मलाभेन पूर्णार्थो नावसीदन्ति Asg तम्‌॥ ₹
thate bhagavan iso
na hi tatra visajjate
atma-labhena purnartho
navasidanti ye ‘nu tam

thate—engages in activities of creation, maintenance and annihila-
tion; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; isah—the
supreme controller; na—not; hi—indeed; tatra—in such activities;
visajjate—He becomes entangled; atma-labhena—because of His own
gain; puarna-arthah—who is self-satisfied; na—not; avasidanti—are
disheartened; ye —persons who; anu—follow; tam —the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is full in opulence by His
own gain, yet He acts as the creator, maintainer and annihilator of
this material world. In spite of acting in that way, He is never en-
tangled. Hence devotees who follow in His footsteps are also never
entangled.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.9), yajaarthat karmano ’nyatra loko
yarn karma-bandhanah: “Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be
performed, otherwise work binds one to this material world.” If we do
not act in Krsna consciousness we shall be entangled, like silkworms in


--- Page 31 ---
Text 15] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 25
cocoons. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, appears in order
to teach us how to work so that we will not be entangled in this material
world. Our real problem is that we are entangled in materialistic ac-
tivities, and because we are conditioned, our struggle continues through
punishment in material existence in one body after another in different
forms of life. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (15.7):
mamaivarmso jiva-loke

jiva-bhitah sanatanah

manah sasthanindriyani

prakrti-sthani karsati
“The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six
senses, which include the mind.” The living entities are actually minute
forms who are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord
is full in everything, and the small particles of the Lord are also
originally qualified like Him, but because of their minute existence, they
are infected by material attraction and thus entangled. We must
therefore follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and then, like Krsna, who is never entangled by His material activities of
creation, maintenance and annihilation, we will have nothing for which
to lament (navasidanti ye nu tam). Krsna personally gives instructions
in Bhagavad-gita, and anyone who follows these instructions is liberated.
Following Krsna’s instructions is possible when one is a devotee, for
Krsna instructs that one should become a devotee. Man-mana bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yaji mar namaskuru: “Always think of Me and be-
come My devotee. Worship Me and offer your homage unto Me.”
(Bg. 18.65) Always thinking of Krsna means chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra, but unless one is an initiated devotee he cannot do this. As soon
as one becomes a devotee, he engages in Deity worship (mad-ydji). A de-
votee’s business is to offer obeisances to the Lord and the spiritual master
constantly. This principle is the recognized way to come to the platform
of bhakti. As soon as one comes to this platform, he gradually under-
stands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and simply by understand-

ing Krsna one is liberated from material bondage.


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
TEXT 16
तमीहमानं fAwgd बुधं
निराशिषं पूणंमनन्यचोदितम्‌ |
नृन्‌ शिक्षयन्तं निजवत्मसं्यितं
प्रथं प्रपद्येऽखिरुधमेमावनम्‌ ।।१६॥
tam thamanarh niraharnkrtarn budham
nirasisarn parnam ananya-coditam
nF Siksayantari nija-vartma-sarnsthitarn
prabhuri prapadye ’khila-dharma-bhavanam

tam —unto the same Supreme Personality of Godhead; thamanam—
who is acting for our benefit; nirahankrtam—who is without entangle-
ment or desire for gain; budham—who is completely in knowledge;
nirasisam — without desires to enjoy the fruits of His activities; parnam
—who is full and therefore has no need to fulfill desires; ananya—by
others; coditam—induced or inspired; nfn—all of human society;
Siksayantam—to teach (the real path of life); nija-vartma—His own
personal way of life; samsthitam—to establish (without deviation);
prabhum—unto the Supreme Lord; prapadye—I request everyone to
surrender; akhila-dharma-bhavanam—who is the master of all
religious principles or the occupational duties for a human being.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, works just like an
ordinary human being, yet He does not desire to enjoy the fruits
of work. He is full in knowledge, free from material desires and
diversions, and completely independent. As the supreme teacher
of human society, He teaches His own way of activities, and thus
He inaugurates the real path of religion. I request everyone to
follow Him.

PURPORT

This is the sum and substance of our Krsna consciousness movement.

We are simply requesting human society to follow in the footsteps of the


--- Page 33 ---
Text 16] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 27
teacher of Bhagavad-gita. Follow the instructions of Bhagavad-gita As It
Is, and your life will be successful. That is the summary of the Krsna
consciousness movement. The organizer of the Krsna consciousness
movement is teaching everyone how to follow Lord Ramacandra, how to
follow Lord Krsna, and how to follow Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this
material world, we need a leader for a monarchy or good government.
Lord Sri Ramacandra, by His practical example, showed how to live for
the benefit of all human society. He fought with demons like Ravana, He
carried out the orders of His father, and He remained the faithful hus-
band of mother Sita. Thus there is no comparison to Lord Ramacandra’s
acting as an ideal king. Indeed, people still hanker for rama-rajya, a
government conducted like that of Lord Ramacandra. Similarly, al-
though Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He taught
His disciple and devotee Arjuna how to lead a life ending in going back
home, back to Godhead (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so
rjuna). All teachings — political, economic, social, religious, cultural and
philosophical —are to be found in Bhagavad-gita. One only has to follow
them strictly. The Supreme Personality of Godhead also comes as Lord
Caitanya just to play the part of a pure devotee. Thus the Lord teaches us
in different ways just to make our lives successful, and Sviyambhuva
Manu requests us to follow Him.

Svayambhuva Manu is the leader of mankind, and he has given a book
called Manu-sarihita to guide human society. Herein he directs us to
follow the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different incarnations.
These incarnations are described in Vedic literature, and Jayadeva
Gosvami has described ten important incarnations in summary (kesava
dhrta-mina-sarira jaya jagad-isa hare, kesava dhrta-nara-hari-ripa
jaya jagad-isa hare, kesava dhrta-buddha-sarira jaya jagad-isa hare,
etc.). Sviyambhuva Manu instructs us to follow the instructions of God’s
incarnations, especially Krsna’s instructions of Bhagavad-gita As It Is.

Appreciating bhakti-marga as instructed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya thus depicted the activities of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu:

vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga-
Siksartham ekah purusah puranah

Sri-krsna-caitanya-sarira-dhari
krpambudhir yas tam aham prapadye


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
“Let me take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna,
who has descended in the form of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to teach us
real knowledge, His devotional service, and detachment from whatever
does not foster Krsna consciousness. He has descended because He is an
ocean of transcendental mercy. Let me surrender unto His lotus feet.”
(Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka 6.74) In this age of Kali, people cannot
follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
therefore the Lord Himself takes the part of Sri Krsna Caitanya to teach
personally how to become Krsna conscious. He asks everyone to follow
Him and to become a guru to deliver the fallen souls of Kali-yuga.
yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa
amadra ajidya guru hana tara’ ei desa
“Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Sri Krsna as they are
given in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. In this way become a
spiritual master and try to liberate everyone in this land.”
(Ce. Madhya 7.128) The coherent purpose of Lord Ramacandra, Lord
Krsna and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is to teach human society how to
be happy by following the instructions of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 17
fH उवाच
इति मन्त्रोपनिषदं व्याहरन्तं समाहितम्‌ ।
TRIGA यातुधाना जग्धुमभ्यद्रवन्‌ क्षुधा ॥१७॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
iti mantropanisadari
vyaharantari samahitam
drstvasura yatudhana
Jjagdhum abhyadravan ksudha
Sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; mantra-
upanisadam—the Vedic mantra (uttered by Svayambhuva Manu);
vyaharantam—taught or chanted; samahitam—concentrated the mind


--- Page 35 ---
Text 18] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 29
(without being agitated by material conditions); drstvé—upon seeing
(him); asurah—the demons; ydatudhanah—the Raksasas; Jjagdhum—
desired to devour; abhyadravan—running very fast; ksudha—to satisfy
their appetite.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Svayambhuva Manu was thus in a
trance, chanting the mantras of Vedic instruction known as the
Upanisads. Upon seeing him, the Raksasas and asuras, being very
hungry, wanted to devour him. Therefore they ran after him with
great speed.
TEXT 18
Ly
तांस्तथावसितान्‌ वीक्ष्य यज्ञः सवेगतो हरिः |
EY - A Ce
यामे; परिवरतो देवंहेत्वाशासत्‌ त्रिविष्टपम्‌ ng cn
107७ tathavasitan viksya
yajiiah sarva-gato harih
yamaih parivrto devair
hatvasasat tri-vistapam
tan—the demons and Riksasas; tatha —in that way; avasitan—who
were determined to devour Svayambhuva Manu; viksya —upon observ-
ing; yajiah—Lord Visnu, known as Yajfia; sarva-gatah—who is seated
in everyone's heart; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yamaih—with His sons named the Yamas; parivrtah—surrounded;
devaih—by the demigods; hatva—after killing (the demons); asasat—
ruled (taking the post of Indra); tri-vistapam —the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, Visnu, who sits in everyone’s heart, appear-
ing as Yajfapati, observed that the Raksasas and demons were
going to devour Svayambhuva Manu. Thus the Lord, accompanied
by His sons named the Yamas and by all the other demigods, killed
the demons and Raksasas. He then took the post of Indra and
began to rule the heavenly kingdom.


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
PURPORT
The various names of the demigods—Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Lord
Indra and so on—are not personal names; they are names of different
posts. In this regard, we understand that Lord Visnu sometimes becomes
Brahma or Indra when there is no suitable person to occupy these posts.
TEXT 19
=
खारोचिषो दितीयस्तु मनुरग्नेः सुतोऽभवत्‌ |
दयुमत्सुषेणरोचिष्मल्प्रपुखास्तस्य चात्मजाः 12.11
svdrociso dvitiyas tu
manur agneh suto ’bhavat
dyumat-susena-rocismat
pramukhds tasya catmajah
svarocisah—Svarocisa; dvittyah—the second; tu—indeed; manuh—
Manu; agneh—of Agni; sutah—the son; abhavat—became; dyumat—
Dyumat; susena—Susena; rocismat—Rocismat; pramukhah—begin-
ning with them; tasya—of him (Svarocisa); ca—also; dtma-jah—sons.
TRANSLATION
The son of Agni named Svarocisa became the second Manu. His
several sons were headed by Dyumat, Susena and Rocismat.
PURPORT
manvantararit manur deva
manu-putrah suresvarah
rsayo ‘risavataras ca
hareh sad vidham ucyate
There are many incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Manu, the manu-putrah (the sons of Manu), the king of the heavenly
planets, and the seven great sages are all partial incarnations of the
Supreme Lord. Manu himself, his sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada, the


--- Page 37 ---
Text 21] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 31
demigods created by Daksa, and the rsis like Marici were all partial incar-
nations of the Lord during the reign of Svayambhuva Manu. During that
time, the incarnation of the Lord as Yajfia took charge of ruling the
heavenly planets. The next Manu was Svirocisa. The Manus and the
sages and demigods are further described in the following eleven verses.
TEXT 20
TAR रोचनस्त्वासीद्‌ देवाश्च तुषितादयः |
c
उजंस्तम्मादयः सप्त॒ ऋषयो ब्रह्मवादिनः ॥२०॥
tatrendro rocanas tv asid
devas ca tusitadayah
arja-stambhadayah sapta
rsayo brahma-vadinah
tatra—in this manvantara; indrah—Indra; rocanah—Rocana, the
son of Yajfia; tu—but; asit—became; devah—demigods; ca—also;
tusita-adayah—Tusita and others; @rja—Urja; stambha—Stambha;
adayah—and others; sapta—seven; rsayah—great saints; brahma-
vadinah—all faithful devotees.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Svarocisa, the post of Indra was assumed by
Rocana, the son of Yajfia. Tusita and others became the principal
demigods, and Urja, Stambha and others became the seven saints.
All of them were faithful devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 21
ऋषेस्तु वेदशिरसस्तुषिता नाम पटन्यभूत्‌ |
तस्यां जज्ञे ततो देवो विशचुरित्यमिविश्वुतः ॥२१॥
rses tu ৮০০৫৩870505
tusita nama patny abhit
tasyam jajie tato devo
vibhur ity abhivisrutah


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
rseh—of the saintly person; tu—indeed; vedaSirasah— Veda$ira;
tusita— Tusita; nama—named; patni—the wife; abhit—begat;
tasyam —in her (womb); jajiie—took birth; tatah—thereafter; devah—
the Lord; vibhuh—Vibhu; iti—thus; abhivisrutah—celebrated as.
TRANSLATION
Vedasira was a very celebrated rsi. From the womb of his wife,
whose name was Tusita, came the avatara named Vibhu.
TEXT 22
अष्टाशीतिसहस्राणि अनयो ये धृतव्रताः |
अन्वशिक्चन्वतं तस्य कोमारबरह्मचारिणः 120
astasiti-sahasrani
munayo ye dhrta-vratah
anvasiksan vratam tasya
kaumara-brahmacarinah
astasiti—eighty-eight; = sahasrani—thousand; munayah—great
saintly persons; ye—those who; dhrta-vratah—fixed in vows;
anvasiksan—took instructions; vratam—vows; tasya—from him
(Vibhu); kaumara—who was unmarried; brahmacarinah—and fixed in
the brahmacari stage of life.
TRANSLATION
Vibhu remained a brahmacari and never married throughout his
life. From him, eighty-eight thousand other saintly persons took
lessons on self-control, austerity and similar behavior.
TEXT 23
ठतीय उत्तमो नाम प्रियव्रतसुतो wg: |
पवनः asm यज्ञदोत्राद्यास्तत्सुता चप ॥२२।
trttya uttamo nama
priyavrata-suto manuh


--- Page 39 ---
Text 25] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 33
pavanah srijayo yajiia-
hotradyas tat-suta nrpa
trttyah—the third; uttamah—Uttama; nama—named; priyavrata—
of King Priyavrata; sutah—the son; manuh—he became the Manu;
pavanah—Pavana; srijayah—Srijaya; yajiiahotra-adyah—Yajiiahotra
and others; tat-sutah—the sons of Uttama; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, the third Manu, Uttama, was the son of King
Priyavrata. Among the sons of this Manu were Pavana, Sriijaya and
Yajiiahotra.
TEXT 24
वसिष्ठतनयाः মম ऋषयः THERA: |
सत्या IFAT भद्रा देवा इन्द्रस्तु सत्यजित्‌ 11:81
vasistha-tanayah sapta
rsayah pramadadayah
satya vedasruta bhadra
deva indras tu satyajit
vasistha-tanayah—the sons of Vasistha; sapta—seven; rsayah—the
sages; pramada-adayah—headed by Pramada; satyah—the Satyas;
vedasrutah —Vedaérutas; bhadrah —Bhadras; devah—demigods;
indrah—the King of heaven; tu—but; satyajit—Satyajit.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of the third Manu, Pramada and other sons of
Vasistha became the seven sages. The Satyas, Vedasrutas and
Bhadras became demigods, and Satyajit was selected to be Indra,
the King of heaven.
TEXT 25
र्स्य घनृतायां तु मगबान्पुरूषोत्तमः |
EN
सत्यसेन इति ख्यातो जातः सत्य वतेः सह 140


--- Page 40 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
dharmasya stinrtayam tu
bhagavan purusottamah
satyasena iti khydto .
Jjatah satyavrataih saha
dharmasya—of the demigod in charge of religion; sinridyam—in the
womb of his wife named Sanrta; tu—indeed; bhagavan—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; purusa-uttamah—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; satyasenah—Satyasena; iti—thus; khyatah—celebrated;
jatah—took birth; satyavrataih—the Satyavratas; saha—with.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ap-
peared from the womb of Siinrta, who was the wife of Dharma, the
demigod in charge of religion. The Lord was celebrated as
Satyasena, and He appeared with other demigods, known as the
Satyavratas.
TEXT 26
सोऽनृतव्रतदुःश्चीलानसतो यक्षराक्षसान्‌ |
भूतद्रुहो भूतगणां चरावधीत्‌ सत्यजिरसखः ॥२६॥
so ‘nrta-vrata-duhsilan
asato yaksa-raksasan
bhata-druho bhiita-ganams
cavadhit satyajit-sakhah
sah—He (Satyasena); anrta-vrata—who are fond of speaking lies;
duhsilan—misbehaved; asatah—miscreant; yaksa-raksasan— Yaksas
and Raksasas; bhata-druhah—who are always against the progress of
other living beings; bhiita-ganan—the ghostly living entities; ca—also;
avadhit—killed; satyajit-sakhah—with His friend Satyajit.
TRANSLATION
Satyasena, along with His friend Satyajit, who was the King of
heaven, Indra, killed all the untruthful, impious and misbehaved


--- Page 41 ---
Text 28] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 35
Yaksas, Raksasas and ghostly living entities, who gave pains to
other living beings.
TEXT 27
चतुथं उत्तमभ्राता AGNA च तामसः |
पृथुः ख्यातिनैरः केतरित्याध्या হুযা तत्सुताः ।|२७॥
caturtha uttama-bhrata
manur namna ca tamasah
prthuh khyatir narah ketur
ity adya dasa tat-sutah
caturtha—the fourth Manu; uttama-bhrata—the brother of Uttama;
manuh—became the Manu; namna—celebrated by the name; ca—also;
tamasah—Tamasa; prthuh—Prthu; khyatih—Khyati; narah—Nara;
ketuh—Ketu; iti—thus; adyah—headed by; dasa—ten; tat-sutah—
sons of Tamasa Manu.
TRANSLATION
The brother of the third Manu, Uttama, was celebrated by the
name Tamasa, and he became the fourth Manu. Tamasa had ten
sons, headed by Prthu, Khyati, Nara and Ketu.
TEXT 28
सत्यका हरयो वीरा देवाखिशिख ईश्वरः । .
ज्योतिर्धामादयः सप्त॒ ऋषयस्तामसेऽन्तरे Rel
satyaka harayo vira
devas trisikha iSvarah
Jyotirdhamadayah sapta
rsayas tamase ’ntare
satyakah —the Satyakas; harayah—the Haris; virah—the Viras;
devah—the demigods; trisikhah—Triéikha; iSvarah—the King of
heaven; jyotirdhama-addayah—headed by the celebrated Jyotirdhama;
sapta—seven; rsayah—sages; tamase—the reign of Tamasa Manu;
antare—within.


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Tamasa Manu, among the demigods were
the Satyakas, Haris and Viras. The heavenly King, Indra, was
Trisikha. The sages in saptarsi-dhama were headed by
Jyotirdhama.
TEXT 29
a8
देवा वेषतयो नाम নিশ্তলললমা नृप ।
স্ব.
नष्टाः कालेन येद Agar: स्वेन तेजसा ।।২৭।।
deva vaidhrtayo nama
vidhrtes tanaya nrpa
nastah kalena yair veda
vidhrtah svena tejasa
devah—the demigods; vaidhrtayah—the Vaidhrtis; nama—by the
name; vidhrteh—of Vidhrti; tanayah—who were the sons; nrpa—O
King; nastah—were lost; kdalena—by the influence of time; yaih—by
whom; vedah—the Vedas; vidhrtah—were protected; svena—by their
own; tejasd—power.
TRANSLATION
O King, in the Tamasa manvantara the sons of Vidhrti, who were
known as the Vaidhrtis, also became demigods. Since in course of
time the Vedic authority was lost, these demigods, by their own
powers, protected the Vedic authority.
PURPORT
In the Tamasa manvantara there were two kinds of demigods, and one
of them was known as the Vaidhrtis. The duty of the demigods is to pro-
tect the authority of the Vedas. The word devata refers to one who car-
ries the authority of the Vedas, whereas Raksasas are those who defy the
Vedic authority. If the authority of the Vedas is lost, the entire universe
becomes chaotic. Therefore, it is the duty of the demigods, as well as
kings and aides of governments, to give full protection to the Vedic au-
thority; otherwise human society will be in a chaotic condition in which
there cannot be peace or prosperity.


--- Page 43 ---
Text 31] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 37
TEXT 30
तत्रापि जज्ञे मगवान्हरिप्यां हरिमेधसः |
हरिरित्याहृतो येन गजेन्द्रो मोचितो ग्रहात्‌ ॥२०॥
tatrapi jajiie bhagavan
harinyam harimedhasah
harir ity ahrto yena
gajendro mocito grahat
tatrapi—in that period; jajiie—appeared; bhagavan—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; harinyam—in the womb of Harini;
harimedhasah—begotten by Harimedha; harih—Hari; iti—thus;
ahrtah—called; yena—by whom; gaja-indrah—the King of the
elephants; mocitah—was freed; grahat—from the mouth of a crocodile.
TRANSLATION
Also in this manvantara, the Supreme Lord, Visnu, took birth
from the womb of Harini, the wife of Harimedha, and He was
known as Hari. Hari saved His devotee Gajendra, the King of the
elephants, from the mouth of a crocodile.
TEXT 31
श्रीराजोवाच
बादरायण ९तत्‌ ते श्रोतुमिच्छामहे वयम्‌ ।
हरियेथा गजपतिं ग्राहग्रस्तममूमुचत्‌ 132
Sri-rajovaca
badarayana etat te
7010771 icchamahe vayam
harir yatha gaja-patim
graha-grastam amuamucat
Sri-rgja  uwvaca—King Pariksit said; badarayane—O son of
Badarayana (Vyasadeva); etat—this; te—from you; srotum icchamahe-
—desire to hear; vayam—we; harih—the Lord Hari; yatha—the


--- Page 44 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 1
manner in which; gaja-patim—the King of the elephants; graha-
grastam —when attacked by the crocodile; amiimucat —delivered.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit said: My lord, Badarayani, we wish to hear from
you in detail how the King of the elephants, when attacked by a
crocodile, was delivered by Hari.
TEXT 32
FFAG महत्‌ पुण्यं धन्यं खस्त्ययनं gad |
यत्र यत्रोत्तमश्छोको मगवान्गीयते हरिः nz
tat-kathasu mahat punyarm
dhanyarm svastyayanari subham
yatra yatrottamasloko
bhagavan giyate harih
tat-kathasu—in those narrations; mahat—great; pumnyam—pious;
dhanyam—glorious; svastyayanam—auspicious; Subham—all good;
yatra—whenever; yatra—wherever; uttamaslokah—the Lord, who is
known as Uttamasloka (He who is described by transcendental
literature); bhagavan —the Supreme Personality of Godhead; giyate—is
glorified; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Any literature or narration in which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Uttamasloka, is described and glorified is certainly great,
pure, glorious, auspicious and all good.
PURPORT
The Krsna consciousness movement is spreading all over the world
simply by describing Krsna. We have published many books, including
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta in seventeen volumes, four hundred pages each,
as well as Bhagavad-gita and The Nectar of Devotion. We are also
publishing Srimad-Bhagavatam in sixty volumes. Wherever a speaker
holds discourses from these books and an audience hears him, this will


--- Page 45 ---
Text 33] The Manus, Administrators of the Universe 39
create a good and auspicious situation. Therefore the preaching of Krsna
consciousness must be done very carefully by the members of the Krsna
consciousness movement, especially the sannydsis. This will create an
auspicious atmosphere.
TEXT 33
श्रीचूत उवाच
परीधितैवं स॒ तु बाद्रायणिः
=
प्रायोपविष्टेन कथासु चोदितः |
उवाच विप्राः प्रतिनन्य पार्थिवं
यदा नीनां सदसि ख श्यृष्वताम्‌ 113210
Sri-siita uvaca
pariksitaivar sa tu badarayanth
prayopavistena kathasu coditah
uvaca viprah pratinandya parthivari
muda muninari sadasi sma Srnvatam
ri-sitah uvaca—Sri Sata Gosvami said; pariksita—by Maharaja
Pariksit; evam—thus; sah—he; tu—indeed; badarayanih—Sukadeva
Gosvami; praya-upavistena—Pariksit Maharaja, who was awaiting im-
pending death; kathasu—by the words; coditah—being encouraged;
uvaca—spoke; viprah—O brahmanas; pratinandya—after congratulat-
ing; parthivam—Maharaja Pariksit; muda —with great pleasure;
muninam—of great sages; sadasi—in the assembly; sma—indeed;
Srnvatam —who desired to hear.
TRANSLATION
Sri Siita Gosvami said: O brahmanas, when Pariksit Maharaja,
who was awaiting impending death, thus requested Sukadeva
Gosvami to speak, Sukadeva Gosvami, encouraged by the King’s
words, offered respect to the King and spoke with great pleasure
in the assembly of sages, who desired to hear him.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, First
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Manus, Administra-
tors of the Universe.”


--- Page 46 ---
CHAPTER TWO
The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis
The Second, Third and Fourth Chapters of this canto describe how the
Lord, during the reign of the fourth Manu, gave protection to the King of
the elephants. As described in this Second Chapter, when the King of the
elephants, along with his female elephants, was enjoying in the water, a
crocodile suddenly attacked him, and the elephant surrendered to the
lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead for protection.

In the midst of the ocean of milk, there is a very high and beautiful
mountain that has an altitude of ten thousand yojanas, or eighty thou-
sand miles. This mountain is known as Trikata. In a valley of Trikita
there is a nice garden named Rtumat, which was constructed by Varuna,
and in that area there is a very nice lake. Once the chief of the elephants,
along with female elephants, went to enjoy bathing in that lake, and they
disturbed the inhabitants of the water. Because of this, the chief cro-
codile in that water, who was very powerful, immediately attacked the
elephant’s leg. Thus there ensued a great fight between the elephant and
the crocodile. This fight continued for one thousand years. Neither the
elephant nor the crocodile died, but since they were in the water, the
elephant gradually became weak whereas the power of the crocodile in-
creased more and more. Thus the crocodile became more and more en-
couraged. Then the elephant, being helpless and seeing that there was no
other way for his protection, sought shelter at the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 1
श्रीसयुक उवाच
आसीद्‌ गिरिवरो weitere इति विश्रुतः ।
क्षीरोदेनावृतः श्रीमान्योजनायुतयुच्छरितः ।। १ ॥
sri-Ssuka uvaca
asid girivaro rajaris
trikiata iti visrutah
41


--- Page 47 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
ksirodenavrtah sriman
yojanayutam ucchritah
sri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; dst —there was; giri-
varah—a very big mountain; rajan—O King; tri-katah— Trikata; iti—
thus; visSrutah—celebrated; ksira-udena—by the ocean of milk;
avrtah—surrounded; srim@n—very beautiful; yojana—a measurement
of eight miles; ayutam—ten thousand; ucchritah—very high.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, there is a very large
mountain called Trikita. It is ten thousand yojanas [eighty thou-
sand miles] high. Being surrounded by the ocean of milk, it is very
beautifully situated.
TEXTS 2-3
a
तावता fea: पर्यक्‌ त्रिभिः शरङ्गैः पयोनिधिम्‌ ।
दिश्चः खं रोचयन्नास्ते रौप्यायसदिरण्मयेः ॥ २ ॥
४.१
अन्यैश्च FPO: सर्वा रलथातुविचित्रितैः ।
A =>
नानादमलतागुर्मैनिषेषिरनिस्राम्भसाम्‌ ॥ ३॥
tavata vistrtah paryak
tribhih srrigaih payo-nidhim
disah kham rocayann aste
raupyayasa-hiranmayaih
anyais ca kakubhah sarva
ratna-dhatu-vicitritaih
nana-druma-lata-gulmair
nirghosair nirjharambhasam
tavata—in that way; vistrtah—length and breadth (eighty thousand
miles); paryak—all around; tribhih—with three; S$rrigaih—peaks;
payah-nidhim—situated on an island in the ocean of milk; disah—all


--- Page 48 ---
Text 4] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 43
directions; kham—the sky; rocayan—pleasing; daste—standing;
raupya—made of silver; ayasa—iron; hiranmayaih—and gold;
anyaih—with other peaks; ca—also; kakubhah—directions; sarvah—
all; ratna—with jewels; dhatu—and minerals; vicitritaih— decorated
very nicely; nana—with various; druma-lata—trees and creepers;
gulmaih—and shrubs; nirghosaih—with the sounds of; nirjhara—
waterfalls; ambhasam —of water.
TRANSLATION

The length and breadth of the mountain are of the same
measurement [eighty thousand miles]. Its three principal peaks,
which are made of iron, silver and gold, beautify all directions and
the sky. The mountain also has other peaks, which are full of
jewels and minerals and are decorated with nice trees, creepers and
shrubs. The sounds of the waterfalls on the mountain create a
pleasing vibration. In this way the mountain stands, increasing the
beauty of all directions.

TEXT 4
स चावनिज्यमानाद्धिः समन्तात्‌ पयरर्भिभिः।
करोति श्यामलां मूर हरिन्मरकतास्ममिः ॥ ४ ॥
sa cavanijyamananghrih
samantat paya-urmibhih
karoti syamalarn bhimim
harin-marakatasmabhih

sah —that mountain; ca—also; avanijyamana-arighrih—whose foot is
always washed; samantat—all around; payah-urmibhih—by waves of
milk; karoti—makes; Syamalam—dark green; bhiimim—ground;
harit—green; marakata—with emerald; asmabhih—stones.

TRANSLATION

The ground at the foot of the mountain is always washed by

waves of milk that produce emeralds all around in the eight direc-


--- Page 49 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
tions [north, south, east, west and the directions midway between
them].
PURPORT

From Srimad-Bhagavatam we understand that there are various
oceans. Somewhere there is an ocean filled with milk, somewhere an
ocean of liquor, an ocean of ghee, an ocean of oil, and an ocean of sweet
water. Thus there are different varieties of oceans within this universe.
The modern scientists, who have only limited experience, cannot defy
these statements; they cannot give us full information about any planet,
even the planet on which we live. From this verse, however, we can
understand that if the valleys of some mountains are washed with milk,
this produces emeralds. No one has the ability to imitate the activities of
material nature as conducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 5
EN
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वि्याधरमहोरगैः |
किमरैरष्सरोभिश्च क्रीडद्धिजै्टकन्द्रः ॥ ५ ॥
siddha-carana-gandharvair
vidyadhara-mahoragaih
kinnarair apsarobhis ca
kridadbhir justa-kandarah

siddha —by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; carana—the inhabitants of
Caranaloka; gandharvaih—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka;
vidyadhara—the inhabitants of Vidyadhara-loka; maha-uragaih—the
inhabitants of the serpent loka; kinnaraih—the Kinnaras; apsarobhih—
the Apsaras; ca—and; hridadbhih—who were engaged in sporting;
Jjusta—enjoyed; kandarah—the caves.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of the higher planets—the Siddhas, Caranas,
Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, serpents, Kinnaras and Apsaras—go to
that mountain to sport. Thus all the caves of the mountain are full
of these denizens of the heavenly planets.


--- Page 50 ---
Text 6] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 45
PURPORT

As ordinary men may play in the salty ocean, the inhabitants of the
higher planetary systems go to the ocean of milk. They float in the ocean
of milk and also enjoy various sports within the caves of Trikita Moun-
tain.

TEXT 6
यत्र॒ ,_ संगीतस्नादैनैदद्‌गुहममरषया ।
अभिगजंन्ति हरयः छाषिनः परशङ्कया gn
yatra sangita-sannadair
nadad-guham amarsaya
abhigarjanti harayah
slaghinah para-sankaya

yatra—in that mountain (Trikiita); sangita—of singing; san-
nadath—with the vibrations; nadat—resounding; guham—the caves;
amarsaya—because of unbearable anger or envy; abhigarjanti—roar;
harayah—the lions; §laghinah—being very proud of their strength;
para-$arikayd— because of suspecting another lion.

TRANSLATION

Because of the resounding vibrations of the denizens of heaven
singing in the caves, the lions there, being very proud of their
strength, roar with unbearable envy, thinking that another lion is
roaring in that way.

PURPORT

In the higher planetary systems, there are not only different types of
human beings, but also animals like lions and elephants. There are trees,
and the land is made of emeralds. Such is the creation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has sung in this
regard, kesava! tuya jagata vicitra: “My Lord Kesava, Your creation is
colorful and full of varieties.” Geologists, botanists and other so-called
scientists speculate about other planetary systems, but being unable to


--- Page 51 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
estimate the varieties on other planets, they falsely imagine that all plan-
ets but this one are vacant, uninhabited, and full of dust. Although they
cannot even estimate the varieties existing throughout the universe, they
are very proud of their knowledge, and they are accepted as learned by
persons of a similar caliber. As described in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(2.3.19), sva-vid-varahostra-kharaih saristutah purusah pasuh: ma-
terialistic leaders are praised by dogs, hogs, camels and asses, and they
themselves are also big animals. One should not be satisfied with the
knowledge imparted by a big animal. Rather, one must take knowledge
from a perfect person like Sukadeva Gosvami. Mahdajano yena gatah sa
panthdh: our duty is to follow the instructions of the mahdjanas. There
are twelve mahdjanas, and Sukadeva Gosvami 15 one of them.
svayambhir naradah sambhuh
kumarah kapilo manuh
prahlado janako bhismo
balir vaiyasakir vayam
(Bhag. 6.3.20)

Vaiyasaki is Sukadeva Gosvami. Whatever he says we consider to be fac-
tual. That is perfect knowledge.

TEXT 7
नानारण्यपञ्त्रातसङ्कलद्रोण्यलङकुतः |
चित्रदुमसुरोधानकलकण्ठविहङ्गमः ॥ ও ॥

nanaranya-pasu-vrata-
sarikula-drony-alarikrtah
citra-druma-surodyana-
kalakantha-vihanngamah
nana—with varieties of; aranya-pasu—jungle animals; vrata—with
a multitude; sankula—filled; dropi—with valleys; alarkrtah—very
beautifully decorated; citra—with varieties of; druma—trees; sura-
udydana—in gardens maintained by the demigods; kalakantha—sweetly
chirping; viharigamah —birds.


--- Page 52 ---
Text 8] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 47
TRANSLATION
The valleys beneath Trikiita Mountain are beautifully decorated
by many varieties of jungle animals, and in the trees, which are
maintained in gardens by the demigods, varieties of birds chirp
with sweet voices.
TEXT 8
“Ra
सरित्सरोभिरच्छोदैः पुलिनै्मणिबाट्कैः |
AC
देवल्ीमजनामोदसौरमाम्न्वनिरेयुतः ॥ ८॥
sarit-sarobhir acchodaih
pulinair mani-valukaih
deva-stri-majjanamoda-
saurabhambv-anilair yutah
sarit—with rivers; sarobhih—and lakes; acchodaih—filled with
crystal-clear water; pulinaih—beaches; mani—with small gems;
valukaih —resembling grains of sand; deva-stri—of the damsels of the
demigods; majjana—by bathing (in that water); amoda—bodily
fragrance; saurabha—very fragrant; ambu—with the water; anilaih—
and the air; yutah—enriched (the atmosphere of Trikata Mountain).
TRANSLATION
Trikata Mountain has many lakes and rivers, with beaches
covered by small gems resembling grains of sand. The water is as
clear as crystal, and when the demigod damsels bathe in it, their
bodies lend fragrance to the water and the breeze, thus enriching
the atmosphere.
PURPORT
Even in the material world, there are many grades of living entities.
The human beings on earth generally cover themselves with external
fragrances to stop their bad bodily odors, but here we find that because of
the bodily fragrance of the demigod damsels, the rivers, the lakes, the
breeze and the entire atmosphere of Trikiita Mountain also become


--- Page 53 ---
48 3 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
fragrant. Since the bodies of the damsels in the upper planetary systems
are so beautiful, we can just imagine how beautifully formed are the
bodies of the Vaikuntha damsels or the damsels in Vrndavana, the gopis.
TEXTS 9-13
तस्य द्रोण्यां मगवतो वरुणस्य महात्मनः ।
उद्यानमृतुमन्नाम आक्रीडं सुरयोषिताम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
सरव॑तोऽलङ्कतं दिव्यरनित्यपुष्पफलद्ुमैः ।
१) =
मन्दारः पारिजातैश्च पाटलाशोकचम्पकैः ॥१०॥
a EN =
चूतैः पियालैः पनसेराग्रराम्रातकैरपि |
- A LY
कयुकेनरिकेले शच we SHER: 1221)
EN €.
मधुकः TEAR AREA: |
Sg : FREER ॥१२॥
EN bet
पिचमेदं: कोविदारैः a@: सुरदारुभिः |
EN
द्राक्े्चरम्भाजम्बुभिर्बदरयक्षाभयामरैः ।॥१३॥
tasya dromyam bhagavato
varunasya mahatmanah
udyanam rtuman nama
akridam sura-yositam
sarvato ’lankrtarm divyair
nitya-puspa-phala-drumaih
mandaraih parijatais ca
patalasoka-campakaih
cutaih piyalaih panasair
amrair amratakair api
kramukair narikelais ca
kharjirair bijapirakaih
madhukaih $ala-talais ca
tamalair asandarjunaih


--- Page 54 ---
Text 13] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 49
aristodumbara-plaksair
vataih kims$uka-candanaih
picumardaih kovidaraih
saralaih sura-darubhih
drakseksu-rambha-jambubhir
badary-aksabhayamalaih
tasya—of that mountain (Trikita); dronyam—in a valley;
bhagavatah—of the great personality; wvarunasya—the demigod
Varuna; maha-atmanah—who is a great devotee of the Lord;
udyanam—a garden; rtumat—Rtumat; nama—of the name;
akridam—a place of sporting pastimes; sura-yositam—of the damsels of
the demigods; sarvatah—everywhere; alarikrtam—beautifully deco-
rated; divyaih—pertaining to the demigods; nitya—always; puspa—of
flowers; phala—and fruits; drumaih—by trees; mandaraih—mandara;
parijatath—parijata; == ca—also;  patala—patala;  asoka—asoka;
campakaih—campaka; citath—cita fruits; piyalaih—piyala fruits;
panasaih—panasa fruits; amraih—mangoes; amratakaih—sour fruits
called amrataka; api—also; kramukaih —kramuka fruits; narikelaih—
coconut trees; ca—and; kharjuiraih—date trees; bijapiurakaih—
pomegranates; madhukaih—madhuka fruits; sala-talaih— palm fruits;
ca—and; tamalaith—tamdla trees; asana—asana trees; arjunaih—
arjuna trees; arista—arista fruits; udumbara—big udumbara trees;
plaksaih—plaksa trees; vataih—banyan trees; kirmsuka—red flowers
with no scent; candanaih—sandalwood trees; picumardaih— picumarda
flowers; kovidaraih —kovidara fruits; saralaih—sarala trees; sura-
darubhih—sura-daru trees;  draksa—grapes; iksuh—sugarcane;
rambha—bananas; jambubhih—jambu fruits; badari—badari fruits;
aksa—aksa fruits; abhaya—abhaya fruits; amalaih—amalaki, a sour
fruit.
TRANSLATION
In a valley of Trikiita Mountain there was a garden called
Rtumat. This garden belonged to the great devotee Varuna and was
a sporting place for the damsels of the demigods. Flowers and
fruits grew there in all seasons. Among them were mandaras,


--- Page 55 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
parijatas, patalas, aSokas, campakas, ciitas, piyalas, panasas,
mangoes, amratakas, kramukas, coconut trees, date trees and
pomegranates. There were madhukas, palm trees, tamalas, asanas,
arjunas, aristas, udumbaras, plaksas, banyan trees, kimsukas and
sandalwood trees. There were also picumardas, kovidaras, saralas,
sura-darus, grapes, sugarcane, bananas, jambu, badaris, aksas,
abhayas and amalakis.
TEXTS 14-19
€
विल्वैः wisn ga भ्छातकादिमिः |
तसिन्सरः सुविपुलं लसत्काच्चनपङ्कजम्‌ 128
कुघदोः्पलकहारशतपत्रभ्नियोर्जितम्‌ |
০৬ न EN
मत्तषटपद निघृष्टं शकुन्ते कठखनेः 1340
+ EN
दंसकारण्डवाकीणं चक्राह्वैः सारसैरपि |
जलङ्क्डुटकोयषिदात्युहकुलबूजितम्‌ ॥१६॥
मत्स्यक्च्छपसश्वादचलत्पद्मरजःपयः |
> €
कदम्बवेतसनलनीपवञ्जुलकेब्ेतम्‌ ॥ १७॥
TR: স্ভবনক্যাহকীঃ शिरीषैः कूटजेङ्गुदैः ।
Feud: खर्ण॑युथौभिर्नागपु्ागजातिभिः ॥१८॥
मच्छिकाशतपत्रैथ॒, माधवीजालकादिभिः |
. a + a
ओोभितं तीरजेान्यैर्नित्यतभिरलं दमैः ।॥१९॥
bilvaih kapitthair jambirair
vrto bhallatakadibhih
tasmin sarah suvipularm
lasat-kancana-pankajam
kumudotpala-kahlara-
Satapatra-sriyorjitam
matta-sat-pada-nirghustariu
Sakuntais ca kala-svanaih


--- Page 56 ---
Text 19] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 51
hamsa-karandavakirnar
cakrahvaih sarasair api
Jjalakukkuta-koyasti-
datyiha-kula-kajitam
matsya-kacchapa-saficara-
calat-padma-rajah-payah
kadamba-vetasa-nala-
nipa-varnjulakair vrtam
kundaih kurubakasokaih
Sirisaih katajerigudaih
kubjakaih svarna-yuthibhir
naga-punnaga-jatibhih
mallika-satapatrais ca
madhavi-jalakadibhih
Sobhitar tira-jais canyair
nityartubhir 01071) drumaih
bilvaih—bilva trees; kapitthaih—kapittha trees; jambiraih—jambira
trees; vrtah—surrounded by; bhallataka-adibhih—bhallataka and
other trees; tasmin—in that garden; sarah—a lake; su-vipulam—which
was very large; lasat—shining; kafcana—golden; parika-jam—filled
with lotus flowers; kumuda—of kumuda flowers; utpala—utpala
flowers; kahlara—kahlara flowers; Satapatra—and Satapatra flowers;
sriya—with the beauty; irjitam—excellent; matta—intoxicated; sat-
pada —bees; nirghustam—hummed; Sakuntaih—with the chirping of
birds; ca—and; kala-svanaih—whose songs were very melodious;
hamsa—swans; karandava—karandavas; akirnam—crowded with;
cakrahvaih—cakravakas; sarasaih—cranes; api—as well as; jala-
kukkuta—water chickens; koyasti—koyastis; datyaha—datyithas;
kula—Aflocks of; kijitam —murmured; matsya—of the fish; kacchapa—
and tortoises; sancara—because of the movements; calat—agitating;
padma—of the lotuses; rajah—by the pollen; payah—the water (was
decorated); kadamba—kadambas; vetasa—vetasas; nala—nalas;


--- Page 57 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
nipa—nipas;  vaijulakaith—vasjulakas;  vrtam—surrounded by;
kundaih—kundas; kurubaka—kurubakas; asokaih—asokas; Sirisaih—
sirisas; कच्छ kittajas;  ingudaih—ingudas; ' kubjakaih—kubjakas;
svarna-yitthibhih—svarna-yithis; naga—nagas; punndga —punnagas;
Jjatibhih—jatis; mallika—mallikas; satapatraih—satapatras; ca—also;
madhavi—madhavis; jalakadibhih—jalakas; sobhitam—adorned; tira-
Jjaith—growing on the banks; ca—and; anyaih—others; nitya-rtubhih—
in all seasons; alam —abundantly; drumaih —with trees (bearing flowers
and fruits).
i TRANSLATION

In that garden there was a very large lake filled with shining
golden lotus flowers and the flowers known as kumuda, kahlara,
utpala and Satapatra, which added excellent beauty to the moun-
tain. There were also bilva, kapittha, jambira and bhallataka trees.
Intoxicated bumblebees drank honey and hummed with the chirp-
ing of the birds, whose songs were very melodious. The lake was
crowded with swans, karandavas, cakravakas, cranes, and flocks of
water chickens, datyihas, koyastis and other murmuring birds.
Because of the agitating movements of the fish and tortoises, the
water was decorated with pollen that had fallen from the lotus
flowers. The lake was surrounded by kadamba flowers, vetasa
flowers, nalas, nipas, vaiijulakas, kundas, kurubakas, aSokas,
Sirisas, kiitajas, ingudas, kubjakas, svarna-yuthis, nagas, pun-
nagas, jatis, mallikas, Satapatras, jalakas and madhavi-latas. The
banks were also abundantly adorned with varieties of trees that
yielded flowers and fruits in all seasons. Thus the entire mountain
stood gloriously decorated.

PURPORT

Judging from the exhaustive description of the lakes and rivers on
Trikata Mountain, on earth there is no comparison to their superex-
cellence. On other planets, however, there are many such wonders. For
instance, we understand that there are two million different types of
trees, and not all of them are exhibited on earth. Srimad-Bhagavatam
presents the total knowledge of the affairs of the universe. It not only de-
scribes this universe, but also takes into account the spiritual world


--- Page 58 ---
Text 21] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 53
beyond the universe. No one can challenge the Srimad-Bhagavatam'’s
descriptions of the material and spiritual worlds. The attempts to go from
the earth to the moon have failed, but the people of earth can understand
what exists on other planets. There is no need of imagination; one may
take actual knowledge from Srimad-Bhagavatam and be satisfied.
TEXT 20
EN
TAT तद्विरिकाननाश्रयः
करेणुभिर्वारणयूथपश्चरन्‌ |
सकण्टकं कीचकवेणुवेत्रषद्‌
विन्ञारगुरूमं प्ररुजन्वनस्पतीन्‌ ॥२०॥
tatraikada tad-giri-kananasrayah
karenubhir varana-yiatha-pas caran
sakantakarin kicaka-venu-vetravad
visala-gulmari prarujan vanaspatin
tatra—therein; ekada—once upon a time; tat-giri—of that mountain
(Trikata); kanana-asrayah—who lives in the forest; karenubhih —ac-
companied by female elephants; varana-ydtha-pah—the leader of the
elephants; caran—while wandering (toward the lake); sa-kantakam—a
place full of thorns; kicaka-venu-vetra-vat—with plants and creepers of
different names; visala-gulmam—many thickets; prarujan—breaking;
vanah-patin—trees and plants.
TRANSLATION
The leader of the elephants who lived in the forest of the moun-
tain Trikita once wandered toward the lake with his female
elephants. He broke many plants, creepers, thickets and trees, not
caring for their piercing thorns.
TEXT 21
यद्रन्धमात्राद्धरयो गजेन्द्रा
व्याघ्रादयो STEN: सखद्गाः |


--- Page 59 ---
54. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
महोरगाश्चापि भयाद्‌ gata
सगौरकृष्णाः शरमाश्रम्यः URL
yad-gandha-matrad dharayo gajendra
vyaghradayo vyala-mrgah sakhadgah
mahoragas capi bhayad dravanti
sagaura-krsnah sarabhas camaryah
yat-gandha-matrat—simply by the scent of that elephant; harayah—
lions; gaja-indrah—other elephants; vyaghra-adayah—ferocious
animals like tigers; wvyala-mrgah—other ferocious animals; sa-
khadgah—rhinoceroses; maha-uragah—big, big serpents; ca—also;
api—indeed; bhayat—because of fear; dravanti—running away; sa—
with; gaura-krsndh—some of them white, some of them black;
sarabhah—sarabhas; camaryah—also camaris.
TRANSLATION
Simply by catching scent of that elephant, all the other
elephants, the tigers and the other ferocious animals, such as lions,
rhinoceroses, great serpents and black and white sarabhas, fled in
fear. The camari deer also fled.
TEXT 22
©
बका वराहा মহিদ্থহাক্মা
५.
गोपुच्छशाठा़कमकटाथ |
अन्यत्र क्षुद्रा हरिणाः शशाद य-
अरन्त्यमीता यदनुग्रहेण ॥२२॥
vrka varaha mahisarksa-salya
gopuccha-salavrka-markatas ca
anyatra ksudra harinah $asadayas
caranty abhita yad-anugrahena
vrkah—foxes; varahah—boars; mahisa—buffaloes; rksa—bears;
Salyah—porcupines; gopuccha—a type of deer; salavrka—wolves;


--- Page 60 ---
Text 24] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 55
markatah—monkeys; ca—and; anyatra—elsewhere; ksudrah—small
animals; harinah—deer; $asa-adayah—rabbits and others; caranti—
roaming (in the forest); abhitah—without fear; yat-anugrahena—by
the mercy of that elephant.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of this elephant, animals like the foxes, wolves,
buffaloes, bears, boars, gopucchas, porcupines, monkeys, rabbits,
the other deer and many other small animals loitered elsewhere in
the forest. They were not afraid of him.
PURPORT
All the animals were practically controlled by this elephant, yet al-
though they could move without fear, because of respect they did not
stand before him.
TEXTS 23-24
स घर्मतप्तः करिभिः करेण॒भि-
a
I मदव्युर्करभेरनुदुतः |
गिरिं गरिम्णा परितः प्रकम्पयन्‌
निषेन्यमाणोऽचिङ्रैंदाशनैः ॥२२॥
सरोऽनिलं पङ्कजरेणुरूषितं
जिघन्िदूरान्मद विहलेक्षणः ।
ga: सखयूथेन ठषार्दितेन वत्‌
खरोवराग्यासपथागपद्‌ दतम्‌ ॥२४॥
sa gharma-taptah karibhih karenubhir
vrto madacyut-karabhair anudrutah
girirh garimna paritah prakampayan
nisevyamano ’likulair madasanaih
saro 7717107, pankaja-renu-rasitarn
Jighran vidiiran mada-vihvaleksanah


--- Page 61 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
vrtah sva-yithena trsarditena tat
sarovarabhyasam athagamad drutam
sah—he (the leader of the elephants); gharma-taptah— perspiring;
karibhih—Dby other elephants; karenubhih—as well as female elephants;
vrtah—surrounded; mada-cyut—liquor dripping from his mouth;
karabhaih—by small elephants; anudrutah—was followed; girim—that
mountain; garimna—by the weight of the body; paritah—all around;
prakampayan —causing to tremble; nisevyamanah—being served; ali-
kulath—by the bumblebees; mada-asanaih—who drank honey;
sarah—from the lake; anilam—the breeze; parkaja-renu-rasitam—
carrying the dust from the lotus flowers; jighran —smelling; vidarat—
from a distance; mada-vihvala—being intoxicated; iksanah—whose
vision; vrtah—surrounded; sva-yiithena—by his own associates; trsa-
arditena—who were afflicted by thirst; tat—that; sarovara-abhyasam—
to the bank of the lake; atha—thus; agamat—went; drutam—very
soon.
TRANSLATION
Surrounded by the herd’s other elephants, including females,
and followed by the young ones, Gajapati, the leader of the
elephants, made Trikaita Mountain tremble all around because of
the weight of his body. He was perspiring, liquor dripped from his
mouth, and his vision was overwhelmed by intoxication. He was
being served by bumblebees who drank honey, and from a
distance he could smell the dust of the lotus flowers, which was
carried from the lake by the breeze. Thus surrounded by his asso-
ciates, who were afflicted by thirst, he soon arrived at the bank of
the lake.
TEXT 25
QC ৬
frm तसिन्नर्ताम्बु fe
हेमारबिन्दोत्परठरेणरूपितिम्‌ ।
पपो निकामं निजपुष्करोद्षत-
मात्मानमद्धि: सपयन्गतङ्कमः ।। २९५॥


--- Page 62 ---
Text 26] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 57
vigahya tasminn amrtambu 71777101027
hemaravindotpala-renu-risitam
papau nikamar nija-puskaroddhrtam
atmanam adbhih snapayan gata-klamah
vigahya—entering; tasmin—into the lake; amrta-ambu—water as
pure as nectar; nirmalam—crystal clear; hema—very cold; aravinda-
utpala—from the lilies and lotuses; renu—with the dust; rasitam—
which was mixed; papau—he drank; nikamam—until fully satisfied;
nija—own; puskara-uddhrtam—drawing with his trunk; atmanam—
himself; adbhih—with water; snapayan—bathing thoroughly; gata-
klamah—was relieved of all fatigue.
TRANSLATION
The King of the elephants entered the lake, bathed thoroughly
and was relieved of his fatigue. Then, with the aid of his trunk, he
drank the cold, clear, nectarean water, which was mixed with the
dust of lotus flowers and water lilies, until he was fully satisfied.
TEXT 26
स पुष्करेणोदुधृतज्ञीकराम्बुभि-
निपाययन्संखपयन्यथा गृही |
धरणी करेणुः करमां दुम॑दो
नाचष्ट FF कृपणोऽजमायया ॥२६॥
sa puskarenoddhrta-stkarambubhir
nipayayan sarmsnapayan yathda grhi
ghrni karenuh karabharms ca durmado
nacasta krcchrarm krpano ’ja-mayaya
sah—he (the leader of the elephants); puskarena—with his trunk;
uddhrta—by drawing out; sikara-ambubhih—and sprinkling the water;
nipayayan—causing them to drink; sammsnapayan—and bathing them;
yatha—as; grhi—a householder; ghrni—always kind (to the members
of his family); karenuh—to his wives, the female elephants;


--- Page 63 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
karabhan—to the children; ca—as well as; durmadah—who is too at-
tached to the members of his family; na—not; dacasta—considered;
krcchram—hardship; krpanah—being without spiritual knowledge;
aja-mayaya— because of the influence of the external, illusory energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Like a human being who lacks spiritual knowledge and is too at-
tached to the members of his family, the elephant, being illusioned
by the external energy of Krsna, had his wives and children bathe
and drink the water. Indeed, he raised water from the lake with his
trunk and sprayed it over them. He did not mind the hard labor in-
volved in this endeavor.
TEXT 27
d লগ किन्ुप दैवचोदितो
ग्राहो बलीयांश्चरणे रुषाग्रहीत्‌ ।
यच्च्छयैवं॑ व्यसनं गतो गजो
° -
यथाबलं सोऽतिबलो विचक्रमे Rell
tam tatra kascin nrpa daiva-codito
graho baliyarms$ carane rusagrahit
yadrcchayaivar vyasanar gato gajo
yatha-balari so 1126010 vicakrame
tam—him (Gajendra); tatra—there (in the water); kascit—someone;
nrpa—O King; daiva-coditah—inspired by providence; grahah—cro-
codile; baltyan—very powerful; carane—his foot; rusa—angrily;
agrahit—captured; yadrcchaya—occurring due to providence; evam —
such; vyasanam—a dangerous position; gatah—having obtained;
gajah—the elephant; yatha-balam—according to his strength; sah—he;
ati-balah—with great endeavor; vicakrame—tried to get out.
TRANSLATION
By the arrangement of providence, O King, a strong crocodile
was angry at the elephant and attacked the elephant’s leg in the


--- Page 64 ---
Text 29] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 59
water. The elephant was certainly strong, and he tried his best to
get free from this danger sent by providence.
TEXT 28
तथातुरं युथपतिं फरेणवो
विषृष्यमाणं तरसा बलीयसा |
विच्य नधियोऽपरे , गनाः
पाष्णिग्रहास्तारयितं न चाशकन्‌ ।।২৫।।
tathaturari yitha-patirh karenavo
vikrsyamanarm tarasa baliyasa
vicukrusur dina-dhiyo ‘pare gajah
parsni-grahas tarayituri na casakan
tatha—then; aturam—that grave condition; yitha-patim —the leader
of the elephants; karenavah—his wives; vikrsyamanam—being at-
tacked; tarasa —by the strength; baliyasa—by the strength (of the cro-
codile); vicukrusuh—began to cry; dina-dhiyah—who were less intelli-
gent; apare—the other; gajah—elephants; parsni-grahah—grasping
him from behind; tarayitum—to free; na—not; ca—also; asakan—
were able.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in that grave condition, his wives
felt very, very sorry and began to cry. The other elephants wanted
to help Gajendra, but because of the crocodile’s great strength,
they could not rescue him by grasping him from behind.
TEXT 29
नियुष्यतोरेबमिभेन्द्रनकयो-
्िकषेतोरन्तरतो बहिर्मिथः ।
समाः सहस्रं न्यगमन्‌ महीपते
सप्राणयोधित्रमर्मसतामराः ॥२९॥


--- Page 65 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
niyudhyator evam ibhendra-nakrayor
vikarsator antarato bahir mithah
samah sahasram vyagaman mahi-pate
sapranayos citram amarisatamarah
niyudhyatoh—fighting; evam—in this way; ibha-indra—of the
elephant; nakrayoh—and the crocodile; vikarsatoh—pulling;
antaratah—in the water; bahih—outside the water; mithah—one
another; samah—years; sahasram—one thousand; vyagaman —passed;
mahi-pate—O King; sa-pranayoh—both alive; citram—wonderful;
amarisata—considered; amarah —the demigods.
TRANSLATION
O King, the elephant and the crocodile fought in this way, pull-
ing one another in and out of the water, for one thousand years.
Upon seeing the fight, the demigods were very surprised.
TEXT 30
ततो THEE मनोबलोजसां
৭
कालेन दीर्घेण महानभूद्‌ व्ययः |
-
विकृष्यमाणस्य जलेऽवसीदतो
.
विपयंयोऽभूत्‌ सकरं जरोकसः ॥३०॥
tato gajendrasya mano-balaujasarn
kalena dirghena mahan abhid vyayah
vikrsyamanasya jale ’vasidato
viparyayo ‘bhit sakalari jalaukasah
tatah —thereafter; gaja-indrasya—of the King of the elephants;
manah—of the strength of enthusiasm; bala—the physical strength;
ojasam—and the strength of the senses; kdlena—because of years of
fighting;  dirghena—prolonged; mahan—great; abhiit—became;
vyayah—the expenditure; vikrsyamanasya—who was being pulled (by
the crocodile); jale—into the water (a foreign place); avasidatah—
reduced (mental, physical and sensory strength); viparyayah—the op-


--- Page 66 ---
Text 30] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 61
posite; abhiit—became; sakalam—all of them; jala-okasah—the cro-
codile, whose home is the water.
TRANSLATION

Thereafter, because of being pulled into the water and fighting
for many long years, the elephant became diminished in his men-
tal, physical and sensual strength. The crocodile, on the contrary,
being an animal of the water, increased in enthusiasm, physical
strength and sensual power.

PURPORT

In the fighting between the elephant and the crocodile, the difference
was that although the elephant was extremely powerful, he was in a
foreign place, in the water. During one thousand years of fighting, he
could not get any food, and under the circumstances his bodily strength
diminished, and because his bodily strength diminished, his mind also
became weak and his senses less powerful. The crocodile, however, being
an animal of the water, had no difficulties. He was getting food and was
therefore getting mental strength and sensual encouragement. Thus
while the elephant became reduced in strength, the crocodile became
more and more powerful. Now, from this we may take the lesson that in
our fight with maya we should not be in a position in which our strength,
enthusiasm and senses will be unable to fight vigorously. Our Krsna con-
sciousness movement has actually declared war against the illusory en-
ergy, in which all the living entities are rotting in a false understanding
of civilization. The soldiers in this Krsna consciousness movement must
always possess physical strength, enthusiasm and sensual power. To keep
themselves fit, they must therefore place themselves in a normal condi-
tion of life. What constitutes a normal condition will not be the same for
everyone, and therefore there are divisions of varnasrama —brahmana,
ksatriya, vaiSya, $adra, brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and san-
nyasa. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga, it is advised that no one take
sannyasa.

asvamedhar gavalambhari
sannyasar pala-paitrkam


--- Page 67 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
devarena sutotpattin
kalau pafica vivarjayet
(Brahma-vaivarta Purana)
From this we can understand that in this age the sannyasa-asrama is
forbidden because people are not strong. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
showed us an example in taking sannydsa at the age of twenty-four
years, but even Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya advised Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu to be extremely careful because He had taken sannydsa at an
early age. For preaching we give young boys sannydsa, but actually it is
being experienced that they are not fit for sannyasa. There is no harm,
however, if one thinks that he is unfit for sannyasa; if he is very much
agitated sexually, he should go to the asrama where sex is allowed,
namely the grhastha-asrama. That one has been found to be very weak
in one place does not mean that he should stop fighting the crocodile of
maya. One should take shelter of the lotus feet of Krsna, as we shall see
Gajendra do, and at the same time one can be a grhastha if he is satisfied
with sexual indulgence. There is no need to give up the fight. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore recommended, sthane sthitah Sruti-
801৫7 tanu-vari-manobhih. One may stay in whichever asrama 15 suit-
able for him; it is not essential that one take sannyasa. If one is sexually
agitated, he can enter the grhastha-asrama. But one must continue fight-
ing. For one who is not in a transcendental position, to take sannyasa ar-
tificially is not a very great credit. If sannyasa is not suitable, one may
enter the grhastha-asrama and fight maya with great strength. But one
should not give up the fighting and go away.
TEXT 31
इत्थं गजेन्द्रः स॒ यदाप संकटं
प्राणसख देही विवशो यदष्छया |
- ol
अपारयननात्मविमोक्षणे चिरं
दध्याविमां बुद्धिमथाभ्यपद्यत 13201
ittham gajendrah sa yadapa sarikatarm
pranasya dehi vivaso yadrcchaya


--- Page 68 ---
Text 31] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 63
aparayann atma-vimoksane cirarn
dadhyav imari buddhim athabhyapadyata

ittham—in this way; gaja-indrah—the King of the elephants; sah—
he; yada —when; apa—obtained; sarikatam—such a dangerous posi-
tion; pranasya—of life; dehi—who is embodied; vivasah—circumstan-
tially helpless; yadrcchaya—by the will of providence; aparayan—
being unable; atma-vimoksane—to save himself; ciram—for a long
time; dadhyau—began to think seriously; imam —this; buddhim —deci-

sion; atha—thereupon; abhyapadyata—reached.

TRANSLATION
When the King of the elephants saw that he was under the
clutches of the crocodile by the will of providence and, being em-
bodied and circumstantially helpless, could not save himself from
danger, he was extremely afraid of being killed. He consequently
thought for a long time and finally reached the following decision.
PURPORT
Everyone in the material world is engaged in a struggle for existence.
Everyone tries to save himself from danger, but when one is unable to
save himself, if he is pious, he then takes shelter of the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(7.16):
catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino ‘rjuna
arto jijiasur artharthi

jaani ca bharatarsabha
Four kinds of pious men—namely, one who is in danger, one who is in
need of money, one who is searching for knowledge and one who is in-
quisitive—begin to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in order to be saved or to advance. The King of the elephants, in his con-
dition of danger, decided to seek shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
After considerable thought, he intelligently arrived at this correct deci-
sion. Such a decision is not reached by a sinful man. Therefore in


--- Page 69 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
Bhagavad-gitd it is said that those who are pious (उष्ण) can decide that
in a dangerous or awkward condition one should seek shelter of the lotus
feet of Krsna.
TEXT 32
न मामिमे ज्ञातय आतुरं गजाः
कृतः करिण्यः प्रभवन्ति मोचितुम्‌ ৷
ग्राहेण पादोन विधातुराडतो-
ऽप्यहं च तं यामि परं परायणम्‌ 13:0
na mam ime jhdtaya aturar gajah
kutah karinyah prabhavanti mocitum
grahena pasena vidhatur avrto
py হযে ca tam yami param parayanam
na—not; mam —me; ime—all these; jiatayah—friends and relatives
(the other elephants); aturam—in my distress; gajah—the elephant;
kutah—how; karinyah—my wives; prabhavanti—are able; mocitum—
to deliver (from this dangerous position); grahena—by the crocodile;
pasena—Dby the network of ropes; vidhatuh—of providence; avrtah—
captured; api—although (I am in such a position); aham—I; ca—also;
tam —that (Supreme Personality of Godhead); yami—take shelter of;
param —who is transcendental; parayanam—and who is the shelter of
even the exalted demigods like Brahma and Siva.
TRANSLATION
The other elephants, who are my friends and relatives, could not
rescue me from this danger. What then to speak of my wives?
They cannot do anything. It is by the will of providence that I have
been attacked by this crocodile, and therefore I shall seek shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always the shelter
of everyone, even of great personalities.
PURPORT
This material world is described as [00007 pada yad vipadam,
which means that at every step there is danger. A fool wrongly thinks


--- Page 70 ---
Text 33] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 65
that he is happy in this material world, but in fact he is not, for one who
thinks that way is only illusioned. At every step, at every moment, there
is danger. In modern civilization one thinks that if he has a nice home
and a nice car his life is perfect. In the Western countries, especially in
America, it is very nice to possess a good car, but as soon as one is on the
road, there is danger because at any moment an accident may take place
and one will be killed. The record actually shows that so many people die
in such accidents. Therefore if we actually think that this material world
is a very happy place, this is our ignorance. Real knowledge is that this
material world is full of danger. We may struggle for existence as far as
our intelligence allows and may try to take care of ourselves, but unless
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, ultimately saves us from
danger, our attempts will be useless. Therefore Prahlada Maharaja says:
balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha
nartasya cagadam udanvati majjato nauh
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihanjasestas
tavad vibho tanu-bhrtam tvad-upeksitanam
(Bhag. 7.9.19)
We may invent so many ways to be happy or to counteract the dangers of
this material world, but unless our attempts are sanctioned by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they will never make us happy. Those
who try to be happy without taking shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead are midhas, rascals. Na mam duskrtino midhah prapadyante
naradhamah. Those who are the lowest of men refuse to take to Krsna
consciousness because they think that they will be able to protect them-
selves without Krsna’s care. This is their mistake. The decision of the
King of the elephants, Gajendra, was correct. In such a dangerous posi-
tion, he sought shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 33
> LN -
यः कथनेशो बलिनोऽन्तकोरगात्‌
प्रचण्डवेगादभिधावतो भृशम्‌ |
मीतं प्रपन्नं परिपाति यद्धया-
Hg प्रधावत्यरणं तमीमहि 1330


--- Page 71 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
yah kascaneso balino ’ntakoragat
pracanda-vegad abhidhavato bhrsam
bhitam prapannarm paripati yad-bhayan
mrtyuh pradhavaty aranam tam imahi

yah—He who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); kascana—
someone; iSah—the supreme controller; balinah—very powerful;
antaka-uragat—from the great serpent of time, which brings death;
pracanda-vegat—whose force is fearful; abhidhavatah—who is chas-
ing; bhrsam—endlessly (every hour and every minute); bhitam —one
who is afraid of death; prapannam—who is surrendered (to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); paripati—He protects; yat-bhayat—
from fear of the Lord; mrtyuh—death itself; pradhavati—runs away;
aranam—the actual shelter of everyone; tam —unto Him; imahi—I sur-
render or take shelter.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is certainly not known to
everyone, but He is very powerful and influential. Therefore, al-
though the serpent of eternal time, which is fearful in force,
endlessly chases everyone, ready to swallow him, if one who fears
this serpent seeks shelter of the Lord, the Lord gives him protec-
tion, for even death runs away in fear of the Lord. I therefore sur-
render unto Him, the great and powerful supreme authority who
is the actual shelter of everyone.

PURPORT

One who is intelligent understands that there is a great and supreme
authority above everything. That great authority appears in different in-
carnations to save the innocent from disturbances. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (4.8), paritranaya sadhinar vinasaya ca duskrtam: the
Lord appears in His various incarnations for two purposes —to annihilate
the duskrti, the sinful, and to protect His devotees. The King of the
elephants decided to surrender unto Him. This is intelligent. One must
know that great Supreme Personality of Godhead and surrender unto
Him. The Lord comes personally to instruct us how to be happy, and only


--- Page 72 ---
Text 33] The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis 67
fools and rascals do not see by intelligence this supreme authority, the
Supreme Person. In the Sruti-mantra it is said:
bhisasmad vatah pavate
bhisodeti siiryah
bhisasmad agnis candras ca
mrtyur dhavati paficamah
(Taittirtya Upanisad 2.8)

It is out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the wind is
blowing, that the sun is distributing heat and light, and that death is
chasing everyone. Thus there is a supreme controller, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (9.10): mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram.
This material manifestation is working so well because of the supreme
controller. Any intelligent person, therefore, can understand that there
is a supreme controller. Furthermore, the supreme controller Himself
appears as Lord Krsna, as Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and as Lord
Ramacandra to give us instructions and to show us by example how to
surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yet those who are
duskrti, the lowest of men, do not surrender (na mam duskrtino miidhah
prapadyante naradhamah).

In Bhagavad-gita the Lord clearly says, mrtyuh sarva-haras caham:
“I am all-devouring death.” Thus mrtyu, or death, is the representative
who takes everything away from the living entity who has accepted a ma-
terial body. No one can say, “I do not fear death.” This is a false proposi-
tion. Everyone fears death. However, one who seeks shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can be saved from death. One may
argue, “Does the devotee not 016?” The answer is that a devotee cer-
tainly must give up his body, for the body is material. The difference is,
however, that for one who surrenders to Krsna fully and who is pro-
tected by Krsna, the present body is his last; he will not again receive a
material body to be subjected to death. This is assured in Bhagavad-gita
(4.9). Tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna: a devotee,
after giving up his body, does not accept a material body, but returns
home, back to Godhead. We are always in danger because at any moment
death can take place. It is not that only Gajendra, the King of the


--- Page 73 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 2
elephants, was afraid of death. Everyone should fear death because
everyone is caught by the crocodile of eternal time and may die at any
moment. The best course, therefore, is to seek shelter of Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and be saved from the struggle for ex-
istence in this material world, in which one repeatedly takes birth and
dies. To reach this understanding is the ultimate goal of life.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Second
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Elephant Gajendra’s
Crisis.”


--- Page 74 ---
CHAPTER THREE
Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender

In this chapter, the prayers by Gajendra, the King of the elephants, are
described. It appears that the King of the elephants was formerly a
human being known as Indradyumna and that he learned a prayer to the
Supreme Lord. Fortunately he remembered that prayer and began to
chant it to himself. First he offered his respectful obeisances to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and because of his awkward position in
having been attacked by the crocodile, he expressed his inability to recite
prayers nicely. Nonetheless, he tried to chant the mantra and expressed
himself in appropriate words as follows.

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes, the
original person from whom everything has emanated. He is the root
cause of this cosmic manifestation, and the entire cosmos rests in Him,
yet He is transcendental, for He does everything in relation to the ma-
terial world through His external energy. He is eternally situated in the
spiritual world —in Vaikuntha or Goloka Vrndavana— where He engages
in His eternal pastimes. The material world is a product of His external
energy, or material nature, which works under His direction. It is thus
that creation, maintenance and annihilation take place. The Lord exists
at all times. This is extremely difficult for a nondevotee to understand.
Although the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead is per-
ceivable by everyone, only the pure devotees perceive His presence and
activities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely free from
material birth, death, old age and disease. Indeed, if anyone in this ma-
terial world takes shelter of Him, he also becomes situated in that tran-
scendental position. For the satisfaction of the devotee (paritranaya
sadhinam), the Lord appears and exhibits His activities. His appearance,
disappearance and other pastimes are not at all material. One who knows
this secret can enter the kingdom of God. In the Lord, all opposing ele-
ments are adjusted. The Lord is situated in everyone’s heart. He is the
controller of everything, He is the witness of all activities, and He is the
original source of all living entities. Indeed, all living entities are parts of

69


--- Page 75 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
Him, for He is the origin of Maha-Visnu, who is the source of the living
entities within this material world. The Lord can observe the activities of
our senses, which can work and achieve material results because of His
mercy. Although He is the original source of everything, He is un-
touched by any of His by-products. In this way He is like a gold mine,
which is the source of gold in ornaments and yet is different from the or-
naments themselves. The Lord is worshiped by the method prescribed in
the Panicaratras. He is the source of our knowledge, and He can give us
liberation. Therefore it is our duty to understand Him according to the
instructions of devotees, in particular the spiritual master. Although for
us the mode of goodness is covered, by following the instructions of
saintly persons and the spiritual master we can be freed from material
clutches.

“The self-effulgent material form of the Supreme Personality of God-
head is adored by nondevotees, His impersonal form is adored by those
advanced in spiritual knowledge, and His feature as the localized
Supersoul is appreciated by yogis. But His original form as a person is
understood only by devotees. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is
competent to dissipate the darkness of the conditioned soul through His
instructions in Bhagavad-gita. He is the ocean of transcendental
qualities and can be understood only by liberated persons freed from the
bodily concept of life. By His causeless mercy, the Lord can rescue the
conditioned soul from the material clutches and enable him to return
home, back to Godhead, to become His personal associate. Nonetheless, a
pure devotee does not aspire to go back to Godhead; he is simply satisfied
with executing his service in this material world. A pure devotee does not
ask anything from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His only prayer
is to be freed from the material conception of life and to be engaged in
the Lord’s transcendental loving service.”

In this way the King of the elephants, Gajendra, offered prayers
directly to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without mistaking Him
for one of the demigods. None of the demigods came to see him, not even
Brahma or Siva. Rather, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana,
seated on Garuda, personally appeared before him. Gajendra, by lifting
his trunk, offered obeisances to the Lord, and the Lord immediately
pulled him from the water along with the crocodile who had captured his
leg. Then the Lord killed the crocodile and thus rescued Gajendra.


--- Page 76 ---
Text 1] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 71
TEXT 1
श्रीवादरायणिरुवाच
एवं उयवसितो बुद्धया समाधाय मनो हदि |
जजाप परमं जाप्यं प्राग्जन्मन्यनुशिक्षितम्र्‌ । १ ॥
Sri-badarayanir uvaca
evar vyavasito buddhya
samadhdaya mano hrdi
Jajapa paramarm japyarn
prag-janmany anusiksitam
sri-badarayanih uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus;
vyavasitah—fixed; buddhya—Dby intelligence; samadhaya—for con-
centration; manah—the mind; Ardi—in consciousness or in the heart;
Jajapa—he chanted; paramam—a supreme; japyam—mantra he had
learned from great devotees; prak-janmani—in his previous birth;
anusiksitam —practiced.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thereafter, the King of the
elephants, Gajendra, fixed his mind in his heart with perfect intel-
ligence and chanted a mantra which he had learned in his previous
birth as Indradyumna and which he remembered by the grace of
Krsna.
PURPORT
Such remembrance is described in Bhagavad-gita (6.43-44.) :
tatra tar buddhi-sarvyogari
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhivyah
samsiddhau kuru-nandana
purvabhyasena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso ’pi sah
In these verses it is assured that even if a person engaged in devotional
service falls down, he is not degraded, but is placed in a position in which


--- Page 77 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
he will in due course of time remember the Supreme Personality of God-
head. As explained later, Gajendra was formerly King Indradyumna, and
somehow or other in his next life he became King of the elephants. Now
Gajendra was in danger, and although he was in a body other than that of
a human being, he remembered the stotra he had chanted in his previous
life. Yatate ca tato bhityah samsiddhau kuru-nandana. To enable one to
achieve perfection, Krsna gives one the chance to remember Him again.
This is proved here, for although the King of the elephants, Gajendra,
was put in danger, this was a chance for him to remember his previous
devotional activities so that he could immediately be rescued by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

It is imperative, therefore, that all devotees in Krsna consciousness
practice chanting some mantra. Certainly one should chant the Hare
Krsna mantra, which is the maha-mantra, or great mantra, and also one
should practice chanting cintamani-prakara-sadmasu or the Nrsimha
strotra (ito nrsimhah parato nrsimho yato yato yami tato nrsirnhah).
Every devotee should practice in order to chant some mantra perfectly so
that even though he may be imperfect in spiritual consciousness in this
life, in his next life he will not forget Krsna consciousness, even if he be-
comes an animal. Of course, a devotee should try to perfect his Krsna
consciousness in this life, for simply by understanding Krsna and His in-
structions, after giving up this body one can return home, back to God-
head. Even if there is some falldown, practice of Krsna consciousness
never goes in vain. For example, Ajamila, in his boyhood, practiced
chanting the name of Narayana under the direction of his father, but
later, in his youth, he fell down and became a drunkard, woman-hunter,
rogue and thief. Nonetheless, because of chanting the name of Narayana
for the purpose of calling his son, whom he had named Narayana, he be-
came advanced, even though he was involved in sinful activities.
Therefore, we should not forget the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra
under any circumstances. It will help us in the greatest danger, as we
find in the life of Gajendra.

TEXT 2
HSE उवाच
ॐ नमो भगवते तसै यत एतचिदात्मकम्र्‌ |
पुरुषायादिबीजाय परेशायाभिधीमहि | २॥


--- Page 78 ---
Text 2] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 73
Sri-gajendra uvaca
ori namo bhagavate tasmai
yata etac cid-atmakam
purusayadi-bijaya
paresayabhidhimahi

sri-gajendrah uvaca—Gajendra, the King of elephants, said; 07--0
my Lord; namah—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You;
bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmai—unto
Him; yatah—from whom; etat—this body and the material manifesta-
tion; cit-Gtmakam—is moving due to consciousness (the spirit soul);
purusaya—unto the Supreme Person; adi-bijaya—who is the origin or
root cause of everything; para-iséya—who is supreme, transcendental
and worshipable for such exalted persons as Brahma and Siva;

abhidhimahi—let me meditate upon Him.

TRANSLATION
The King of the elephants, Gajendra, said: I offer my respectful
obeisances unto the Supreme Person, Vasudeva [ori namo
bhagavate vasudevaya]. Because of Him this material body acts due
to the presence of spirit, and He is therefore the root cause of
everyone. He is worshipable for such exalted persons as Brahma
and Siva, and He has entered the heart of every living being. Let
me meditate upon Him.

PURPORT
In this verse the words etac cid-atmakam are very important. The ma-
terial body certainly consists only of material elements, but when one
awakens to Krsna conscious understanding, the body is no longer ma-
terial but spiritual. The material body is meant for sense enjoyment,
whereas the spiritual body engages in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. Therefore, a devotee who engages in the service of the
Supreme Lord and who constantly thinks of Him should never be con-
sidered to have a material body. It is therefore enjoined, gurusu nara-
matih: one should stop thinking of the spiritual master as an ordinary
human being with a material body. Arcye visnau Sila-dhth: everyone


--- Page 79 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
knows that the Deity in the temple is made of stone, but to think that the
Deity is merely stone is an offense. Similarly, to think that the body of
the spiritual master consists of material ingredients is offensive. Atheists
think that devotees foolishly worship a stone statue as God and an ordi-
nary man as the guru. The fact is, however, that by the grace of Krsna’s
omnipotence, the so-called stone statue of the Deity is directly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the body of the spiritual master is
directly spiritual. A pure devotee who is engaged in unalloyed devotional
service should be understood to be situated on the transcendental plat-
form (sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhiyaya kalpate). Let us
therefore offer our obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
by whose mercy so-called material things also become spiritual when
they are engaged in spiritual activity.

Omikara (pranava) is the symbolic sound representation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Or tat sad iti nirdeso brahmanas tri-
vidhah smrtah: the three words 07 tat sat immediately invoke the
Supreme Person. Therefore Krsna says that He is orkara in all the Vedic
mantras (pranavah sarva-vedesu). The Vedic mantras are pronounced
beginning with orikdra to indicate immediately the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Srimad-Bhagavatam, for example, begins with the words
om namo bhagavate vasudevaya. There is no difference between the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva, and orikara (pranava). We
should be careful to understand that orikara does not indicate anything
nirakara, or formless. Indeed, this verse immediately says, 072 namo
bhagavate. Bhagavan is a person. Thus orikara is the representation of
the Supreme Person. Orikara is not meant to be impersonal, as the
Mayavadi philosophers consider it to be. This is distinctly expressed here
by the word purusaya. The supreme truth addressed by omkara is
purusa, the Supreme Person; He is not impersonal. Unless He is a per-
son, how can He control the great, stalwart controllers of this universe?
Lord Visnu, Lord Brahma and Lord Siva are the supreme controllers of
this universe, but Lord Visnu is offered obeisances even by Lord Siva
and Lord Brahma. Therefore this verse uses the word paresaya, which
indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by ex-
alted demigods. Paresaya means paramesvara. Lord Brahma and Lord
Siva are iSvaras, great controllers, but Lord Visnu is paramesvara, the
supreme controller.


--- Page 80 ---
Text 3] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 75
TEXT 3
यस्मिन्निदं यतघेदं येनेदं य इदं खयम्‌ |
५ বে
योऽस्मात्‌ परस्माच GEES प्रपद्ये खयम्भुवम्‌ ।। 3 ॥
yasminn 1027 yatas cedar
yenedam ya 10271 svayam
yo ’smat parasmdc ca paras
tari prapadye svayambhuvam

yasmin—the basic platform on which; idam—the universe rests;
yatah—the ingredients from which; ca—and; idam—the cosmic
manifestation is produced; yena—by whom; idam—this cosmic
manifestation is created and maintained; yah—He who; idam —this ma-
terial world; svayam—is Himself; yah—He who; asmat—from the
effect (this material world); parasmat—from the cause; ca—and;
parah—transcendental or different; tam —unto Him; prapadye—1I sur-
render; svayambhuvam —unto the supreme self-sufficient.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Godhead is the supreme platform on which every-
thing rests, the ingredient by which everything has been pro-
duced, and the person who has created and is the only cause of this
cosmic manifestation. Nonetheless, He is different from the cause
and the result. I surrender unto Him, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is self-sufficient in everything.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (9.4) the Lord says, maya tatam idari sarvam jagad
avyakta-mirtina: “न am the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
everything rests upon My energy, just as an earthen pot rests on the
earth.” The place where an earthen pot rests is also earth. Then again,
the earthen pot is manufactured by a potter, whose body is a product of
earth. The potter’s wheel with which the pot is made is an expansion of
earth, and the ingredients from which the pot are made are also earth. As


--- Page 81 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
confirmed in the Sruti-mantra, yato va imani bhutani jayante. yena
jatani jivanti. yat prayanty abhisariwisanti. The original cause of every-
thing is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and after being annihi-
lated, everything enters into Him (prakrtimn yanti mamikam). Thus the
Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead —Lord Ramacandra or Lord
Krsna—is the original cause of everything.
varah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.” (Brahma-sarihita 5.1)
The Lord is the cause for everything, but there is no cause for Him.
Sarvari khalv 8007 brahma. Mat-sthani sarva-bhiitani na caham tesv
avasthitah. Although He is everything, His personality is different from
the cosmic manifestation.
TEXT 4
यः खात्मनीदं निजमाययार्पितं
कचिद्‌ विभातं छ च तत्‌ पतिरोहितम्‌।
अविद्धदक्‌ साक्ष्युभयं तदीक्षते
-
स अत्ममूखोऽवतु मां परात्परः 1 ४॥
yah svatmanidari nija-mdayayarpitariu
kvacid vibhatari kva ca tat tirohitam
aviddha-drk saksy ubhayarn tad tksate
sa atma-mulo vatu mari parat-parah
yah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; sva-atmani—in
Him; idam—this cosmic manifestation; nija-mdyaya—by His own
potency; arpitam—invested; kvacit—sometimes, at the beginning of a
kalpa; vibhatam—it is manifested; kva ca—sometimes, during dissolu-


--- Page 82 ---
Text 5] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender a
tion; tat—that(manifestation); tirohitam—not visible; aviddha-drk—
He sees everything (in all these circumstances); saksi—the witness;
ubhayam—both (manifestation and annihilation); tat tksate—sees
everything, without loss of sight; sah—that Supreme Personality of God-
head; atma-mitlah—self-sufficient, having no other cause; avatu—
please give protection; mam —unto me; parat-parah—He is transcen-
dental to transcendental, or above all transcendence.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by expanding His own
energy, keeps this cosmic manifestation visible and again some-
times renders it invisible. He is both the supreme cause and the
supreme result, the observer and the witness, in all circumstances.
Thus He is transcendental to everything. May that Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead give me protection.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has multipotencies (parasya
Saktir vividhaiva $rizyate). Therefore, as soon as He likes, He uses one of
His potencies, and by that expansion He creates this cosmic manifesta-
tion. Again, when the cosmic manifestation is annihilated, it rests in
Him. Nonetheless, He is infallibly the supreme observer. Under any
circumstances, the Supreme Lord is changeless. He is simply a witness
and is aloof from all creation and annihilation.
TEXT 5
कालेन पञ्चत्वमितेषु FE
APY पेषु च सव॑हेतुषु |
तमस्तदासीद्‌ गहनं गभीरं
यस्तस्य पारेऽभिबिराजते विथः || এ |
kalena pancatvam itesu (1571050
lokesu palesu ca sarva-hetusu
tamas tadasid gahanari gabhirar
yas tasya pare ‘bhivirajate vibhuh


--- Page 83 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3

kalena—in due course of time (after millions and millions of years);
paficatvam—when everything illusory is annihilated; itesu—all
transformations; krtsnasah—with everything within this cosmic
manifestation; lokesu—all the planets, or everything that exists;
palesu—maintainers like Lord Brahmi; ca—also; sarva-hetusu—all
causative existences; tamah—great darkness; tada—then; asit—was;
gahanam—very dense; gabhiram—very deep; yah—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead who; tasya—this dark situation; pdre—over and
above; abhivirajate—exists or shines; vibhuh—the Supreme.

TRANSLATION

In due course of time, when all the causative and effective
manifestations of the universe, including the planets and their
directors and maintainers, are annihilated, there is a situation of
dense darkness. Above this darkness, however, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. I take shelter of His lotus feet.

PURPORT

From the Vedic mantras we understand that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is above everything. He is supreme, above all the demigods,
including Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. He is the supreme controller.
When everything disappears by the influence of His energy, the cosmic
situation is one of dense darkness. The Supreme Lord, however, is the
sunshine, as confirmed in the Vedic mantras: aditya-varnam tamasah
parastat. In our daily experience, when we on earth are in the darkness
of night, the sun is always luminous somewhere in the sky. Similarly, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme sun, always remains
luminous, even when the entire cosmic manifestation is annihilated in
due course of time.

TEXT 6
न थस्य देवा ऋषयः पदं বিভব
S
जन्तुः पुनः RIS गन्तुमीरितुम्‌ |
यथा नटय्ाकृतिभिर्विचेष्टतो
दुरत्ययानुक्रमणः स माबतु ॥&॥


--- Page 84 ---
Text 6] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 79
na yasya deva rsayah [00007 vidur
jantuh punah ko ’rhati gantum iritum
yatha natasyakrtibhir vicestato
duratyayanukramanah sa mavatu
na—neither; yasya—He of whom; devah—the demigods; rsayah—
great sages; padam—position; viduh—can understand; jantuh—unin-
telligent living beings like animals; punah—again; kah—who; arhati—
is able; gantum—to enter into the knowledge; iritum—or to express by
words; yathda—as; natasya—of the artist; akrtibhih—by bodily
features; vicestatah—dancing in different ways; duratyaya—very dif-
ficult; anukramanah—His movements; sah—that Supreme Personality
of Godhead; ma—unto me; avatu—may give His protection.
TRANSLATION
An artist onstage, being covered by attractive dresses and danc-
ing with different movements, is not understood by his audience;
similarly, the activities and features of the supreme artist cannot
be understood even by the demigods or great sages, and certainly
not by those who are unintelligent like animals. Neither the
demigods and sages nor the unintelligent can understand the
features of the Lord, nor can they express in words His actual posi-
tion. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead give me protec-
tion.
PURPORT
A similar understanding was expressed by Kuntidevi. The Supreme
Lord exists everywhere, within and without. He even exists within the
heart. Sarvasya ০৫/১07 hrdi sannivisto. Isvarah sarva-bhitanarm hrd-
dese 77870 tisthati. Thus it is indicated that one can find the Supreme
Lord within one’s heart. There are many, many yogis trying to find Him.
Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti yar yoginah. Nonethe-
less, even great yogis, demigods, saints and sages have been unable to
understand the bodily features of that great artist, nor could they under-
stand the meaning of His movements. What then is to be said of ordinary
speculators like the so-called philosophers of this material world? For
them He is impossible to understand. Therefore we must accept the


--- Page 85 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
statements given by the Supreme when He kindly incarnates to instruct
us. We must simply accept the word of Lord Ramacandra, Lord Krsna
and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and follow in Their footsteps. Then it
may be possible for us to know the purpose of Their incarnations.
janma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deharn punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
(Bg. 4.9)
If by the Lord’s grace one can understand Him, one will immediately be
delivered, even within his material body. The material body will no
longer have any function, and whatever activities take place with the
body will be activities of Krsna consciousness. In this way one may give
up his body and return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
दिदृक्षवो यस्य पदं सुमङ्गलं
वि्चुक्तसङ्गा gag: सुसाधवः |
TASHA बने
भूतात्मभूताः सुहृदः स मे गतिः ॥ ७॥
didrksavo yasya padar sumarigalarn
vimukta-sariga munayah susadhavah
caranty aloka-vratam avranam vane
bhutatma-bhitah suhrdah sa me gatih
didrksavah—those who desire to see (the Supreme Personality of God-
head); yasya—of Him; padam—the lotus feet; su-mangalam—all-
auspicious; vimukta-sarigah— persons who are completely disinfected of
material conditions; munayah—great sages; su-sadhavah—those who
are highly elevated in spiritual consciousness; caranti—practice; aloka-
vratam—vows of brahmacarya, vanaprastha or sannydsa; avranam—
without any fault; vane—in the forest; bhiita-atma-bhitah—those who
are equal to all living entities; suhrdah—those who are friends to every-


--- Page 86 ---
Text 9] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 81
one; sah—that same Supreme Personality of Godhead; me—my;
gatih—destination.
TRANSLATION
Renunciants and great sages who see all living beings equally,
who are friendly to everyone and who flawlessly practice in the
forest the vows of brahmacarya, vanaprastha and sannyasa desire
to see the all-auspicious lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. May that same Supreme Personality of Godhead be my
destination.
PURPORT
This verse describes the qualifications for devotees or persons highly
elevated in spiritual consciousness. Devotees are always equal to every-
one, seeing no distinction between lower and higher classes. Panditah
sama-darsinah. They look upon everyone as a spirit soul who is part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. Thus they are competent to search for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Understanding that the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is the friend of everyone (suhrdam sarva-
bhatanam), they act as friends of everyone on behalf of the Supreme
Lord. Making no distinction between one nation and another or one com-
munity and another, they preach Krsna consciousness, the teachings of
Bhagavad-gita, everywhere. Thus they are competent to see the lotus
feet of the Lord. Such preachers in Krsna consciousness are called
paramaharnsas. As indicated by the word vimukta-sanga, they have
nothing to do with material conditions. One must take shelter of such a
devotee in order to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 8-9
न विद्यते यस्य च जन्म कर्मवा
न नामरूपे गुणदोष एव वा |
तथापि लोकाप्ययसंमवाय यः
खमायया तान्यजुकारगच्छति ॥ ८ ॥
तस्मै नमः परेशाय ब्रहमणेऽनन्तराक्तये |
अरूपायोरुरूपाय नम॒  आधर्यकमेणे ॥ ९ ॥


--- Page 87 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
na vidyate yasya ca janma karma va
na nama-riipe guna-dosa eva va
tathapi lokapyaya-sambhavaya yah
sva-mayaya tany anukalam rcchati
tasmai namah paresaya
brahmane ’nanta-saktaye
aripayoru-rupaya
nama dscarya-karmane

na—not; vidyate—there is; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead); ca—also; janma—birth; karma—activities; va—
or; na—nor; ndma-ripe—any material name or material form; guna—
qualities; dosah—fault; eva—certainly; wva—either; tathapi—still;
loka—of this cosmic manifestation; apyaya—who is the destruction;
sambhavaya—and creation; yah—He who; sva-mayaya—by His own
potency; tani—activities; anukdlam—eternally; rcchati—accepts;
tasmai—unto Him; namah—1I offer my obeisances; para —transcenden-
tal; #aya—who is the supreme controller; brahmane—who is the
Supreme Brahman (Parabrahman); ananta-saktaye—with unlimited
potency; ariipaya—possessing no material form; uru-riipaya—possess-
ing various forms as incarnations; namah—I offer my obeisances;
ascarya-karmane —whose activities are wonderful.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material birth, ac-
tivities, name, form, qualities or faults. To fulfill the purpose for
which this material world is created and destroyed, He comes in
the form of a human being like Lord Rama or Lord Krsna by His
original internal potency. He has immense potency, and in various
forms, all free from material contamination, He acts wonderfully.
He is therefore the Supreme Brahman. I offer my respects to Him.

PURPORT

In the Visnu Purana it is said, gundarms ca 005৫ 715 ca mune vyatita

samasta-kalyana-gunatmako hi. The Supreme Personality of Godhead


--- Page 88 ---
Text 10] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 83
has no material form, qualities or faults. He is spiritual and is the only
reservoir of all spiritual qualities. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.8) by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, paritrandya sadhinam vinasaya
ca duskrtam. The Lord’s activities of saving the devotees and annihilat-
ing the demons are transcendental. Anyone annihilated by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead gets the same result as a devotee who is protected
by the Lord; both of them are transcendentally promoted. The only dif-
ference is that a devotee goes directly to the spiritual planets and be-
comes an associate of the Supreme Lord, whereas demons are promoted
to brahmaloka, the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. Both of them,
however, are transcendentally promoted. The Lord’s killing or annihilat-
ing of the demons is not exactly like the killing of this material world.
Although He appears to act within the modes of material nature, He is
nirguna, above the modes of nature. His name is not material; otherwise
how could one get liberation by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Rama? The
names of the Lord like Rama and Krsna are nondifferent from the person
Rama and Krsna. Thus by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one con-
stantly associates with Rama and Krsna, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, and therefore becomes liberated. A practical example is Ajamila,
who always remained transcendental to his activities simply by chanting
the name Narayana. If this was true of Ajamila, what is to be said of the
Supreme Lord? When the Lord comes to this material world, He does not
become a product of matter. This is confirmed throughout Bhagavad-
gita (janma-karma ca me divyam, avajananti mam miadhdah manusimn
tanum Gsritam). Therefore, when the Supreme Personality of God-
head —Rama or Krsna—descends to act transcendentally for our benefit,
we should not consider Him an ordinary human being. When the Lord
comes, He does so on the basis of His spiritual potency (sambhavamy
atma-mayaya). Because He is not forced to come by the material energy,
He is always transcendental. One should not consider the Supreme Lord
an ordinary human being. Material names and forms are contaminated,
but spiritual name and spiritual form are transcendental.
TEXT 10
नम आत्मप्रदीपाय साक्षिणे परमात्मने |
नमो गिरां विद्राय मनसरसचेतसामपि nee


--- Page 89 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
nama atma-pradipaya
saksine paramatmane
namo giram vidiraya
manasas$ cetasam api
namah—1I offer my respectful obeisances; atma-pradipaya—unto He
who is self-effulgent or who gives enlightenment to the living entities;
saksine—who is situated in everyone’s heart as a witness; parama-
atmane—unto the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul; namah—1I offer my re-
spectful obeisances; giram —by words; vidiraya—who is impossible to
reach; manasah—by the mind; cetasam—or by consciousness; api—
even.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the self-effulgent Supersoul, who is the witness in
everyone’s heart, who enlightens the individual soul and who can-
not be reached by exercises of the mind, words or consciousness.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, cannot be understood by
the individual soul through mental, physical or intellectual exercises. It
is by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the individual
soul is enlightened. Therefore, the Lord is described here as atma-
pradipa. The Lord is like the sun, which illuminates everything and
cannot be illuminated by anyone. Therefore, if one is serious about
understanding the Supreme, one must receive enlightenment from Him,
as instructed in Bhagavad-gita. One cannot understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by one’s mental, physical or intellectual powers.
TEXT 11
aq प्रतिलभ्याय नैष्कर्म्येण विपचिता |
नमः कैवल्यनाथाय निर्वाणसुखसंविदे ॥११॥
sattvena pratilabhyaya
naiskarmyena vipascita


--- Page 90 ---
Text 11] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 85
namah kaivalya-nathaya
nirvana-sukha-sarnvide

sattvena—by pure devotional service; prati-labhyaya—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is achieved by such devotional ac-
tivities; naiskarmyena—by transcendental activities; vipascita—by per-
sons who are sufficiently learned; namah—I offer my respectful obei-
sances; kaivalya-nathdaya—unto the master of the transcendental world;
nirvana—for one completely freed from material activities; sukha—of
happiness; sarmvide—who is the bestower.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is realized by pure devo-
tees who act in the transcendental existence of bhakti-yoga. He is
the bestower of uncontaminated happiness and is the master of the
transcendental world. Therefore I offer my respect unto Him.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
be understood only by devotional service. Bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah. If one wants to know the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in truth, one must take to the activities of devotional
service. These activities are called sattva or $uddha-sattva. In the ma-
terial world, activities of goodness, which are symptomatic of a pure
brahmana, are appreciated. But the activities of devotional service are
Suddha-sattva; in other words, they are on the transcendental platform.
Only by devotional service can one understand the Supreme.

Devotional service is called naiskarmya. Mere negation of material ac-
tivity will not endure. Naiskarmyam apy acyuta-bhava-varjitam. Unless
one performs activities with reference to Krsna consciousness, cessation
of material activities will not be helpful. In hopes of achieving
naiskarmya, freedom from material action, many highly elevated san-
nyasis stopped their activities, yet they failed and returned to the ma-
terial platform to act as materialistic persons. But once one is engaged in
the spiritual activities of bhakti-yoga, one does not fall down. Our Krsna
consciousness movement is therefore an attempt to engage everyone al-
ways in spiritual activity, by which one becomes transcendental to


--- Page 91 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
material actions. The spiritual activities of bhakti-marga—sravanam
kirtanarn visnoh smaranarm pada-sevanam—lead one to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, as stated here, sattvena
pratilabhyaya naiskarmyena vipascita: “The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is realized by pure devotees who act in the transcendental exis-
tence of bhakti-yoga.”

The Gopala-tapani Upanisad (15) says, bhaktir asya bhajanam tad
thamutropadhi-nairasyenaivamusmin manasah kalpanam etad eva ca
naiskarmyam. This is a definition of naiskarmya. One acts in
naiskarmya when he fully engages in Krsna conscious activities without
material desires to enjoy, either here or in the upper planetary systems,
in the present life or in a future life (iha-amutra). Anyabhilasita-
siinyam. When one is freed from all contamination and he acts in devo-
tional service under the direction of the spiritual master, one is on the
platform of naiskarma. By such transcendental devotional service, the
Lord is served. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.

TEXT 12
नमः शान्ताय घोराय मूढाय ura |
निर्विंज्ेषाय साम्याय नमो ज्ञानघनाय च ।१२॥
namah santaya ghoraya
miidhaya guna-dharmine
78871085650) 0 samyaya
namo jiana-ghanaya ca

namah—all obeisances; santaya—unto He who is above all material
qualities and completely peaceful, or unto Vasudeva, the Supersoul in
every living entity; ghoraya—unto the fierce forms of the Lord like
Jamadagnya and Nrsirmhadeva; midhdaya—the form of the Lord as an
animal, such as the boar; guna-dharmine—who accepts different
qualities within the material world; nirvisesaya—who is without ma-
terial qualities, being fully spiritual; samyaya—Lord Buddha, the form
of nirvana, wherein the material qualities stop; namah—1I offer my re-
spectful obeisances; jiiana-ghandya—who is knowledge or the imper-
sonal Brahman; ca—also.


--- Page 92 ---
Text 12] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 87
TRANSLATION

I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Vasudeva, who is all-
pervading, to the Lord’s fierce form as Lord Nrsirnhadeva, to the
Lord’s form as an animal [Lord Varahadeva], to Lord Dattatreya,
who preached impersonalism, to Lord Buddha, and to all the other
incarnations. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who
has no material qualities but who accepts the three qualities good-
ness, passion and ignorance within this material world. I also offer
my respectful obeisances unto the impersonal Brahman
effulgence.

PURPORT

In the previous verses it has been described that although the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has no material form, He accepts innumerable
forms to favor His devotees and kill the demons. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, there are so many incarnations of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead that they are like the waves of a river. The waves of a river
flow incessantly, and no one can count how many waves there are.
Similarly, no one can calculate when and how the different incarnations
of the Lord appear according to the necessities of time, place and candi-
dates. The Lord appears perpetually. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita
(4.7):

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanari srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.” In the material world there 15 always the possibility of
deviation from Krsna consciousness, and therefore Krsna and His devo-
tees always act in various forms to curb such godlessness.

Even impersonalists who stress the knowledge feature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead want to merge in the effulgence of the Lord.
Therefore, here the word jiadna-ghandya indicates that for atheists who
disbelieve in the form and existence of the Lord, all these various incar-
nations appear. Since the Lord comes to teach in so many forms, no one


--- Page 93 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
can say that there is no God. The word jiiana-ghandaya is especially used
here to refer to those whose knowledge has become solidified by dint of
their searching for the Lord through speculative philosophical under-
standing. Superficial knowledge is useless for understanding the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when one’s knowledge becomes
extremely intense and deep, one understands Vasudeva (vasudevah
sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah). A jiani attains this stage after
many, many births. Therefore the word jiana-ghanaya is used here.
The word Santaya indicates that Lord Vasudeva is situated in everyone’s
heart but does not act with the living entity. Impersonalist jiianis realize
Vasudeva when they are fully mature in knowledge (vdsudevah sarvam
iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah).
TEXT 13
RINT नमस्तुम्यं सर्वाध्यक्षाय aif |
पुरुषायात्ममूलाय मूलगप्रहृतये नमः 123
ksetra-jidya 71077105 tubhyam
sarvadhyaksaya saksine
purusayatma-milaya
maila-prakrtaye namah
ksetra-jiidya—unto the one who knows everything of the external
body; namah—I offer my respectful obeisances; tubhyam—unto You;
sarva—everything; adhyaksaya—who are superintending, managing;
saksine—who are the witness, Paramatma, or antaryami; purusaya—
the Supreme Person; atma-miilaya—who are the original source of
everything; miila-prakrtaye—unto the purusa-avatara, the origin of
prakrti and pradhana; namah—1I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the
Supersoul, the superintendent of everything, and the witness of
all that occurs. You are the Supreme Person, the origin of material
nature and of the total material energy. You are also the owner of
the material body. Therefore, You are the supreme complete. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.


--- Page 94 ---
Text 13] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 89
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (13.3) the Lord says, ksetra-jiiari capi mari viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharata: (0 scion of Bharata, you should understand that
I am also the knower in all bodies.” Every one of us is thinking, “I am
this body” or “This is my body,” but actually the truth is different. Our
bodies are given to us by the supreme proprietor. The living entity, who
is also ksetra-jiia, or the knower of the body, is not the body’s only
proprietor; the actual proprietor of the body is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is the supreme ksetra-jiia. For example, we may rent
and occupy a house, but actually the owner of the house is the landlord.
Similarly, we may be allotted a certain type of body as a facility with
which to enjoy this material world, but the actual proprietor of the body
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is called sarvadhyaksa be-
cause everything in the material world works under His supervision.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), wherein the Lord says,
mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram: “This material nature,
working under My direction, O son of Kunti, is producing all moving and
unmoving beings.” From prakrti, or material nature, come so many
varieties of living entities, including aquatics, plants, trees, insects,
birds, animals, human beings and demigods. Prakrti is the mother, and
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the father (ahari bija-pradah
pita).

Prakrti can give us material bodies, but as spirit souls we are parts and
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (15.7): mamaivariso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah.
The living entity, being part and parcel of God, is not a product of this
material world. Therefore the Lord is described in this verse as atma-
mitla, the original source of everything. He is the seed of all existences
(৮027 mam sarva-bhitanam). In Bhagavad-gita (14.4) the Lord says:

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
mirtayah sambhavanti yah
10527 brahma mahad yonir
ahar bija-pradah pita
“It should be understood that all living entities, in all species of life, 0
son of Kunti, are made possible by birth in this material nature, and that
I am the seed-giving father.” Plants, trees, insects, aquatics, demigods,


--- Page 95 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
beasts, birds and all other living entities are sons or parts and parcels of
the Supreme Lord, but because they are struggling with different men-
talities, they have been given different types of bodies (manah
sasthanindriyani prakrti-sthani karsati). Thus they have become sons of
prakrti, or material nature, which is impregnated by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Every living entity in this material world is strug-
gling for existence, and the only salvation or relief from the cycle of
birth and death in the evolutionary process is full surrender. This is in-
dicated by the word namah, ‘‘I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.”
TEXT 14
सरवेन्द्रियगुणद्रष सर्वप्रत्ययहेतवे |
असताच्छाययोक्ताय सद्ामासाय ते नमः ॥ १४॥
sarvendriya-guna-drastre
sarva-pratyaya-hetave
5012 cchayayoktaya
sad-abhasaya te namah

sarva-indriya-guna-drastre—unto the seer of all objectives pursued
by the senses; sarva-pratyaya-hetave—who is the solution to all doubts
(and without whose help one cannot solve all doubts and inabilities);
asat@a—with the manifestation of unreality or illusion; chayayad—be-
cause of the resemblance; uktdya—called; sat—of reality; abhasaya—
unto the reflection; te—unto You; namah—I offer my respectful obei-
sances.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You are the observer of all the objectives of the senses.
Without Your mercy, there is no possibility of solving the problem
of doubts. The material world is just like a shadow resembling
You. Indeed, one accepts this material world as real because it gives
a glimpse of Your existence.

PURPORT

To paraphrase this verse: “The objectives of sensual activities are ac-

tually observed by You. Without Your direction, the living entity cannot


--- Page 96 ---
Text 15] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 91
take even a step forward. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.15),
sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca.
You are situated in everyone's heart, and only from You come
remembrance and forgetfulness. Chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti
durga. The living entity under the clutches of maya wants to enjoy this
material world, but unless You give him directions and remind him, he
cannot make progress in pursuing his shadowy objective in life. The con-
ditioned soul wrongly progresses toward the wrong objective, life after
life, and he is reminded of that objective by You. In one life the condi-
tioned soul desires to progress toward a certain objective, but after his
body changes, he forgets everything. Nonetheless, my Lord, because he
wanted to enjoy something of this world, You remind him of this in his
next birth. Mattah smrtir jaanam apohanam ca. Because the conditioned
soul wants to forget You, by Your grace You give him opportunities, life
after life, by which he can almost perpetually forget You. Therefore You
are eternally the director of the conditioned souls. It is because You are
the original cause of everything that everything appears real. The ulti-
mate reality is Your Lordship, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.”

The word sarva-pratyaya-hetave is explained by Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura, who says that a result gives one a glimpse of its
cause. For example, since an earthen pot is the result of the actions of a
potter, by seeing the earthen pot one can guess at the existence of the
potter. Similarly, this material world resembles the spiritual world, and
any intelligent person can guess how it is acting. As explained in
Bhagavad-gita, mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram. The ac-
tivities of the material world suggest that behind them is the superinten-
dence of the Lord.

TEXT 15
नमो नमस्तेऽखिलकारणाय
निष्कारणायाद्भुतकारणाय |
सर्वागमाञ्नायमहार्णवाय
नमोऽपवगाय परायणाय ॥१५॥
namo namas te ’khila-karanaya
niskarandyadbhuta-karanaya


--- Page 97 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
sarvdgamamnaya-maharnaviya
namo ’pavargdya parayandya

namah—1I offer my respectful obeisances; namah—again I offer my
respectful obeisances; te—unto You; akhila-karandya—unto the
supreme cause of everything; niskarandya—unto You who are cause-
less; adbhuta-karandya—the wonderful cause of everything; sarva—
all; agama-amnaya—unto the source of the parampara system of all
Vedic knowledge; mahd-arnavaya—the great ocean of knowledge, or
the great ocean wherein all the rivers of knowledge merge; namah—I
offer my obeisances; apavargdya—unto You who can give deliverance or
liberation; para-ayanaya—the shelter of all transcendentalists.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You are the cause of all causes, but You Yourself have
no cause. Therefore You are the wonderful cause of everything. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the shelter of the
Vedic knowledge contained in the $astras like the Paficaratras and
Vedanta-siitra, which are Your representations, and who are the
source of the parampara system. Because it is You who can give
liberation, You are the only shelter for all transcendentalists. Let
me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described herein as the won-
derful cause. He is wonderful in the sense that although there may be
unlimited emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(janmady asya yatah), He always remains complete (pizrnasya pirnam
adaya purnam evavasisyate). In our experience in the material world, if
we have a bank balance of one million dollars, as we withdraw money
from the bank the balance gradually diminishes until it becomes nil.
However, the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is so complete
that although innumerable Personalities of Godhead expand from Him,
He remains the same Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pirnasya
purnam dadaya purnam evavasisyate. Therefore He is the wonderful
cause. Govindam adi-purusar tam ahari bhajami.


--- Page 98 ---
Text 15] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 93
varah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.” (Brahma-samhita 5.1)
Even in this material world, we can understand that the sun has ex-
isted for millions of years and has given off heat and light since its cre-
ation, yet the sun still retains its power and never changes. What then is
to be said of the supreme cause, [00707 brahma, Krsna? Everything
emanates from Him perpetually, yet He maintains His original form
(sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah). Krsna personally says in Bhagavad-gita
(10.8), mattah sarvam pravartate: “Everything emanates from Me.”
Everything emanates from Krsna eternally, yet He is the same Krsna and
does not change. Therefore He is the shelter of all transcendentalists who
are eager to get free from material bondage.
Everyone must take shelter of Krsna. It is therefore advised:
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusarh param
“Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the
existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving
service.” (Bhag. 2.3.10) [02707 brahma, the Supreme Lord, and param
dhama, the supreme repose, is Krsna. Therefore anyone who desires
anything—whether he be a karmi, a jiiani or a yogi—should try to per-
ceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead very seriously, and all of his
desires will be fulfilled. The Lord says, ye yatha mam prapadyante tars
tathaiva bhajamy aham: ‘‘As the living entities surrender unto Me, I
reward them accordingly.” Even the karmi who wants everything for his
enjoyment can get it from Krsna. For Krsna, supplying what he wants is


--- Page 99 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
not at all difficult. Actually, however, one should worship Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for the sake of getting liberation.
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. By studying the Vedic literature,
one should understand Krsna. As confirmed here, sarvagamamnaya-
maharnavaya. He is the ocean, and all Vedic knowledge flows toward
Him. Therefore, intelligent transcendentalists take shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari
Saranam vraja). This is the ultimate goal.
TEXT 16
गुणारणिच्छननचिदुष्मपाय
तत्क्षोभविस्फू्जितमानसाय ।
नैष्कम्य॑मावेन विवर्जितागम-
सखयंप्रकाशाय नमस्करोमि BTR]
gundarani-cchanna-cid-usmapaya
tat-ksobha-visphitrjita-manasaya
naiskarmya-bhavena vivarjitagama-
svayam-prakasaya namas karomi
guna—by the three gunas, the modes of material nature (sattva, rajas
and tamas); arani—by arani wood; channa—covered; cit—of knowl-
edge; usmapaya—unto He whose fire; tat-ksobha—of the agitation of
the modes of material nature; visphiirjita—outside; manasaya—unto He
whose mind; naiskarmya-bhavena—because of the stage of spiritual
understanding; vivarjita—in those who give up; dgama—Vedic prin-
ciples; svayam—personally; prakasaya—unto He who is manifest;
namah karomi—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, as the fire in arani wood is covered, You and Your un-
limited knowledge are covered by the material modes of nature.
Your mind, however, is not attentive to the activities of the modes
of nature. Those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge are not
subject to the regulative principles directed in the Vedic


--- Page 100 ---
Text 16] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 95
literatures. Because such advanced souls are transcendental, You
personally appear in their pure minds. Therefore I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (10.11) it is said:
tesam evanukampartham
aham ajiana-jam tamah
nasayamy atma-bhava-stho
jiana-dipena bhasvata
For a devotee who has taken the lotus feet of the Lord within his heart,
the Lord gives spiritual enlightenment, known as jii@na-dipa, by special
mercy from within. This jAana-dipa is compared to the fire hidden
within arani wood. To perform fire sacrifices, great sages previously did
not ignite a fire directly; the fire would be invoked from arani wood.
Similarly, all living entities are covered by the modes of material nature,
and the fire of knowledge can be ignited only by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead when one takes Him within one’s heart. Sa vai manah krsna-
padaravindayoh. If one takes seriously the lotus feet of Krsna, who is
seated within one’s heart, the Lord eradicates all ignorance. By the torch
of knowledge, one immediately understands everything properly by the
special mercy of the Supreme Lord and becomes self-realized. In other
words, although a devotee may externally not be very well educated, be-
cause of his devotional service the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives
him enlightenment from within. If the Lord gives enlightenment from
within, how can one be in ignorance? Therefore the allegation of the
Mayavadis that the devotional path is for the unintelligent or uneducated
is untrue.
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah
(Bhag. 5.18.12)

If one becomes an unalloyed devotee of the Supreme Lord, he auto-
matically manifests all good qualities. Such a devotee is above the


--- Page 101 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
instructions of the Vedas. He is a paramaharisa. Even without going
through the Vedic literature, a devotee becomes pure and enlightened by
the mercy of the Lord. “Therefore, my Lord,” the devotee says, “I offer
my respectful obeisances unto You.”
TEXT 17
मादक्रपन्षपद्चपाशविमोक्षणाय
रक्ताय भूरिकरुणाय नमोऽलयाय |
©.
खांशेन सवंतनुभन्मनसि प्रतीत-
्रत्यग्डे WEY बृहते नमस्ते ॥१७॥
madrk prapanna-pasu-pasa-vimoksandaya
muktaya bhuri-karunaya namo ’layaya
svarisena sarva-tanu-bhrn-manasi pratita-
pratyag-drse bhagavate brhate namas te
madrk—Ilike me; prapanna—surrendered; pasu—an animal; pdsa—
from entanglement; vimoksanaya—unto He who releases; muktaya—
unto the Supreme, who is untouched by the contamination of material
nature; bhitri-karundya—who are unlimitedly merciful; namah—I
offer my respectful obeisances; alaydya—who are never inattentive or
idle (for the purpose of my deliverance); sva-amsena—by Your partial
feature as Paramatma; sarva—of all; tanu-bhrt—the living entities em-
bodied in material nature; manasi—in the mind; pratita—who are
acknowledged; pratyak-drse—as the direct observer (of all activities);
bhagavate —unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brhate —who are
unlimited; namah—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
Since an animal such as I has surrendered unto You, who are
supremely liberated, certainly You will release me from this
dangerous position. Indeed, being extremely merciful, You inces-
santly try to deliver me. By your partial feature as Paramatma, You
are situated in the hearts of all embodied beings. You are cele-
brated as direct transcendental knowledge, and You are unlimited.


--- Page 102 ---
Text 17] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 97
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
PURPORT

The words brhate namas te have been explained by Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura: brhate $ri-krsnaya. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is Krsna. There are many tattvas, such as visnu-tattva, jiva-
tattva and Sakti-tattva, but above everything is the visnu-tattva, which is
all-pervading. This all-pervading feature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is explained in Bhagavad-gita (10.42), wherein the Lord says:

athava bahunaitena
চান? jiiatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham 1027 krtsnam
ekarmsena sthito jagat

“But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.”
Thus Krsna says that the entire material world is maintained by His par-
tial representation as Paramatma. The Lord enters every universe as
Garbhodakasayi Visnu and then expands Himself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu
to enter the hearts of all living entities and even enter the atoms.
Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham. Every universe is full of
atoms, and the Lord is not only within the universe but also within the
atoms. Thus within every atom the Supreme Lord exists in His Visnu
feature as Paramatma, but all the visnu-tattvas emanate from Krsna. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (10.2), aham adir hi devanam: Krsna is the
adi, or beginning, of the devas of this material world—Brahma, Visnu
and Mahesvara. Therefore He is described here as bhagavate brhate.
Everyone is bhagavan—everyone possesses opulence—but Krsna is
brhan bhagavan, the possessor of unlimited opulence. Isvarah paramah
krsnah. Krsna is the origin of everyone. Aharh sarvasya prabhavah.
Even Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara come from Krsna. Mattah
paratararih nanyat kincid asti dhananjaya: there is no personality
superior to Krsna. Therefore Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that
bhagavate brhate means “unto Sri Krsna.”


--- Page 103 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3

In this material world, everyone is a pasu, an animal, because of the
bodily conception of life.

yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih
yat tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
Jjanesv abhijiiesu sa eva go-kharah
“A human being who identifies the body made of three elements as the
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who
considers the land of his birth to be worshipable, and who goes to a place
of pilgrimage simply to bathe rather than to meet men of transcendental
knowledge there is to be considered like a cow or an ass.”
(Bhag. 10.84.13) Practically everyone, therefore, is a pasu, an animal,
and everyone is attacked by the crocodile of material existence. Not only
the King of the elephants but every one of us is being attacked by the
crocodile and is suffering the consequences.

Only Krsna can deliver us from this material existence. Indeed, He is
always trying to deliver us. Isvarah sarva-bhuatanam hrd-dese ’rjuna
tisthati. He is within our hearts and is not at all inattentive. His only aim
is to deliver us from material life. It is not that He becomes attentive to
us only when we offer prayers to Him. Even before we offer our prayers,
He incessantly tries to deliver us. He is never lazy in regard to our
deliverance. Therefore this verse says, bhitri-karunaya namo ’layaya. It
is the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord that He always tries to bring
us back home, back to Godhead. God is liberated, and He tries to make us
liberated, but although He is constantly trying, we refuse to accept His
instructions (sarva-dharman parityajya mam 6178 Saranar vraja).
Nonetheless, He has not become angry. Therefore He is described here as
bhiiri-karundya, unlimitedly merciful in delivering us from this misera-
ble material condition of life and taking us back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 18
आटमात्मजातगृहवि TY सक्त
दुस््रापणाय गुणसद्भविवर्जिंताय |


--- Page 104 ---
Text 18] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 99
शक्तात्ममिः खहृदये परिभाविताय
ज्ञानात्मने भगवते नम ईश्वराय ॥१८॥
atmatma-japta-grha-vitta-janesu saktair
dusprapandya guna-sanga-vivarjitdya
muktatmabhih sva-hrdaye paribhavitaya
JjAaanatmane bhagavate nama varaya
atma—the mind and body; atma-ja—sons and daughters; apta—
friends and relatives; grha—home, community, society and nation;
vitta—wealth; janesu—to various servants and assistants; saktaih—by
those who are too attached; dusprapanaya—unto You, who are very dif-
ficult to achieve; guna-sariga—by the three modes of material nature;
vivarjitdya—who are not contaminated; mukta-atmabhih—by persons
who are already liberated; sva-hrdaye—within the core of the heart;
paribhavitaya—unto You, who are always meditated upon; jidna-
atmane—the reservoir of all enlightenment; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; namah—1I offer my respectful obei-
sances; iSvar@dya—unto the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, those who are completely freed from material con-
tamination always meditate upon You within the cores of their
hearts. You are extremely difficult to attain for those like me who
are too attached to mental concoction, home, relatives, friends,
money, servants and assistants. You are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, uncontaminated by the modes of nature. You are the
reservoir of all enlightenment, the supreme controller. I therefore
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes into the material
world, He is unaffected by the modes of material nature. This is con-
firmed in Lopanisad. Apapa-viddham: He is not contaminated. This
same fact is described here. Guna-sanga-vivarjitaya. Although the


--- Page 105 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as an incarnation within this
material world, He is unaffected by the modes of material nature. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.11), avajananti mam mudha manusim
tanum asritam: foolish men with insufficient knowledge deride the Per-
sonality of Godhead because He appears just like a human being.
Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be understood only
by the muktatma, the liberated soul. Muktatmabhih sva-hrdaye
paribhavitaya: only the liberated person can constantly think of Krsna.
Such a person is the greatest of all yogis.
yoginam api sarvesarin
mad-gatenantaratmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo mari
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.” (Bg. 6.47)
TEXT 19
+ (=
यं धर्मकामाथविश्क्तिकामा
मजन्त॒ इष्टां गतिमाप्लुवन्ति ।
किं चाशिषो रात्यपि देहमन्ययं
करोतु मेऽदभ्रदयो विमोक्षणम्‌ nga
yar dharma-kamartha-vimukti-kama
bhajanta 15107 gatim apnuvanti
क्र casiso raty api deham avyayar
karotu me ‘dabhra-dayo vimoksanam
yam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; dharma-kama-
artha-vimukti-kamah —persons who desire the four principles of
religion, economic development, sense gratification and salvation;
bhajantah—by worshiping; istam—the objective; gatim—destination;
apnuvanti—can achieve; kim—what to speak of; ca—also; asisah—


--- Page 106 ---
Text 19] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 101
other benedictions; rati—He bestows; api—even; deham—a body;
avyayam—spiritual; karotu—may He bestow benediction; me—unto
me; adabhra-dayah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is un-
limitedly merciful; vimoksanam—liberation from the present danger
and from the material world.
TRANSLATION

After worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, those
who are interested in the four principles of religion, economic
development, sense gratification and liberation obtain from Him
what they desire. What then is to be said of other benedictions? In-
deed, sometimes the Lord gives a spiritual body to such ambitious
worshipers. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is un-
limitedly merciful, bestow upon me the benediction of liberation
from this present danger and from the materialistic way of life.

PURPORT

Some men within this material world are akami, free from material
desire, some are ambitious to get more and more material profit, and
some desire fulfillment in religious life, economic development, sense
gratification and finally liberation.

akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tiwrena bhakti-yogena
Yajeta purusarh param
(Bhag. 2.3.10)

It is recommended that whatever one’s position —whether one demands
no material profit, all material profit or ultimately liberation—one
should offer his obedient devotional service to the Lord, and one will get
what he desires. Krsna is so kind. Ye yatha mar prapadyante tars
tathaiva bhajamy aham. The Lord reciprocates. Whatever even an or-
dinary living entity wants, Krsna gives. Krsna is situated in everyone’s
heart, and He gives that which is desired by the living entity.


--- Page 107 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
iSvarah sarva-bhutanarm
hrd-dese ‘rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhitani
yantraridhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” (Bg. 18.61) The Lord gives
everyone an opportunity to fulfill his ambitions. Even such a devotee as
Dhruva Maharaja wanted the material benediction of a kingdom greater
than that of his father, and although he received a spiritual body, he also
got the kingdom, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not disap-
point anyone who takes shelter of His lotus feet. Therefore, since
Gajendra, King of the elephants, had surrendered to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead to get free from the present danger and, indirectly,
from the present danger of materialistic life, why should the Supreme
Personality of Godhead not fulfill his desire?
TEXTS 20-21
एकान्तिनो यस्य न FEA
वाञ्छन्ति ये वै मगवत्प्रपन्नाः |
अत्यद्धुतं तचरितं GARD
गायन्त आनन्द सयुद्रमग्ना;ः ॥२०॥
तमक्षरं ब्रह्म परं परेश
मनव्यक्तमाध्यात्मिकयोगगम्यम्‌ ।
अतीन्द्रियं खष्ममिवातिदृर-,
HAE परिपूर्णमीडे ॥२१॥
ekantino yasya na kaiicanartharin
vanchanti ye vai bhagavat-prapannah
aty-adbhutari tac-caritari sumargalari
gayanta ananda-samudra-magnah


--- Page 108 ---
Text 21] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 103
tam aksaram brahma param paresam
avyaktam adhyatmika-yoga-gamyam
atindriyan siksmam atidiiram
anantam adyarm paripirnam ide

ekantinah—unalloyed devotees (who have no desire other than Krsna
consciousness); yasya—the Lord, of whom; na—not; kaficana—some;
artham—benediction; varichanti—desire; ye—those devotees who;
vai—indeed; bhagavat-prapannah—fully surrendered unto the lotus
feet of the Lord; ati-adbhutam —which are wonderful; tat-caritam —the
activities of the Lord; su-marngalam—and very auspicious (to hear);
gayantah—by chanting and hearing; ananda—of transcendental bliss;
samudra—in the ocean; magnah—who are immersed; tam —unto Him;
aksaram—eternally existing; brahma—the Supreme; param —tran-
scendental; para-isam—the Lord of the supreme personalities;
avyaktam—invisible or not able to be realized by the mind and senses;
adhyatmika—transcendental; yoga—by bhakti-yoga, devotional ser-
vice; gamyam—obtainable (bhaktya mam abhijanati); ati-indriyam—
beyond the perception of material senses; siksmam—minute; iva—like;
ati-dirram—very far away; anantam—unlimited; adyam—the original
cause of everything; paripirnam—completely full; ide—I offer my
obeisances.

TRANSLATION

Unalloyed devotees, who have no desire other than to serve the
Lord, worship Him in full surrender and always hear and chant
about His activities, which are most wonderful and auspicious.
Thus they always merge in an ocean of transcendental bliss. Such
devotees never ask the Lord for any benediction. I, however, am in
danger. Thus I pray to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is eternally existing, who is invisible, who is the Lord of all great
personalities, such as Brahma, and who is available only by tran-
scendental bhakti-yoga. Being extremely subtle, He is beyond the
reach of my senses and transcendental to all external realization.
He is unlimited, He is the original cause, and He is completely full
in everything. I offer my obeisances unto Him.


--- Page 109 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
PURPORT
anyabhilasita-sanyari
Jjiana-karmady-anavrtam
anukiilyena krsnanu-
Silanar bhaktir uttama
(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.1.11)
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.” Unalloyed devotees have nothing to ask from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but Gajendra, the King of the
elephants, was circumstantially asking for an immediate benediction be-
cause he had no other way to be rescued. Sometimes, when there is no al-
ternative, a pure devotee, being fully dependent on the mercy of the
Supreme Lord, prays for some benediction. But in such a prayer there is
also regret. One who always hears and chants about the transcendental
pastimes of the Lord is always situated on a platform on which he has
nothing to ask in terms of material benefits. Unless one is a completely
pure devotee, one cannot enjoy the transcendental bliss derived from
chanting and dancing in the ecstasy of the sarkirtana movement. Such
ecstasy is not possible for an ordinary devotee. Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu showed us how one can enjoy transcendental bliss simply by
chanting, hearing and dancing in ecstasy. This is bhakti-yoga. Therefore
the King of the elephants, Gajendra, said, adhyatmika-yoga-gamyam,
indicating that unless one is situated on this transcendental platform, one
cannot approach the Supreme Lord. The benediction of being able to ap-
proach the Lord can be achieved after many, many births, yet Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has awarded this benediction to everyone, even to
the fallen souls who have no heritage of anything in spiritual life. That is
actually being seen in the Krsna consciousness movement. Therefore the
path of bhakti-yoga is the spotless process by which to approach the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah: only
through devotional service can one approach the Supreme Lord. The
Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (7.1):
mayy asakta-manah partha
30807 yuiijan mad-asrayah


--- Page 110 ---
Text 24] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 105
asamsayam samagram mam
yatha jadsyast tac chrnu
“Now hear, O son of Prtha [Arjunal, how by practicing yoga in full con-
sciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full,
free from doubt.” Simply by being attached to Krsna consciousness and
by thinking of the lotus feet of Krsna constantly, one can fully under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without a doubt.
TEXTS 22-24
यस्य ब्रह्मादयो देवा वेदा लोकाश्चराचराः ।
नामरूपविभेदेन फरून्या च FSA कृताः ॥२२॥
यथाचिषोऽगेः सितुर्गमस्तयो
निर्यान्ति संयान्त्यसङ्ृत्‌ खरोचिषः |
तथा यतोऽयं गुणसम्प्रवाहो
(
बुद्धि्मेनः खानि श्षरीरसर्गाः ॥२३॥
EN Q
a ল न देवासुरभरत्यतियंड्‌
नस््रीनषण्टोन पुमान्‌ न जन्तुः |
नायं गुणः कम न सन चासन्‌
निषेधशेषो जयतादशेषः ॥२४॥
yasya brahmadayo deva
veda lokas caracarah
nama-ripa-vibhedena
phalgvya ca kalaya krtah
yatharciso 'gneh savitur gabhastayo
niryanti sarivyanty asakrt sva-rocisah
tatha yato 07 guna-sampravaho
buddhir manah khani sarira-sargah
sa vai na devasura-martya-tiryarn
na stri na sandho na puman na jantuh


--- Page 111 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
nayam gunah karma na san na casan
nisedha-eso jayatad asesah

yasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; brahma-
dadayah—the great demigods, headed by Lord Brahma; devah—and
other demigods; vedah—the Vedic knowledge; lokah—different per-
sonalities; cara-acarah—the moving and the nonmoving (like trees and
plants); nama-ripa—of different names and different forms;
vibhedena—by such divisions; phalgvya—who are less important; ca—
also; kalaya—by the parts; krtah—created; yatha—as; arcisah—the
sparks; agneh—of fire; savituh—from the sun; gabhastayah—the shin-
ing particles; niryanti—emanate from; samyanti—and enter into;
asakrt—again and again; sva-rocisah—as parts and parcels; tatha—
similarly; yatah—the Personality of Godhead from whom; ayam —this;
guna-sampravahah— continuous manifestation of the different modes of
nature; buddhih manah—the intelligence and mind; khani—the senses;
Sarira—of the body (gross and subtle); sargah —the divisions; sah —that
Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; na—is not; deva—
demigod; asura—demon; martya—human being; tiryak—bird or beast;
na—neither; stri—woman; na—nor; sandah—neuter; na—neither;
puman—man; na—nor; jantuh—living being or animal; na ayam—nor
is He; gunah—material quality; karma —fruitive activity; na—is not;
sat—manifestation; na—nor; ca—also; asat—nonmanifestation;
nisedha—of the discrimination of neti neti (“not this, not this”);
sesah—He is the end; jayatat—all glories unto Him; asesah—who 15 un-
limited.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead creates His minor parts
and parcels, the jiva-tattva, beginning with Lord Brahma, the
demigods and the expansions of Vedic knowledge [Sama, Rg,
Yajur and Atharva] and including all other living entities, moving
and nonmoving, with their different names and characteristics. As
the sparks of a fire or the shining rays of the sun emanate from
their source and merge into it again and again, the mind, the intel-
ligence, the senses, the gross and subtle material bodies, and the
continuous transformations of the different modes of nature all


--- Page 112 ---
Text 25] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 107
emanate from the Lord and again merge into Him. He is neither
demigod nor demon, neither human nor bird or beast. He is not
woman, man, or neuter, nor is He an animal. He is not a material
quality, a fruitive activity, a manifestation or nonmanifestation. He
is the last word in the discrimination of ‘not this, not this,” and
He is unlimited. All glories to the Supreme Personality of God-
head!
PURPORT 4
This is a summary description of the Supreme Personality of God-
head’s unlimited potency. That supreme one is acting in different phases
by manifesting His parts and parcels, which are all simultaneously dif-
ferently situated by His different potencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva
sriyate). Each and every potency is acting quite naturally (svabhaviki
jiana-bala-kriya ca). Therefore the Lord is unlimited. Na tat-samas
cabhyadhika$ ca drSyate: nothing is equal to Him, nor is anything
greater than Him. Although He manifests Himself in so many ways, per-
sonally He has nothing to do (na tasya karyari karanari ca vidyate), for
everything is done by expansions of His unlimited energies.
TEXT 25
जिजीविषे नाहमिहामुया कि
मन्तव॑दिथाड़तयेभयोन्या |
इच्छामि कालेन न यस्थ विव-
स्तस्यात्मलोकावरणस्य मोक्षम्‌ ।२५॥
Jijivise naham ihamwya kim
antar bahis cavrtayebha-yonya
icchami kalena na yasya viplavas
tasyatma-lokavaranasya moksam
Jijivise—wish to live long; na—not; aham—I; iha—in this life;
amuyda—or in the next life (I do not wish to live upon being saved from
this dangerous position); kim—what is the value; antah—internally;
bahih—externally; ca—and; avrtaya—covered by ignorance; ibha-
yonya—in this birth as an elephant; icchami—I desire; kalena—


--- Page 113 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
because of the influence of time; na—there is not; yasya—of which;
viplavah—annihilation; tasya—that; atma-loka-avaranasya—froin the
covering of self-realization; moksam—liberation.
TRANSLATION

I do not wish to live anymore after I am released from the attack
of the crocodile. What is the use of an elephant’s body covered ex-
ternally and internally by ignorance? I simply desire eternal
liberation from the covering of ignorance. That covering is not
destroyed by the influence of time.

PURPORT

In this material world, every living entity is covered by the darkness
of ignorance. Therefore the Vedas enjoin that one should approach the
Supreme Lord through the spiritual master, who is described and offered
prayers in the Gautamiya-tantra as follows:

ori ajidna-timirandhasya
JjAananjana-salakaya
caksur unmilitamh yena
tasmai Sri-gurave namah

“I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the
torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the
darkness of ignorance.” Although one may struggle for existence in this
material world, to live forever is impossible. One must understand,
however, that this struggle for existence is due to ignorance, for other-
wise every living being is an eternal part of the Supreme Lord. There is
no need to live as an elephant or man, American or Indian; one should
desire only to achieve liberation from the cycle of birth and death. Be-
cause of ignorance, we consider every life offered by nature to be happy
and pleasing, but in the degraded life within this material world, from
the life of Lord Brahma down to that of an ant, no one can actually be
happy. We are making so many plans to live happily, but there cannot be
any happiness in this material world, however we may try to make a per-
manent settlement in this life or that.


--- Page 114 ---
Text 26] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 109
TEXT 26
सोऽहं frags विश्वमविश्वं॑विश्ववेदसम्‌ |
~, ४4 भ 4
विश्वारमानमनं ब्रह्म प्रणतोऽसि परं पदम्‌ ॥२६॥
so "har visva-srjarh visvam
avisvarh visva-vedasam
visvatmanam ajar brahma
pranato ‘smi pararh padam
sah—that; aham—TI (the person desiring release from material life);
visva-srjam—unto He who has created this cosmic manifestation;
visvam—who is Himself the whole cosmic presentation; avisvam—al-
though He is transcendental to the cosmic manifestation; wvisva-
vedasam —who is the knower or ingredient of this universal manifesta-
tion; viSva-atmanam—the soul of the universe; ajam—who is never
born, eternally existing; brahma—the Supreme; pranatah asmi—I offer
my respectful obeisances; param —who is transcendental; padam—the
shelter.
TRANSLATION
Now, fully desiring release from material life, I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto that Supreme Person who is the creator
of the universe, who is Himself the form of the universe and who
is nonetheless transcendental to this cosmic manifestation. He is
the supreme knower of everything in this world, the Supersoul of
the universe. He is the unborn, supremely situated Lord. I offer
my respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Sometimes when bhakti-yoga, Krsna consciousness, is preached to the
common man, people argue, “Where is Krsna? Where is God? Can you
show Him to us?” In this verse the answer is given that if we are suffi-
ciently intelligent, we must know that there is someone who has created
the entire cosmic manifestation, who has supplied and has become the in-
gredients for this cosmic manifestation, who is eternally existing, but
who is not within the cosmic manifestation. Simply on the basis of this


--- Page 115 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
suggestion, one can offer respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord.
This is the beginning of devotional life.
TEXT 27
योगरन्धितकर्माणो हृदि योगविमाविते |
योगिनो यं प्रपश्यन्ति योगेशं तं नतोऽस्म्यहम्‌ IRI)
(गुव -7 व्यद -क्८ा 71700
hrdi yoga-vibhavite
yogino yam prapasyanti
yogesam tar nato ’smy aham

yoga-randhita-karmanah—persons whose reactions to fruitive ac-
tivities have been burnt up by bhakti-yoga; hrdi—within the core of the
heart; yoga-vibhavite—completely purified and clean; yoginah—
mystics who are competent; yam —unto the Personality of Godhead who;
prapasyanti—directly see; yoga-isam—unto that Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the master of all mystic yoga; tam—unto Him; natah
asmi—offering obeisances; aham—1I.

TRANSLATION

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme, the Super-
soul, the master of all mystic yoga, who is seen in the core of the
heart by perfect mystics when they are completely purified and
freed from the reactions of fruitive activity by practicing bhakti-
yoga.

PURPORT

The King of the elephants, Gajendra, simply accepted that there must
be someone who has created this cosmic manifestation and has supplied
its ingredients. This should be admitted by everyone, even the most
determined atheists. Why, then, do the nondevotees and atheists not ad-
mit this? The reason is that they are polluted by the reactions of their
fruitive activities. One must be freed from all the dirt accumulated
within the heart due to fruitive activities performed one after another.
One must wash off this dirt by practicing bhakti-yoga. Yoga-randhita-


--- Page 116 ---
Text 28] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 111
karmanah. As long as one is covered by material nature’s modes of ig-
norance and passion, there is no possibility of understanding the
Supreme Lord. Tada rajas-tamo-bhavah kama-lobhadayas ca ye. When
one is freed from the modes of ignorance and passion, one becomes free
from the lowest qualities— kama and lobha, lust and greed.

Nowadays there are so many yoga schools to encourage people in
developing their lusty desires and greed through the practice of yoga.
People are therefore very much fond of so-called yoga practice. The ac-
tual practice of yoga, however, is described here. As authoritatively
stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.13.1), dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena
manasa pasyanti yarn yoginah: a yogi 15 one who always meditates on
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also con-
firmed in the Brahma-sarihita (5.38):

premainjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yar §yamasundaram acintya-guna-svarapar
govindam adi-purusari tam ahariv bhajami
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is Syamasundara, Krsna
Himself, with inconceivable innumerable attributes, whom the pure de-
votees see in their heart of hearts with the eye of devotion tinged with
the salve of love.” The bhakti-yogi constantly sees Syamasundara—
beautiful Lord Krsna with His blackish bodily hue. Because the King of
the elephants, Gajendra, thought himself an ordinary animal, he thought
himself unfit to see the Lord. In his humility, he thought that he could
not practice yoga. In other words, how can those who are like animals in
the bodily concept of life, and who have no purity of consciousness, prac-
tice yoga? In the present day, people who have no control over their
senses, who have no understanding of philosophy and who do not follow
religious principles or rules and regulations are nonetheless pretending
to be yogis. This is the greatest anomaly in the practice of mystic yoga.
TEXT 28
नमो नमस्तुभ्यमसद्यवेग-
श्क्तेत्रयायाखिलधीगुणाय |


--- Page 117 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
भ्रपनपालाय दुरन्तज्ञक्तये
कदिन्द्रियाणामनवाप्यवत्मेने ॥२८॥
namo namas tubhyam asahya-vega-
Sakti-trayayakhila-dhi-gunaya
prapanna-palaya duranta-saktaye
kad-indriyanam anavapya-vartmane
namah—1I offer my respectful obeisances; namah—again I offer my
respectful obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; asahya—formidable;
vega—forces; Sakti-trayaya—unto the Supreme Person, who has
threefold potencies; akhila—of the universe; dhi—for the intelligence;
gunaya—who appears as the sense objects; prapanna-palaya—unto the
Supreme, who gives shelter to the surrendered; duranta-saktaye—who
possesses energies very difficult to overcome; kat-indriyanam—by per-
sons unable to control their senses; anavapya—who is unattainable;
vartmane —on the path.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the controller of formidable strength in three
kinds of energy. You appear as the reservoir of all sense pleasure
and the protector of the surrendered souls. You possess unlimited
energy, but You are unapproachable by those who are unable to
control their senses. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You
again and again.
PURPORT
Attachment, greed and lust are three formidable forces that prevent
one from concentrating upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. These forces act because the Supreme Lord does not like to be
realized by nondevotees and atheists. However, when one surrenders
unto the lotus feet of the Lord, these impediments are withdrawn, and
one can realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord
is the protector of the surrendered soul. One cannot become a devotee
until one surrenders unto the Lord’s lotus feet. Then the Lord gives one
the intelligence from within by which one can return home, back to God-
head.


--- Page 118 ---
Text 29] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 113
TEXT 29
नायं वेद्‌ खमात्मानं यच्छक्त्याहंधिया हतम्‌ |
तं दुरत्ययमाहात्म्यं मगवन्तमितोऽस्म्यहम्‌ 11211
70071 veda svam atmanari
yac-chaktyahar-dhiya hatam
tar duratyaya-mahatmyar
bhagavantam ito ’smy aham

na—not; ayam—people in general; veda—know; svam—own;
atmanam—identity; yat-Saktya—by whose influence; aham—I am in-
dependent; dhiya—by this intelligence; hatam—defeated or covered;
tam—unto Him; duratyaya—difficult to understand; mahatmyam—
whose glories; bhagavantam —of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
itah—taking shelter; asmi aham—1I am.

TRANSLATION

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, by whose illusory energy the jiva, who is part and
parcel of God, forgets his real identity because of the bodily con-
cept of life. I take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
whose glories are difficult to understand.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita, every living entity—regardless of
whether he be human, demigod, animal, bird, bee or whatever —is part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord and the liv-
ing entity are intimately related like father and son. Unfortunately, be-
cause of material contact, the living entity forgets this and wants to enjoy
the material world independently, according to his own plan. This illu-
sion (maya) is very difficult to surmount. Maya covers the living entity
because of his willingness to forget the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and make his own plan to enjoy this material world. As long as this con-
tamination continues, the conditioned soul will be unable to understand
his real identity and will perpetually continue under illusion, life after
life. Ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair janasya moho yam aharih mameti


--- Page 119 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
(Bhag. 5.5.8). As long as the living entity is not enlightened so that he
may understand his real position, he will be attracted to materialistic life,
to house, country or field, to society, sons, family, community, bank
balance and so on. Covered by all this, he will continue to think, “I am
this body, and everything related to this body is mine.” This materialistic
conception of life is extremely difficult to surmount, but one who surren-
ders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as did Gajendra, the King of
the elephants, comes to enlightenment on the Brahman platform.
brahma-bhitah prasannatma
na Socati na karnksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
mad-bhaktiri labhate param
“One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything; he is equally disposed toward all living entities. In that state he
attains pure devotional service unto Me.” (Bg. 18.54) Since a devotee is
completely on the Brahman platform, he is not jealous of any other living
entity (samah sarvesu bhitesu).
TEXT 30
NIH उवाच
एवं गजेन्द्रुपवर्णीतनिरविंशेषं
जह्मादयो बिविधरिङ्गमिदाभिमानाः ।
नैते यदोपससुपुनिखिलात्मकत्वात्‌
तत्राखिलामरमयो हरिराविरासीत्‌ ।।३०॥
sri-Suka uvaca
evar gajendram upavarnita-nirvisesarm
brahmadayo vividha-liriga-bhidabhimanah
naite yadopasasrpur nikhilatmakatvat
tatrakhilamara-mayo harir avirasit
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
gajendram —unto the King of the elephants, Gajendra; upavarnita—


--- Page 120 ---
Text 30] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 115
whose description; nirviSesam—not directed to any particular person
(but to the Supreme, although he did not know who the Supreme is);
brahma-adayah—the demigods, beginning with Brahma, Siva, Indra
and Candra; vividha—varieties; liniga-bhida—with separate forms;
abhimanah —considering themselves separate authorities; na—not;
ete—all of them; yadda—when; upasasrpuh—approached; nikhila-
atmakatvat—because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Super-
soul of everyone; tatra—there; akhila—of the universe; amara-
mayah—consisting of the demigods (who are only external parts of the
body); harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can take away
everything; avirdsit—appeared (before the elephant).
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When the King of the
elephants was describing the supreme authority, without mention-
ing any particular person, he did not invoke the demigods, headed
by Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Indra and Candra. Thus none of them
approached him. However, because Lord Hari is the Supersoul,
Purusottama, the Personality of Godhead, He appeared before
Gajendra.

PURPORT

From the description of Gajendra, he apparently was aiming at the
supreme authority although he did not know who the supreme authority
is. He conjectured, “There is a supreme authority who is above every-
thing.”” Under the circumstances, the Lord’s various expansions, such as
Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Candra and Indra, all thought, ““Gajendra is not
asking our help. He is asking the help of the Supreme, who is above all of
us.” As Gajendra has described, the Supreme Lord has various parts and
parcels, including the demigods, human beings and animals, all covered
by separate forms. Although the demigods are in charge of maintaining
different aspects of the universe, Gajendra thought that they were un-
able to rescue him. Hariri vind naiva mrtirh taranti: no one can rescue
anyone from the dangers of birth, death, old age and disease. It is only
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who can rescue one from the
dangers of material existence. Therefore an intelligent person, to get free
from this dangerous existence, approaches the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, not any demigod. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (7.20),


--- Page 121 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
kamais tais tair hrta-jianah prapadyante ’nya-devatah: those who are
unintelligent approach the various demigods for temporary material
benefits. Actually, however, these demigods cannot rescue the living en-
tity from the dangers of material existence. Like other living entities, the
demigods are merely external parts of the Supreme Personality of God-
head’s transcendental body. As stated in the Vedic mantras, sa atma
arigany anya devatah. Within the body is the atma, the soul, whereas
the various parts of the body like the hands and legs are external.
Similarly, the atma of the entire cosmic manifestation is Narayana, Lord
Visnu, and all the demigods, human beings and other living entities are
parts of His body.

It may also be concluded that since a tree lives on the strength of its
root and when the root is nourished with water all the parts of the tree
are nourished, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the original root of everything. Although the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is very difficult to approach, He is very near to us because He
lives within our hearts. As soon as the Lord understands that one is seek-
ing His favor by fully surrendering, naturally He immediately takes ac-
tion. Therefore although the demigods did not come to the aid of Ga-
jendra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately appeared
before him because of his fervent prayer. This does not mean that the
demigods were angry with Gajendra, for actually when Lord Visnu is
worshiped, all the other demigods are also worshiped. Yasmin tuste jagat
tustam: if the Supreme Personality of Godhead is satisfied, everyone is
satisfied.

yatha taror mila-nisecanena
trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopasakhah
pranopaharac ca yathendriyanam
tathaiva sarvarhanam acyutejya
‘As pouring water on the root of a tree energizes the trunk, branches,
twigs and everything else, and as supplying food to the stomach enlivens
the senses and limbs of the body, so simply worshiping the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead through devotional service automatically satisfies the
demigods, who are parts of that Supreme Personality.” (Bhag. 4.31.14)
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped, all the
demigods are satisfied.


--- Page 122 ---
Text 31] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 117
TEXT 31
तं ठददार्ै्परम्य जगन्निवासः
स्तोत्रं निशम्य दिविजैः सह संस्तवद्धिः |
छन्दोमयेन गरुडेन AGTH
अक्रायुधोऽम्यगमदाश्ु यतो गजेन्द्रः 1320
tari tadvad artam upalabhya jagan-nivasah
stotrari nisamya divijaih saha samstuvadbhih
chandomayena garudena samuhyamanas
cakrayudho ’bhyagamad @5 yato gajendrah

tam—unto him (Gajendra); tadvat—in that way; drtam—who was
very depressed (because of being attacked by the crocodile);
upalabhya—understanding; jagat-nivasah—the Lord, who exists every-
where; stotram—the prayer; nisamya—hearing; divijath—the denizens
of the heavenly planets; saha—with; samstuvadbhih—who were offer-
ing their prayers also; chandomayena—with the speed He desired;
garudena—by Garuda; samuhyamanah—being carried; cakra—carry-
ing His disc; a@yudhah—and other weapons, like the club;
abhyagamat—arrived; asu—immediately; yatah—where; gajendrah—
the King of the elephants, Gajendra, was situated.

TRANSLATION

After understanding the awkward condition of Gajendra, who
had offered his prayers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari, who lives everywhere, appeared with the demigods, who
were offering prayers to Him. Carrying His disc and other
weapons, He appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuda,
with great speed, according to His desire. Thus He appeared
before Gajendra.

PURPORT

Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura specifically hints that since
Gajendra was in such a difficult position and was praying for the mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods, who could have
immediately gone to his rescue, hesitated to go there. Since they


--- Page 123 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
considered Gajendra’s prayer to be directed toward the Lord, they felt
offended, and this in itself was offensive. Consequently, when the Lord
went there, they also went and offered prayers to the Lord so that their
offense might be excused.
TEXT 32
सोऽन्तःसरस्युरूबखेन गृहीत आर्तो
TH गरुत्मति हरिं ख उपाक्च्कम्‌ |
Ifey साम्बुजकरं गिरमाह कच्छा
नारायणाखिलगुरो मगवन्‌ नमस्ते ॥३२॥
so ’ntah-sarasy urubalena grhita arto
drstva garutmati hari kha upatta-cakram
utksipya sambuja-karari giram aha krcchran
narayandakhila-guro bhagavan namas te
sah—he (Gajendra); antah-sarasi—in the water; uru-balena—with
great force; grhitah—who had been captured by the crocodile; artah—
and severely suffering; drstva—upon seeing; garutmati—on the back of
Garuda; harim—the Lord; khe—in the sky; updtta-cakram—wielding
His disc; uthsipya—raising; sa-ambuja-karam—his trunk, along with a
lotus flower; giram aha—uttered the words; krcchrat—with great dif-
ficulty (because of his precarious position); naraéyana—O my Lord
Narayana; akhila-guro—O universal Lord; bhagavan—O Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; namah te—I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You.
TRANSLATION
Gajendra had been forcefully captured by the crocodile in the

water and was feeling acute pain, but when he saw that Narayana,
wielding His disc, was coming in the sky on the back of Garuda, he
immediately took a lotus flower in his trunk, and with great dif-
ficulty due to his painful condition, he uttered the following
words: (0) my Lord, Narayana, master of the universe, O Supreme
Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You.”


--- Page 124 ---
Text 33] Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender 119
PURPORT
The King of the elephants was so very eager to see the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead that when he saw the Lord coming in the sky, with
great pain and in a feeble voice he offered respect to the Lord. A devotee
does not consider a dangerous position to be dangerous, for in such a
dangerous position he can fervently pray to the Lord in great ecstasy.
Thus a devotee regards danger as a good opportunity. Tat te ‘nukampar
susamiksamanah. When a devotee is in great danger, he sees that danger
to be the great mercy of the Lord because it is an opportunity to think of
the Lord very sincerely and with undiverted attention. Tat te
‘nukamparih ~~ susamiksamano bhuiijana evatma-krtarn == vipakam
(Bhag. 10.14.8). He does not accuse the Supreme Personality of God-
head for having let His devotee fall into such a dangerous condition.
Rather, he considers that dangerous condition to be due to his past
misdeeds and takes it as an opportunity to pray to the Lord and offer
thanks for having been given such an opportunity. When a devotee lives
in this way, his salvation —his going back home, back to Godhead —is
guaranteed. We can see this to be true from the example of Gajendra,
who anxiously prayed to the Lord and thus received an immediate chance
to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 33
৬ Ly
तं वीक्ष्य पीडितमजः सहसावतीयं
सग्राहमाञ्ु सरसः कृपयोजदार ।
ग्राहाद्‌ विपाटितमुखादरिणा गजेन्द्रं
संपश्यतां हरिरमूयुचदु च्छ्ियाणाम्‌ ।।३२॥
व viksya piditam ajah sahasavatirya
sa-graham asu sarasah krpayojahara
grahad vipatita-mukhad arina gajendrari
sarmpaSyatam harir amam ucad ucchriyanam
tam—him (Gajendra); viksya—after seeing (in that condition);
piditam—who was very aggrieved; ajah—the unborn, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; sahasa—all of a sudden; avatirya—getting down
(from the back of Garuda); sa-graham—with the crocodile; asu—


--- Page 125 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 3
immediately; sarasah—from the water; krpaya—out of great mercy;
yjjahdra—took out; grahat—from the crocodile; vipatita —separated;
mukhat—from the mouth; arina—with the disc; gajendram—
Gajendra; sampasyatam—who were looking on; harih—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; amiém—him (Gajendra); ucat—saved;
ucchriyanam—in the presence of all the demigods.
TRANSLATION

Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in such an aggrieved position, the
unborn Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, immediately got
down from the back of Garuda by His causeless mercy and pulled
the King of the elephants, along with the crocodile, out of the
water. Then, in the presence of all the demigods, who were look-
ing on, the Lord severed the crocodile’s mouth from its body with
His disc. In this way He saved Gajendra, the King of the elephants.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Third
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Gajendra’s Prayers of
Surrender.”


--- Page 126 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World
This Fourth Chapter describes the previous birth of Gajendra and the
crocodile. It tells how the crocodile became a Gandharva and how
Gajendra became an associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

There was a king on the Gandharva planet whose name was Haha.
Once this King Haha was enjoying with women in the water, and while
enjoying he pulled the leg of Devala Rsi, who was also taking a bath in
the water. Upon this, the sage became very angry and immediately
cursed him to become a crocodile. King Haha was very sorry when
cursed in that way, and he begged pardon from the sage, who in compas-
sion gave him the benediction that he would be freed when Gajendra was
delivered by the Personality of Godhead. Thus the crocodile was
delivered when killed by Narayana.

When Gajendra, by the mercy of the Lord, became one of the Lord’s
associates in Vaikuntha, he got four hands. This achievement is called
sarupya-mukti, or the liberation of receiving a spiritual body exactly like
that of Narayana. Gajendra, in his previous birth, had been a great devo-
tee of Lord Visnu. His name was Indradyumna, and he was the King of
the Tamila country. Following the Vedic principles, this King retired
from family life and constructed a small cottage in the Malayacala Hills,
where he always worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
silence. Agastya Rsi, along with many disciples, once approached King
Indradyumna’s asrama, but because the King was meditating on the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he could not receive Agastya Rsi prop-
erly. Thus the rsi became very angry and cursed the King to become a
dull elephant. In accordance with this curse, the King was born as an
elephant, and he forgot all about his previous activities in devotional ser-
vice. Nonetheless, in his birth as an elephant, when he was dangerously
attacked by the crocodile, he remembered his past life in devotional ser-
vice and remembered a prayer he had learned in that life. Because of this
prayer, he again received the mercy of the Lord. Thus he was

121


--- Page 127 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
immediately delivered, and he became one of the Lord’s four-handed
associates.

Sukadeva Gosvami ends this chapter by describing the good fortune of
the elephant. Sukadeva Gosvami says that by hearing the narration of
Gajendra’s deliverance, one can also get the opportunity to be delivered.
Sukadeva Gosvami vividly describes this, and thus the chapter ends.

TEXT 1
ATF उवाच
तदा देवर्षिगन्धर्वा बह्श्चानपुरोगमाः ।
ता ¢
चुः इसुमासारं शंसन्तः कमं तद्धरेः ॥ १॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
tada devarsi-gandharva
brahmesana-purogamah
mumucuh kusumdsararm
sarmsantah karma tad dhareh

sri-sukah uvaca—Sr1 Sukadeva Gosvami said; taddi—at that time
(when Gajendra was delivered); deva-rsi-gandharvah—the demigods,
sages and Gandharvas; brahma-isana-purogamah—headed by Lord
Brahma and Lord Siva; mumucuh—showered; kusuma-asaram—a
covering of flowers; sarmsantah—while praising; karma —transcenden-
tal activity; tat—that (gajendra-moksana); hareh—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: When the Lord delivered Gajendra,
King of the elephants, all the demigods, sages and Gandharvas,
headed by Brahma and Siva, praised this activity of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and showered flowers upon both the Lord
and Gajendra.

PURPORT

It is evident from this chapter that great sages like Devala Rsi, Narada

Muni and Agastya Muni will sometimes curse someone. The curse of


--- Page 128 ---
Text 4] Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 123
such a personality, however, is in fact a benediction. Both the crocodile,
who had been a Gandharva in his previous life, and Gajendra, who had
been a king named Indradyumna, were cursed, but both of them
benefited. Indradyumna, in his birth as an elephant, attained salvation
and became a personal associate of the Lord in Vaikuntha, and the cro-
codile regained his status as a Gandharva. We find evidence in many
places that the curse of a great saint or devotee is not a curse but a
benediction.
TEXT 2
6... = = or i
Jgdegadl दिव्या गन्धवा नचतुजगुः ।
ऋषयथारणाः Aggy: पुरुषोत्तमम्‌ 1 २॥
nedur dundubhayo divya
gandharva nanrtur jaguh
rsayas$ caranah siddhas
tustuvuh purusottamam
neduh —vibrated; dundubhayah—kettledrums; divyah—in the sky
of the higher planetary system; gandharvah—residents of Gandharva-
loka; nanrtuh—danced; jaguh —and sang; rsayah—all the saintly sages;
caranah—the inhabitants of the Carana planet; siddhah—the inhabi-
tants of the Siddha planet; tustuvuh—offered prayers; purusa-
uttamam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Purusottama, the
best of males.
TRANSLATION
There was a beating of kettledrums in the heavenly planets, the
inhabitants of Gandharvaloka began to dance and sing, while great
sages and the inhabitants of Caranaloka and Siddhaloka offered
prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Purusottama.
TEXTS 3-4
8
योऽसौ ग्राहः स वै सद्यः परमाश्र्यरूपध्रक्‌ |
o_o
शक्तो देवलशापेन हह गेनधवंसत्तमः 1 ३ ॥


--- Page 129 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
प्रणम्य शिरसाधीशचुत्तमश्छोकमव्ययम्‌ |
अगायत यशोधाम कीर्तन्यगुणसत्कथम्‌ | ४ ॥
yo ’sau grahah sa vai sadyah
paramascarya-ripa-dhrk
mukto devala-sapena
hithar gandharva-sattamah
pranamya Sirasadhisam
uttama-slokam avyayam
agayata yaso-dhama
kirtanya-guna-sat-katham
yah—he who; asau—that; grahah—became a crocodile; sah—he;
vai—indeed; sadyah—immediately; parama—very nice; ascarya—
wonderful; rizpa-dhrk—possessing the form (of his original Gandharva
position); muktah—was delivered; devala-sapena—by the cursing of
Devala Rsi; hihih—whose name was formerly Haha; gandharva-sat-
tamah—the best of Gandharvaloka; pranamya—offering his obei-
sances; Sirasa—by the head; adhiSam —unto the supreme master; ut-
tama-$lokam —who is worshiped by the choicest verses; avyayam—who
is the supreme eternal; agayata—he began to chant; yasah-dhama—the
glories of the Lord; kirtanya-guna-sat-katham—whose transcendental
pastimes and qualities are glorious.
TRANSLATION
The best of the Gandharvas, King Haha, having been cursed by
Devala Muni, had become a crocodile. Now, having been delivered
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he assumed a very
beautiful form as a Gandharva. Understanding by whose mercy
this had happened, he immediately offered his respectful obei-
sances with his head and began chanting prayers just suitable for
the transcendental Lord, the supreme eternal, who is worshiped by
the choicest verses.
PURPORT
The story of how the Gandharva had become a crocodile will be de-
scribed later. The curse by which the Gandharva took this position was


--- Page 130 ---
Text 6] Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 125
actually a blessing, not a curse. One should not be displeased when a
saintly person curses someone, for his curse, indirectly, is a blessing. The
Gandharva had the mentality of an inhabitant of the celestial planetary
system, and for him to become an associate of the Supreme Lord would
have taken millions of long years. However, because he was cursed by
Devala Rsi, he became a crocodile and in only one life was fortunate
enough to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face and be
promoted to the spiritual world to become one of the Lord’s associates.
Similarly, Gajendra was also delivered by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead when he was freed from the curse of Agastya Muni.
TEXT 5
सोऽलुकभ्पित ईशेन परिक्रम्य प्रणम्य तम्‌ |
त
लोकस्थ पश्यतो रोकं ARGH HAT ॥ ५ ॥
so ‘nukampita 16९70
parikramya pranamya tam
lokasya pasyato lokam
svam agan mukta-kilbisah
sah—he (King Haha); anukampitah—being favored; isena—by the
Supreme Lord; parikramya—circumambulating; pranamya—offering
his obeisances; tam—unto Him; lokasya—all the demigods and men;
pasyatah—while seeing; lokam —to the planet; svam—his own; agat—
went back; mukta—being delivered; kilbisah—from the reactions of his
sin.
TRANSLATION
Having been favored by the causeless mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and having regained his original form,
King Hithii circumambulated the Lord and offered his obeisances.
Then, in the presence of all the demigods, headed by Brahma, he
returned to Gandharvaloka. He had been freed of all sinful reac-
tions.
TEXT 6
गजेन्द्रो मगवत्स्पशशाद्‌ विशक्तोऽज्ञानबन्धनात्‌ |
= + (५
সামী भगवतो रूपं पीतवासाश्वतुखंजः ॥ £ ॥


--- Page 131 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
gajendro bhagavat-sparsad
vimukto ’jiana-bandhanat
prapto bhagavato ripari
pita-vasas catur-bhujah

gajendrah—the King of the elephants, Gajendra; bhagavat-sparsat—
because of being touched by the hand of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vimuktah—was immediately freed; ajiiana-bandhandat—from
all kinds of ignorance, especially the bodily concept of life; praptah—
achieved; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ripam—the same bodily features; pita-vasah—wearing yellow gar-
ments; catuh-bhujah—and four-handed, with conchshell, disc, club and
lotus.

TRANSLATION

Because Gajendra, King of the elephants, had been touched
directly by the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
was immediately freed of all material ignorance and bondage. Thus
he received the salvation of sariipya-mukti, in which he achieved
the same bodily features as the Lord, being dressed in yellow gar-
ments and possessing four hands.

PURPORT

If one is favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead by having his
gross body touched by the Lord, his body turns into a spiritual body, and
he can go back home, back to Godhead. Gajendra assumed a spiritual
body when his body was touched by the Lord. Similarly, Dhruva
Maharaja assumed his spiritual body in this way. 4Arcana-paddhati, daily
worship of the Deity, provides an opportunity to touch the body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus it enables one to be fortunate
enough to get a spiritual body and go back to Godhead. Not only by
touching the body of the Supreme Lord, but simply by hearing about His
pastimes, chanting His glories, touching His feet and offering worship—
in other words, by serving the Lord somehow or other —one is purified of
material contamination. This is the result of touching the Supreme Lord.
One who is a pure devotee (anyabhilasita-sinyam), who acts according


--- Page 132 ---
Text 8] Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 127
to the Sastra and the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, cer-
tainly becomes purified. Like Gajendra, he assumes a spiritual body and
returns home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
= 6
स वे पूवंमभूद्‌ राजा पाण्ड्यो द्रविडसत्तमः |
gE इति ख्यातो विष्णुव्रतपरायणः ॥ ७ ॥
sa vai parvam abhid raja
pandyo dravida-sattamah
indradyumna iti khyato
visnu-vrata-parayanah
sah—this elephant (Gajendra); vai—indeed; pirvam—formerly;
abhiit—was; raja—a king; pandyah—of the country known as Pandya;
dravida-sat-tamah—the best of those born in Dravida-desa, South India;
indradyumnah—by the name Maharaja Indradyumna; iti—thus;
khyatah—celebrated; visnu-vrata-parayanah—who was a first-class
Vaisnava, always engaged in the service of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
This Gajendra had formerly been a Vaisnava and the king of the
country known as Pandya, which is in the province of Dravida
[South India]. In his previous life, he was known as Indradyumna
Maharaja.
TEXT 8
स एकद्‌ाराधनकाट  ATHAT]
गृहीतमोनव्रत ईशरं हरिम्‌ ।
जटाधरस्तापस अआप्ठुतोऽच्युतं
समर्चयामास FETS: || ८ ॥
sa ekadaradhana-kala atmavan
grhita-mauna-vrata Svaram harim


--- Page 133 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
Jjata-dharas tapasa apluto ‘cyutari
samarcayam dasa kulacalasramah
sah—that Indradyumna Maharaja; ekada—once upon a time;
aradhana-kale—at the time of worshiping the Deity; atmavan—
engaged in devotional service in meditation with great attention;
grhita—taken; mauna-vratah—the vow of silence (not talking with
anyone); iSvaram—the supreme controller; harim—the Personality of
Godhead; jata-dharah—with matted locks; tapasah—always engaged in
austerity; aplutah—always merged in love for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; acyutam—the infallible Lord; samarcayam 250 -- ५३5
worshiping; kulacala-asramah—he made his asrama in Kulicala (the
Malaya Hills).
TRANSLATION
Indradyumna Maharaja retired from family life and went to the
Malaya Hills, where he had a small cottage for his aSrama. He wore
matted locks on his head and always engaged in austerities. Once,
while observing a vow of silence, he was fully engaged in the wor-
ship of the Lord and absorbed in the ecstasy of love of Godhead.
TEXT 9
यद्च्छया বঙ্গ महायज्ञा gia:
a
समागमच्छिष्यगणेः परिचितः |
ব वीक्ष्य तूष्णीमङरतार्ईणादि कं
रहस्युपासीनम्पिश्चुकोप ह ॥ ९ ॥
yadrecchaya tatra maha-yasa munih
samagamac chisya-ganaih parisritah
tar viksya tasnim akrtarhanadikarn
rahasy upasinam rsis cukopa ha
yadrcchaya—out of his own will (without being invited); tatra—
there; maha-yasah—very celebrated, well-known; munih—Agastya
Muni;  samagamat—arrived; ~~ Sisya-ganaith—by his disciples;


--- Page 134 ---
Text 10]  Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 129
parisritah—surrounded; tam—him; viksya—seeing; tisnim—silent;
akrta-arhana-adikam —without offering a respectful reception;
rahasi—in a secluded place; upasinam—sitting in meditation; rsth—the
great sage; cukopa—became very angry; ha—it so happened.
TRANSLATION
While Indradyumna Maharaja was engaged in ecstatic medita-
tion, worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great
sage Agastya Muni arrived there, surrounded by his disciples.
When the Muni saw that Maharaja Indradyumna, who was sitting
in a secluded place, remained silent and did not follow the eti-
quette of offering him a reception, he was very angry.
TEXT 10
तखा इमं चलापमदादसाधु-
रयं दुरात्माङृतवबुद्धिरद् |
विप्रावमन्ता विशतां तमिस
यथा गजः स्तन्धमतिः स एव ॥१०॥
tasma imam sapam adad asadhur
ayarn duratmakrta-buddhir adya
vipravamanta visatari tamisram
yatha gajah stabdha-matih sa eva
tasmai—unto Maharaja Indradyumna; imam—this; $§apam—curse;
adat—he gave; asadhuh—not at all gentle; ayam—this; duratma—
degraded soul; akrta—without education; buddhih—his intelligence;
adya—now; vipra—of a brahmana; avamanta—insulter; visatam—let
him enter; tamisram—darkness; yathda—as; gajah—an elephant;
stabdha-matih— possessing blunt intelligence; sah—he; eva—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Agastya Muni then spoke this curse against the King: This King
Indradyumna is not at all gentle. Being low and uneducated, he has


--- Page 135 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
insulted a brahmana. May he therefore enter the region of dark-
ness and receive the dull, dumb body of an elephant.
PURPORT
An elephant is very strong, it has a very big body, and it can work
very hard and eat a large quantity of food, but its intelligence is not at all
commensurate with its size and strength. Thus in spite of so much bodily
strength, the elephant works as a menial servant for a human being.
Agastya Muni thought it wise to curse the King to become an elephant
because the powerful King did not receive Agastya Muni as one is obliged
to receive a brahmana. Yet although Agastya Muni cursed Maharaja
Indradyumna to become an elephant, the curse was indirectly a benedic-
tion, for by undergoing one life as an elephant, Indradyumna Maharaja
ended the reactions for all the sins of his previous life. Immediately after
the expiry of the elephant’s life, he was promoted to Vaikunthaloka to
become a personal associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Narayana, in a body exactly like that of the Lord. This is called sarapya-
mukti.
TEXTS 11-12
HAH उवाच
एवं PEAT गतोऽगस्त्यो मगवान्‌ Iq सानुगः |
इन्द्र्यश्नोऽपि राजपि्दिष्टं तदुपधारयन्‌ ॥११॥
आपन्नः कौञ्जरीं योनिमात्मस्खृतिविना्िनीम्‌ |
हर्यचैनाजुभावेन यद्धजत्वेऽप्यजुस्मृतिः ॥१२।
sri-suka uvaca
evar Saptva gato ’gastyo
bhagavan nrpa sanugah
indradyumno ‘pi rajarsir
distarn tad upadharayan
apannah kaunjarim yonim
atma-smrti-vinasinim
hary-arcananubhavena
yad-gajatve py anusmrtih


--- Page 136 ---
Text 12] Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 131

sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus; Saptva—
after cursing; gatah—left that place; agastyah—Agastya Muni;
bhagavan—so powerful; nrpa—O King; sa-anugah—with his asso-
ciates; indradyumnah—King Indradyumna; api—also; rajarsih—al-
though he was a rajarsi; distam—because of past deeds; tat—that curse;
upadhdrayan—considering; = dpannah—got;  kauijarim—of an
elephant; yonim—the species; atma-smrti—remembrance of one’s iden-
tity; vinasinim—which destroys; hari—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; arcana-anubhavena—because of worshiping; yat—that; gajatve
—in the body of an elephant; api—although; anusmrtih—the oppor-
tunity to remember his past devotional service.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, after Agastya Muni
had thus cursed King Indradyumna, the Muni left that place along
with his disciples. Since the King was a devotee, he accepted
Agastya Muni’s curse as welcome because it was the desire of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, although in his next
life he got the body of an elephant, because of devotional service
he remembered how to worship and offer prayers to the Lord.

PURPORT

This is the unique position of a devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although the King was cursed, he welcomed the curse because
a devotee is always aware that nothing can happen without the desire of
the Supreme Lord. Although the King was not at fault, Agastya Muni
cursed him, and when this happened the King considered it to be due to
his past misdeeds. Tat te ‘nukampari susamiksamanah (Bhag. 10.14.8).
This is a practical example of how a devotee thinks. He regards any
reverses in life as blessings of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, instead of being agitated by such reverses, he continues his
activities of devotional service, and Krsna takes care of him and enables
him to be promoted to the spiritual world, back to Godhead. If a devotee
has to suffer the reactions of his past misdeeds, the Supreme Lord ar-
ranges for him to be given only a token of these reactions, and very soon
he is freed from all the reactions of material contamination. One should


--- Page 137 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
therefore adhere to devotional service, and the Lord Himself will very
soon see to one’s promotion to the spiritual world. A devotee should not
be disturbed by unfortunate circumstances, but must continue his regu-
lar program, depending on the Lord for everything. The word
upadharayan, “considering,” is very significant in this verse. This word
indicates that a devotee knows what is what; he understands what is hap-
pening in material, conditional life.
TEXT 13
एवं विमोक्ष्य गजयुथपमन्जनाम-
¢
स्तेनापि पाषदगतिं गमितेन युक्तः |
४७ A
गन्धवेसिद्धविबुधरुपगीयमान-
कर्माद्भुतं खभवनं गरुडासनोऽगात्‌।। १३॥
evar vimoksya gaja-yiitha-pam abja-nabhas
tenapi parsada-gatirh gamitena yuktah
gandharva-siddha-vibudhair upagiyamana-
karmadbhutari sva-bhavanam garudasano ‘gat
evam—thus; vimoksya—delivering; gaja-yitha-pam—the King of
the elephants, Gajendra; abja-nabhah—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, from whose navel sprouts a lotus flower; tena—by him
(Gajendra); api—also; parsada-gatim—the position of the Lord’s asso-
ciate; gamitena—who had already gotten; yuktah—accompanied;
gandharva—Dby the denizens of Gandharvaloka; siddha—the denizens
of ৩1001131013; vibudhaih—and by all great learned sages;
upagiyamana—were being glorified; karma—whose transcendental ac-
tivities; adbhutam —all-wonderful; sva-bhavanam —to His own abode;
garuda-dsanah—sitting on the back of Garuda; agat—returned.
TRANSLATION
Upon delivering the King of the elephants from the clutches of

the crocodile, and from material existence, which resembles a cro-
codile, the Lord awarded him the status of sariipya-mukti. In the
presence of the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the other demigods,


--- Page 138 ---
Text 13]  Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 133

who were praising the Lord for His wonderful transcendental ac-

tivities, the Lord, sitting on the back of His carrier, Garuda,

returned to His all-wonderful abode and took Gajendra with Him.
PURPORT

In this verse the word vimoksya is significant. For a devotee, moksa or
mukti—salvation —means getting the position of the Lord’s associate.
The impersonalists are satisfied to get the liberation of merging in the
Brahman effulgence, but for a devotee, mukti (liberation) means not to
merge in the effulgence of the Lord, but to be directly promoted to the
Vaikuntha planets and to become an associate of the Lord. In this regard,
there is a relevant verse in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.8):

tat te ‘nukampar susamiksamano
bhuijana evatma-krtari vipakam
hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
Jjiveta yo mukti-pade sa daya-bhak
“One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all kinds of adverse
conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engages always in
Your devotional service with his mind, words and body, and who always
offers obeisances unto You, is certainly a bona fide candidate for libera-
tion.” A devotee who tolerates everything in this material world and
patiently executes his devotional service can become mukti-pade sa
daya-bhak, a bona fide candidate for liberation. The word daya-bhak
refers to a hereditary right to the Lord’s mercy. A devotee must simply
engage in devotional service, not caring about material situations. Then
he automatically becomes a rightful candidate for promotion to
Vaikunthaloka. The devotee who renders unalloyed service to the Lord
gets the right to be promoted to Vaikunthaloka, just as a son inherits the
property of his father.

When a devotee gets liberation, he becomes free from material con-
tamination and engages as a servant of the Lord. This is explained in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvanyatha ripari svaripena
vyavasthitih. The word svanipa refers to saripya-mukti—going back
home, back to Godhead, and remaining the Lord’s eternal associate, hav-
ing regained a spiritual body exactly resembling that of the Lord, with


--- Page 139 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
four hands, holding the sarnkha, cakra, gada and padma. The difference
between the mukti of the impersonalist and that of the devotee is that the
devotee is immediately appointed an eternal servant of the Lord, whereas
the impersonalist, although merging in the effulgence of the
brahmajyoti, 15 still insecure and therefore generally falls again to this
material world. Aruhya krcchrena parari padar tatah patanty adho
‘nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah (Bhag. 10.2.32). Although the imper-
sonalist rises to the Brahman effulgence and enters into that effulgence,
he has no engagement in the service of the Lord, and therefore he is
again attracted to materialistic philanthropic activities. Thus he comes
down to open hospitals and educational institutions, feed poor men and
perform similar materialistic activities, which the impersonalist thinks
are more precious than serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Anadrta-yusmad-arighrayah. The impersonalists do not think that the
service of the Lord is more valuable than serving the poor man or start-
ing a school or hospital. Although they say brahma satyar jagan
mithya—*‘‘Brahman is real, and the material world is false” —they are
nonetheless very eager to serve the false material world and neglect the
service of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 14
एतन्महाराज तवेरितो मया
=
कृष्णानुभावो गजराजमोक्षणम्‌ |
स्वग्यं यशस्यं wwe
e
হুঃলমনাহা कुरुवयं शृण्वताम्‌ ।।१४।।
etan maha-raja taverito maya
krsnanubhavo gaja-raja-moksanam
svargyam yasasyam kali-kalmasapaham
duhsvapna-nasam kuru-varya Srnvatam
etat—this; maha-raja—O King Pariksit; tava—unto you; iritah—de-

scribed; maya—by me; krsna-anubhavah—the unlimited potency of
Lord Krsna (by which He can deliver a devotee); gaja-raja-moksanam —
delivering the King of the elephants; svargyam—giving elevation to


--- Page 140 ---
Text 15] Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 135
higher planetary systems; yaSasyam—increasing one’s reputation as a
devotee; kali-kalmasa-apaham—diminishing the contamination of the
Kali-yuga; duhsvapna-nasam—counteracting the causes of bad dreams;
kuru-varya—O best among the Kurus; $rnvatam—of persons who hear
this narration.
TRANSLATION

My dear King Pariksit, I have now described the wonderful
power of Krsna, as displayed when the Lord delivered the King of
the elephants. O best of the Kuru dynasty, those who hear this nar-
ration become fit to be promoted to the higher planetary systems.
Simply because of hearing this narration, they gain a reputation as
devotees, they are unaffected by the contamination of Kali-yuga,
and they never see bad dreams.

TEXT 15
यथानुकीतैयन्त्येतच्छरेयस्कामा द्विजातयः |
शुचयः प्रातरुत्थाय दुःखञादयुपक्चान्तये ॥ १५॥
yathanukirtayanty ९४८८
chreyas-kama dvijatayah
Sucayah pratar utthaya
duhsvapnady-upasantaye

yatha—without deviation; anukirtayanti—they chant; etat—this
narration of the deliverance of Gajendra; Sreyah-kamah—persons who
desire their own auspiciousness; dvi-jatayah—the twiceborn
(brahmanas, ksatriyas and wvaiSyas); Sucayah—especially 006
brahmanas, who are always clean; pratah—in the morning; utthaya—
after getting up from sleep; duhsvapna-adi—beginning with sleeping
badly at night; upasantaye—to counteract all troublesome positions.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, after getting up from bed in the morning, those who
desire their own welfare —especially the brahmanas, ksatriyas,
vaiS§yas and in particular the brahmana Vaisnavas—should chant


--- Page 141 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
this narration as it is, without deviation, to counteract the troubles
of bad dreams.

PURPORT

Every verse in the Vedic literature, especially in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita, is a Vedic mantra. Here the words
yathanukirtayanti are used to recommend that this literature be pre-
sented as it is. Unscrupulous persons, however, deviate from the actual
narration and interpret the text in their own way with grammatical jug-
glery. Such deviations are to be avoided. This is a Vedic injunction sup-
ported by Sukadeva Gosvami, one of the mahajanas, or authorities. He
says, yathanukirtayanti: one should recite the mantra as it is, without
deviation, for then one will be eligible to rise to the platform of all good
fortune. Sukadeva Gosvami especially recommends that those who are
brahmanas (Sucayah) recite all these mantras after rising from bed in
the morning.

Because of sinful activities, at night we have bad dreams, which are
very troublesome. Indeed, Maharaja Yudhisthira was obliged to see hell
because of a slight deviation from devotional service to the Lord.
Therefore, duhsvapna—bad dreams —occur because of sinful activities.
A devotee sometimes accepts a sinful person as his disciple, and to coun-
teract the sinful reactions he accepts from the disciple, he has to see a bad
dream. Nonetheless, the spiritual master is so kind that in spite of having
bad dreams due to the sinful disciple, he accepts this troublesome busi-
ness for the deliverance of the victims of Kali-yuga. After initiation,
therefore, a disciple should be extremely careful not to commit again any
sinful act that might cause difficulties for himself and the spiritual
master. Before the Deity, before the fire, before the spiritual master and-
before the Vaisnavas, the honest disciple promises to refrain from all
sinful activity. Therefore he must not again commit sinful acts and thus
create a troublesome situation.

TEXT 16
इदमाह हरिः प्रीतो गजेन्द्रं कुरुसत्तम |
श्रृण्वतां सवभूतानां सर्वभूतमयो विः ॥१६॥


--- Page 142 ---
Text 24]  Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 137
idam aha harih prito
gajendram kuru-sattama
Srnvatam sarva-bhitanam
sarva-bhiita-mayo vibhuh
idam —this; aha —said; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pritah—being pleased; gajendram —unto Gajendra; kuru-sat-tama—O
best of the Kuru dynasty; srnvatam —hearing; sarva-bhiitanam—in the
presence of everyone; sarva-bhita-mayah—all-pervading Personality
of Godhead; vibhuh—the great.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kuru dynasty, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the Supersoul of everyone, being thus pleased, addressed
Gajendra in the presence of everyone there. He spoke the follow-
ing blessings.
TEXTS 17-24
श्रीमगवादवाच

ये मां त्वां च सरशेदं गिरिकन्दरकाननम्‌ |

वेत्रकीचकवेणूनां गुरमानि सुरपादपान्‌ ॥ १७

शृङ्गाणीमानि धिष्ण्यानि ब्रह्मणो मे क्चिवस्य |

क्षीरोदं मे प्रियं धाम इवेतद्वीपं च भाखरम्‌ 1240

श्रीवत्सं कोस्तुमं मालां गदां कौमोदकीं मम |

सदशन पाचजन्यं सुपर्णं पतगेश्वरम्‌ 12a

शेषं च मत्कलां खष्ष्मां भियं देवीं मदाभ्रयाम्‌ |

बरह्माणं AREER भवं MEAT च ॥२०॥

+]

मस्खक्कमराहाचैरथतारः कृतानि मे |

कर्माण्यनन्तपुण्यानि ad सोमं TARA ॥२१॥।

प्रणवं सत्यमव्यक्तं गोविप्रान्‌ धमेमन्ययम्‌ |

दाक्षायणीमपलीः सोमकत्यपयोरपि ।२२॥


--- Page 143 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
गङ्गां सरसखतीं नन्दां कालिन्दीं सितवारणम्‌ |
৬ =
धुवं ब्रह्म्छपीन्सप्त पुण्यश्छोकां श्च मानवान्‌ ।।२३॥
उत्थायापररात्रान्ते प्रयताः सुसमाहिताः ।
LN
स्मरन्ति मम रूपाणि रुच्यन्ते तेऽहसोऽखिलात्‌।। २४॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
ye mar tvam ca saras cedarit
giri-kandara-kananam
vetra-kicaka-veninam
gulmani sura-padapan
Srnganimani dhisnyani
brahmano me sivasya ca
ksirodarih me priya dhama
Sveta-dvipam ca 01005007077
Srivatsarn kaustubhari malar
gadari kaumodakirh mama
sudarsanar pancajanyari
suparnari patagesvaram
$65071 ca mat-kalam saksmar
Sriyam devirh mad-asrayam
brahmanari naradam rsim
bhavari prahradam eva ca
matsya-kirma-varahadyair
avataraih krtani me
karmany ananta-punyani
ऽद्य) somariv hutasanam
pranavam satyam avyaktari
go-vipran dharmam avyayam
daksayanir dharma-patnih
soma-kasSyapayor api


--- Page 144 ---
Text 24]  Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 139
gangarn sarasvatirn nandarn
kalindir sita-varanam
dhruvari brahma-rsin sapta
punya-slokams ca manavan
utthayapara-ratrante
prayatah susamahitah
smaranti mama riapani
mucyante te ‘rnhaso ’khilat
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ye—
those who; mam —Me; tvam—you; ca—also; sarah—lake; ca—also;
idam—this;  giri—hill  (Trikita Mountain); kandara—caves;
kananam—gardens; vetra—of cane; kicaka—hollow bamboo;
veninam—and of another kind of bamboo; gulmani—clusters; sura-
padapan—celestial trees;  Sriigani—the peaks;  imani—these;
dhisnyani—abodes; brahmanah—of Lord Brahmi; me—of Me;
Sivasya—of Lord Siva; ca—also; ksira-udam—the ocean of milk; me—
My; priyam—very dear; dhama—place; Sveta-dvipam—known as the
white island; ca—also; bhasvaram —always brilliant with spiritual rays;
Srivatsam —the mark named Srivatsa; kaustubham —the Kaustubha
gem; malam—garland; gadam—club; kaumodakim—known as
Kaumodaki; ~mama—My; sudarianam—SudarSana disc; parica-
Jjanyam —conchshell named Paficajanya; suparnam— Garuda;
pataga-isvaram—the king of all birds; sesam—the resting place Sesa
Naga; ca—and; mat-kalam—My expanded part; sizksmam—very sub-
tle; sriyam devim—the goddess of fortune; mat-asrayam—all depen-
dent upon Me; brahmanam—Lord Brahma; naradam rsim—the great
saint Narada Muni; bhavam —Lord Siva; prahradam eva ca—as well as
Prahlada; matsya—the Matsya incarnation; kiarma—the Kirma incar-
nation; varaha—the boar incarnation; adyaih—and so on; avataraih—
by different incarnations; krtani—done; me—My; karmani—activities;
ananta—unlimited; punyani—auspicious, pious; siryam—the sun-
god; somam—the moon-god; hutasanam—the fire-god; pranavam —the
ormkara mantra; satyam—the Absolute Truth; avyaktam —the total ma-
terial energy; go-vipran—the cows and brahmanas; dharmam—


--- Page 145 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
devotional service; avyayam—never ending; daksayanih—the
daughters of Daksa; dharma-patnih—bona fide wives; soma—of the
moon-god; kaSyapayoh—and of the great rsi KaSyapa; api—also;
garigam—the River Ganges; sarasvatim—the River Sarasvati; nan-
dam —the River Nanda; kalindim —the River Yamuna; sita-varanam—
the elephant Airavata; dhruvam—Dhruva Maharaja; brahma-rsin—
great rsis; sapta—seven; punya-$lokan—extremely pious; ca—and;
manavan—human beings; utthaya—getting up; apara-ratra-ante—at
the end of the night; prayatah—being very careful; su-samahitah—
with concentrated minds; smaranti—remember; mama—My; riapani—
forms; mucyante—are delivered; te—such persons; amhasah—from
sinful reactions; akhilat—of all kinds.
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Freed from all sinful
reactions are those who rise from bed at the end of night, early in
the morning, and fully concentrate their minds with great atten-
tion upon My form; your form; this lake; this mountain; the
caves; the gardens; the cane plants; the bamboo plants; the
celestial trees; the residential quarters of Me, Lord Brahma and
Lord Siva; the three peaks of Trikita Mountain, made of gold,
silver and iron; My very pleasing abode [the ocean of milk]; the
white island, Svetadvipa, which is always brilliant with spiritual
rays; My mark of Srivatsa; the Kaustubha gem; My Vaijayanti gar-
land; My club, Kaumodaki; My Sudarsana disc and Paficajanya
conchshell; My bearer, Garuda, the king of the birds; My bed, Sesa
Naga; My expansion of energy the goddess of fortune; Lord
Brahma; Narada Muni; Lord Siva; Prahlada; My incarnations like
Matsya, Kiirma and Varaha; My unlimited all-auspicious activities,
which yield piety to he who hears them; the sun; the moon; fire;
the mantra ornkara; the Absolute Truth; the total material energy;
the cows and brahmanas; devotional service; the wives of Soma
and KaSyapa, who are all daughters of King Daksa; the Rivers
Ganges, Sarasvati, Nanda and Yamuna [Kalindi]; the elephant
Airavata; Dhruva Maharaja; the seven rsis; and the pious human
beings.


--- Page 146 ---
Text 26] Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World 141
TEXT 25
ये मां स्तुचन्त्यनेनाद्गं प्रतिबुध्य निश्चात्यये ।
तेषां प्राणात्यये चाहं ददामि विपुलां गतिम्‌ ॥ २५॥
ye mam stuvanty anenanga
pratibudhya nisatyaye
tesa pranatyaye caharin
dadami vipulari gatim
ye—those who; mam —unto Me; stuvanti—offer prayers; anena—in
this way; anga—O King; pratibudhya—getting up; nisa-atyaye—at the
end of night; tesam —for them; prana-atyaye—at the time of death;
ca—also; aham—I; dadami—give; vipulam—the eternal, unlimited;
gatim—transferral to the spiritual world.
TRANSLATION
My dear devotee, unto those who rise from bed at the end of
night and offer Me the prayers offered by you, I give an eternal
residence in the spiritual world at the end of their lives.
TEXT 26
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
इत्यादिश्य हृषीकेशः प्राष्माय जलजोत्तमम्‌ |
(स -
हषयन्विबुधानीकमारुरोह खगाधिपम्‌ ॥२६॥
sri-Suka ८12८0
ity adisya hrsikesah
pradhmaya jalajottamam
harsayan vibudhanikam
aruroha khagadhipam
$ri-sukah uvica—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti —thus; adisya—ad-
vising; hrsitkesah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as
Hrsike$a; pradhmaya—blowing; jala-ja-uttamam—the conchshell, the


--- Page 147 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 4
best of the aquatics; harsayan—pleasing; vibudha-anikam —the host of
demigods, headed by Lord Brahma and Lord Siva; aruroha—got up;
khaga-adhipam —on the back of Garuda.
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After giving this instruction,
the Lord, who is known as Hrsikesa, bugled with His Paficajanya
conchshell, in this way pleasing all the demigods, headed by Lord
Brahma. Then He mounted the back of His carrier, Garuda.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fourth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Gajendra Returns to the
Spiritual World.”


--- Page 148 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
The Demigods Appeal
to the Lord for Protection
This chapter describes the fifth and sixth Manus, and it also describes the
prayers of the demigods and the curse of Durvasa Muni.

The brother of Tamasa, the fourth Manu, who has previously been de-
scribed, was the fifth Manu, Raivata. The sons of Raivata included
Arjuna, Bali and Vindhya. During the reign of this Manu, Indra, the
King of heaven, was known as Vibhu. Among the demigods were the
Bhiitarayas, and among the seven rsis were Hiranyaroma, Vedasira and
Urdhvabahu. The rsi known as Subhra, by his wife, Vikuntha, gave birth
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vaikuntha. This Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead manifested a Vaikuntha planet at the request of
Ramadevi. His power and activities are mentioned in the Third Canto.

The sixth Manu was Caksusa, the son of Caksu Manu. Among the sons
of the sixth Manu were Piru, Parusa and Sudyumna. During the reign
of this Manu, Mantradruma was Indra, the King of the heavenly planets.
Among the demigods were the Apyas, and among the seven rsis were
Havisman and Viraka. The wife of Vairaja, whose name was
Devasambhiiti, gave birth to Ajita, an incarnation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. This Ajita, taking the shape of a tortoise and hold-
ing the mountain known as Mandara on His back, churned the ocean and
produced nectar for the demigods.

Maharaja Pariksit was very eager to hear about the churning of the
ocean, and therefore Sukadeva Gosvami began to explain to him how the
demigods, having been cursed by Durvasa Muni, were defeated in battle
by the asuras. When the demigods were deprived of their heavenly
kingdom, they went to the assembly house of Lord Brahma and informed
Lord Brahma of what had happened. Then Brahma, along with all the
demigods, went to the shore of the ocean of milk and offered prayers to
Ksirodakasayi Visnu.

143


--- Page 149 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
TEXT 1
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
राजन्नुदितमेतत्‌ ते हरेः कर्माघनाशनम्‌ |
+ व ্্া N
गजेन्द्रमोक्षणं पुण्यं रेवतं त्वन्तरं श्रृणु ॥ 2 ॥
sri-suka uvaca
rajann uditam etat te
hareh karmagha-nasanam
gajendra-moksanam punyari
raivatarin tv antararin Srnu
Sri-Sukah uvaca _ ওযায Sukadeva Gosvami said; rajan—O King;
uditam—already described; etat—this; te—unto you; hareh—of the
Lord; karma—activity; agha-nasanam—by hearing which one can be
freed from all misfortune; gajendra-moksanam—deliverance of
Gajendra, the King of the elephants; punyam—very pious to hear and
describe; raivatam—about Raivata Manu; tu—but; antaram—in this
millennium; Srpu—kindly hear from me.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O King, I have described to you
the pastime of Gajendra-moksana, which is most pious to hear. By
hearing of such activities of the Lord, one can be freed from all
sinful reactions. Now please listen as I describe Raivata Manu.
TEXT 2
- A=
पञ्चमा বলবা नाम मनुस्तामससोदरः 1
बखिविन्ध्यादयस्तस्य सुता agama || २ ॥
paiicamo raivato nama
manus tamasa-sodarah
bali-vindhyadayas tasya
suta harjuna-parvakah
paricamah—the fifth; raivatah—Raivata; nama—by the name;
manuh—Manu; tamasa-sodarah —the brother of Tamasa Manu; bali—


--- Page 150 ---
Text 4] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 145
Bali; vindhya—Vindhya; adayah—and so on; tasya—his; sutah—sons;
ha—certainly; arjuna —Arjuna; piarvakah—heading all the sons.
TRANSLATION
The brother of Tamasa Manu was the fifth Manu, named Raivata.
His sons were headed by Arjuna, Bali and Vindhya.
TEXT 3
विश्रिन्द्रः सुरगणा राजन्भूतरयादयः |
दिरण्यरोमा वेदशिरा ऊर्वबाह्ादयो दविजाः ॥ २ ॥
vibhur indrah sura-gana
rajan bhiutarayadayah
hiranyaroma vedasira
ardhvabahv-adayo dvijah
vibhuh—Vibhu; indrah—the King of heaven; sura-ganah—the
demigods; rajan—O King; bhiitaraya-adayah—headed by the
Bhatarayas; = _ hiranyaroma —Hiranyaroma; veda$ira — Vedaéira;
ardhvabahu—Urdhvabahu; adayah—and others;  dvijah—the
brahmanas or rsis who occupied the seven planets.
TRANSLATION
O King, in the millennium of Raivata Manu the King of heaven
was known as Vibhu, among the demigods were the Bhiitarayas,
and among the seven brahmanas who occupied the seven planets
were Hiranyaroma, Vedasira and Urdhvabahu.
TEXT 4
पल्ली विङ्ण्ठा शुभ्रस्य Aged: gaan: |
a -
तयोः खकल्या जज्ञे IFS भगवान्खयम्‌ ॥ ও ॥
patni vikuntha subhrasya
vaikunthaih sura-sattamaih


--- Page 151 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
tayoh sva-kalaya jajiie
vaikuntho bhagavan svayam
| patni—the wife; vikuntha—named Vikuntha; Subhrasya—of
Subhra;  wvaikunthaih—with the Vaikunthas; sura-sat-tamaih—
demigods; tayoh—by Vikuntha and Subhra; sva-kalaya—with plenary
expansions; jajiie—appeared; vaikunthah—the Lord; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam —personally.
TRANSLATION
From the combination of Subhra and his wife, Vikuntha, there
appeared the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vaikuntha, along
with demigods who were His personal plenary expansions.
TEXT 5
a
বস্তুতঃ कल्पितो येन लोको लोकनमस्कृतः |
रमया प्राध्यंमानेन देव्या तत्प्रियकाम्यया ॥ ५ ॥
vaikunthah kalpito yena
loko loka-namaskrtah
ramaya prarthyamanena
devya tat-priya-kamyaya
vaikunthah—a Vaikuntha planet; kalpitah—was constructed; yena—
by whom; lokah—planet; loka-namaskriah—worshiped by all people;
ramaya—by Rama, the goddess of fortune; prarthyamanena—being so
requested; devya—by the goddess; tat—her; priya-kamyaya—just to
please.
TRANSLATION
Just to please the goddess of fortune, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Vaikuntha, at her request, created another Vaikuntha
planet, which is worshiped by everyone.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanitha Cakravarti Thakura remarks here that this
Vaikuntha planet, like Srimad-Bhagavatam, appears and is said to be


--- Page 152 ---
Text 6] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 147
born or created, but both Srimad-Bhagavatam and Vaikuntha eternally
exist beyond the material universes, which are enveloped by eight kinds
of coverings. As described in the Second Canto, Lord Brahma saw
Vaikuntha before the creation of the universe. Viraraghava Acarya men-
tions that this Vaikuntha is within the universe. It is situated above the
mountain known as Lokaloka. This planet is worshiped by everyone.
TEXT 6
= - ब
तस्यानुमावः कथितो गुणाश्च परमोदयाः |
০
भौमान्रेणून्स विममे यो विष्णोरवर्णयेद्‌ गुणान्‌ ।। & ॥
tasyanubhavah kathito
gunas ca paramodayah
bhauman renin sa vimame
yo visnor varnayed gunan

tasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appearing as
Vaikuntha; anubhavah—great activities; kathitah—were explained;
gunah—transcendental qualities; ca—also; parama-udayah—greatly
glorious;  bhauman—earthly;  reniin—particles;  sah—someone;
vimame—can count; yah—such a person; visnoh—of Lord Visnu;
varnayet—can count; gunan—the transcendental qualities.

TRANSLATION

Although the great activities and transcendental qualities of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead’s various incarnations are won-
derfully described, sometimes we are unable to understand them.
Yet everything is possible for Lord Visnu. If one could count the
atoms of the universe, then he could count the qualities of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. But no one can count the atoms
of the universe, nor can anyone count the transcendental qualities
of the Lord.

PURPORT

The Lord’s glorious activities referred to in this connection took place

after His personal bodyguards Jaya and Vijaya became Daityas, having


--- Page 153 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
been cursed by the great sages Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanat-kumara and
Sanandana. Jaya, as Hiranyaksa, had to fight with Varahadeva, and that
same Varahadeva is mentioned in regard to the Raivata millennium. The
fighting, however, took place during the reign of the first Manu,
Svayambhuva. Therefore according to some authorities there are two
Varahas. According to others, however, Varaha appeared during the
regime of Svayambhuva Manu and stayed in the water until that of
Raivata Manu. Some may doubt that this could be possible, but the
answer is that everything is possible. If one could count the atoms within
the universe, one could count the qualities of Lord Vispu. But the atoms
of the universe are impossible for anyone to count, and similarly no one
can count the transcendental qualities of the Lord.
TEXT 7
- न
98 चक्षुषः पुत्रश्चाक्षुषो नाम ৭ মন্তঃ |
EERE ERE CIR SIRES IY ॥ ७ ॥
sasthas ca caksusah putras
caksuso nama vai manuh
piru-pitrusa-sudyumna-
pramukhas caksusatmajah
sasthah—the sixth; ca—and; caksusah—of Caksu; putrah—the son;
caksusah —Caksusa; nama—named; wvai—indeed; manuh—Manu;
paru—Piru; pirusa—Pirusa; sudyumna—Sudyumna; pramukhah—
headed by; caksusa-atma-jah—the sons of Caksusa.
TRANSLATION
The son of Caksu known as Caksusa was the sixth Manu. He had
many sons, headed by Piru, Parusa and Sudyumna.
TEXT 8
इनदरो मन्त्रद्ममस्तत्र देवा आप्यादयो गणाः ।
EN
ुनयस्तत्र॒ वं राजन्हविष्मदवीरकादयः ॥ < ॥


--- Page 154 ---
Text 9] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 149
indro mantradrumas tatra
deva apyadayo ganah
munayas tatra vai rajan
havismad-virakadayah
indrah—the King of heaven; mantradrumah—known as
Mantradruma; tatra—in that sixth manvantara; devah—the demigods;
apya-adayah—the Apyas and others; ganah—that assembly;
munayah—the seven sages; tatra—there; vai—indeed; rajan—O King;
havismat—of the name Havisman; viraka-adayah—Viraka and others.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Caksusa Manu, the King of heaven was
known as Mantradruma. Among the demigods were the Apyas, and
among the great sages were Havisman and Viraka.
TEXT 9
५ =
तत्रापि देवसम्भूत्यां वेराजस्यामवत्‌ सुतः |
अजितो नाम मगवानंशेन जगतः पतिः ॥ ९ ॥
tatrapi devasambhityari
vairajasyabhavat sutah
ajito nama bhagavan
arisena jagatah patih
tatra api—again in that sixth manvantara; devasambhiityam—by
Devasambhiti; vairdjasya—by her husband, Vairaja; abhavat—there
was; sutah—a son; ajitah nama—by the name Ajita; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; arsena—partially; jagatah patih—
the master of the universe.
TRANSLATION
In this sixth manvantara millennium, Lord Visnu, the master of
the universe, appeared in His partial expansion. He was begotten
by Vairaja in the womb of his wife, Devasambhiiti, and His name
was Ajita.


--- Page 155 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatamn [Canto 8, Ch. 5
TEXT 10
पयोधिं येन निर्मथ्य सुराणां साधिता सुधा ।
९
भ्रममाणोऽम्भसि तः कूर्मरूपेण मन्दरः ॥१०॥
10000101873 yena nirmathya
suranam sadhita sudha
bhramamano 'mbhasi dhrtah
kiirma-ripena mandarah
payodhim—the ocean of milk; yena—by whom; nirmathya—by
churning; suranam—of the demigods; sadhita—produced; sudha—nec-
tar; bhramamanah—moving here and there; ambhasi—within the
water; dhrtah—was staying; kirma-ripena—in the form of a tortoise;
mandarah—the mountain known as Mandara.
TRANSLATION
By churning the ocean of milk, Ajita produced nectar for the
demigods. In the form of a tortoise, He moved here and there,
carrying on His back the great mountain known as Mandara.
TEXTS 11-12
श्रीराजोवाच
यथा भगवता ब्रह्मन्मथितः क्षीरसागरः |
यदथ वा FAA दधाराम्बुचरात्मना ॥११॥
यथाख्तं घुर प्राप्तं किञ्चान्यद मवत्‌ ततः |
एतद्‌ भगवतः कर्म॑ IE परमाद्भुतम्‌ ॥१२॥
Sri-rajovaca
yatha bhagavata brahman
mathitah ksira-sagarah
yad-arthari va yatas ০৫077
dadharambucaratmana
yathamrtari suraih praptari
kirh canyad abhavat tatah


--- Page 156 ---
Text 13] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 151
etad bhagavatah karma
vadasva paramadbhutam
sri-raja uvaca—King Pariksit inquired; yatha—as; bhagavata—by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahman—O learned brahmana;
mathitah—churned; ksira-sagarah—the ocean of milk; yat-artham—
what was the purpose; va—either; yatah—wherefrom, for what
reason; ca—and; adrim—the mountain (Mandara); dadhara—was stay-
ing; ambucara-atmana—in the form of a tortoise; yatha—as;
amrtam—nectar; suraith—by the demigods; praptam—was achieved;
kim—what; ca—and; anyat—other; abhavat—became; tatah—
thereafter; etat—all these; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; karma—pastimes, activities; vadasva—kindly describe;
parama-adbhutam —because they are so wonderful.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired: O great brahmana, Sukadeva Gosvami,
why and how did Lord Visnu churn the ocean of milk? For what
reason did He stay in the water as a tortoise and hold up Mandara
Mountain? How did the demigods obtain the nectar, and what
other things were produced from the churning of the ocean?
Kindly describe all these wonderful activities of the Lord.
TEXT 13
त्वया सङ्कम्यमानेन महिक्ना सात्वतां पतेः ।
नातिवप्यति मे चित्तं सुचिरं तापतापितम्‌ ॥१३२॥
vaya sarikathyamanena
mahimna satvatarm pateh
natitrpyati me cittam
suciram tapa-tapitam
tvaya—by Your Holiness; sarikathyamanena—being described;
mahimna—by all the glories; satvatam pateh—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the master of the devotees; na—not; ati-trpyati—is
sufficiently satisfied; me—my; cittam —heart; suciram—for such 8 long
time; tapa—by miseries; tapitam—being distressed.


--- Page 157 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
My heart, which is disturbed by the three miserable conditions
of material life, is not yet sated with hearing you describe the
glorious activities of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is the master of the devotees.
TEXT 14
श्रीसूत उवार
TTR भगवानेवं दवेपायनसुतो द्विजाः ।
¢ ৬
अभिनन्य दरर्वीयिमस्याचष्टुं प्रचक्रमे ॥१४॥
Sri-siita uvaca
samprsto bhagavan 61৫77
dvaipayana-suto dvijah
abhinandya harer viryam
abhyacastur pracakrame
sri-sitah uvdca—Sri Sita Gosvami said; samprstah —being ques-
tioned; bhagavan —Sukadeva Gosvami; evam—thus; dvaipdyana-
sutah—the son of Vyasadeva; dvi-jah—O brahmanas assembled here;
abhinandya—congratulating Maharaja Pariksit; hareh viryam—the glo-
ries of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhyacastum —to describe;
pracakrame —endeavored.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sata Gosvami said: O learned brahmanas assembled here at
Naimisaranya, when Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of Dvaipayana,
was thus questioned by the King, he congratulated the King and
then endeavored to describe further the glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 15-16
श्रीद्युक उवाच
= a
यदा युद्धेऽसुरदेवा बध्यमानाः Frag: |
गतासवो निपतिता नोत्तिष्ठेरन्स भूरिशः । १५॥


--- Page 158 ---
Text 16] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 153
यदा दुर्वासः शापेन सेन्द्रा लोकाल्ञयो नृप |
निः ्रीकाथामर्वसतत्र नेशुरिज्यादयः क्रिया; an
sri-Suka uvaca
yada yuddhe ’surair deva
badhyamanah sitayudhaih
gatasavo nipatita
nottistheran sma bhiirisah
yada durvasah sapena
sendra lokas trayo nrpa
nihsrikas cabhavars tatra
nesur yyadayah kriyah
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; yada—when; yud-
dhe—in the fighting; asuraih—by the demons; devah—the demigods;
badhyamanah—beseiged; Sita-ayudhaih—by serpent weapons; gata-
asavah —almost dead; nipatitah—some of them having fallen; na—not;
uttistheran—got up again; sma—so became; bhirisah—the majority of
them; yada—when; durvasah—of Durvasa Muni; Sapena—with the
curse; sa-indrah—with Indra; lokah trayah—the three worlds; nrpa—
0 King; nihérikah—without any material opulence; ca—also;
abhavan—became; tatra—at that time; nesuh—could not be per-
formed; ijya-adayah—sacrifices; kriyah—ritualistic ceremonies.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: When the asuras, with their serpent
weapons, severely attacked the demigods in a fight, many of the
demigods fell and lost their lives. Indeed, they could not be
revived. At that time, O King, the demigods had been cursed by
Durvasa Muni, the three worlds were poverty-stricken, and
therefore ritualistic ceremonies could not be performed. The
effects of this were very serious.
PURPORT
It is described that while Durvasa Muni was passing on the road, he
saw Indra on the back of his elephant and was pleased to offer Indra a


--- Page 159 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
garland from his own neck. Indra, however, being too puffed up, took
the garland, and without respect for Durvasa Muni, he placed it on the
trunk of his carrier elephant. The elephant, being an animal, could not
understand the value of the garland, and thus the elephant threw the
garland between its legs and smashed it. Seeing this insulting behavior,
Durvasa Muni immediately cursed Indra to be poverty-stricken, bereft of
all material opulence. Thus the demigods, afflicted on one side by the
fighting demons and on the other by the curse of Durvasa Muni, lost all
the material opulences in the three worlds.

To be extremely opulent in materialistic advancement is sometimes
very risky. The materially opulent person does not care about anyone,
and thus he commits offenses to great personalities, such as devotees and
great saints. This is the way of material opulence. As described by
Sukadeva Gosvami, dhana-durmadandha: too much wealth makes one
blind. This happens even to Indra in his heavenly kingdom, and what to
speak of others in this material world? When one is materially opulent,
he should learn to be sober and well-behaved toward Vaisnavas and
saintly persons; otherwise he will fall down.

TEXTS 17-18
निश्ाम्येतत्‌ सुरगणा महेन्द्रवरुणादयः |
° CN -
नाध्यगच्छन्स्वयं AAR AA विनिशितम्‌।।१७॥
७ (७: £
ततो बह्मसमां जग्धर्मेरोभूरभनि सर्वशः |
स्वं॑विनज्ञापयाश्वक्रुः प्रणताः परमेष्ठिने ॥१८॥
nisGmyaitat sura-gana 2
mahendra-varunadayah
nadhyagacchan svayarit mantrair
mantrayanto viniscitam
tato brahma-sabharm jagmur
meror mardhani sarvasah
sarvarh vijidpayam cakruh
pranatah paramesthine


--- Page 160 ---
Text 20] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 155
niSamya—hearing; etat—this incident; sura-gandh—all the
demigods; maha-indra—King Indra; varuna-adayah—Varuna and
other demigods; na—not; adhyagacchan—reached; svayam—per-
sonally;  mantraih—by deliberation;  mantrayantah—discussing;
viniscitam—a real conclusion; tatah—thereupon; brahma-sabham—to
the assembly of Lord Brahma; jagmuh—they went; meroh—of Sumeru
Mountain; mirdhani—on the top; sarvasah—all of them; sarvam—
everything; vijjiiapayam cakruh—they informed; pranatah—offered
obeisances; paramesthine—unto Lord Brahma.
TRANSLATION
Lord Indra, Varuna and the other demigods, seeing their lives in
such a state, consulted among themselves, but they could not find
any solution. Then all the demigods assembled and went together
to the peak of Sumeru Mountain. There, in the assembly of Lord
Brahma, they fell down to offer Lord Brahma their obeisances, and
then they informed him of all the incidents that had taken place.
TEXTS 19-20
स विलोक्येनद्रवायवादीय्‌ निःसच्वान्विगतप्रमान्‌।
लोकानपद्गटप्राणरसुराप्ययथा विथः nan
समादितेन मनसा संसखरन्पुरुषं परम्‌ |
उवाचोत्फुलबदनो देवान्स भगवान्परः ॥२०॥
sa vilokyendra-vayv-adin
nihsattvan vigata-prabhan
lokan amarigala-prayan
asuran ayatha vibhuh
samahitena manasa
samsmaran purusari param
uvacotphulla-vadano
devan sa bhagavan parah


--- Page 161 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5

sah —Lord Brahma; vilokya—looking over; indra-vayu-adin—all the
demigods, headed by Lord Indra and Vayu; nihsattvan—bereft of all
spiritual potency; vigata-prabhan—bereft of all effulgence; lokan—all
the three worlds; amangala-prayan—merged into misfortune;
asuran—all the demons; ayathah—flourishing; vibhuh—Lord Brahma,
the supreme within this material world; samahitena—by full adjust-
ment; manasd—of the mind; samsmaran—remembering again and
again; purusam—the Supreme Person; param —transcendental;
uvaca—said;  utphulla-vadanah—bright-faced; devan—unto the
demigods; sah—he; bhagavan—the most powerful; parah—of the
demigods.

TRANSLATION

Upon seeing that the demigods were bereft of all influence and
strength and that the three worlds were consequently devoid of
auspiciousness, and upon seeing that the demigods were in an
awkward position whereas all the demons were flourishing, Lord
Brahma, who is above all the demigods and who is most powerful,
concentrated his mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus being encouraged, he became bright-faced and spoke to the
demigods as follows.

PURPORT

After hearing from the demigods the real situation, Lord Brahma was
very much concerned because the demons were unnecessarily so power-
ful. When demons become powerful, the entire world is placed in an
awkward position because demons are simply interested in their own
sense gratification and not in the welfare of the world. Demigods or de-
votees, however, are concerned with the welfare of all living beings. Srila
Ripa Gosvami, for example, left his ministership and went to Vrndavana
for the benefit of the entire world (lokanar hita-karinau). This is the
nature of a saintly person or demigod. Even impersonalists think of the
welfare of all people. Thus Brahma was very much concerned at seeing
the demons in power.

TEXT 21
अदं भवो 0
मनुष्यतियग्ुमषर्मजातयः I


--- Page 162 ---
Text 22] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 157
यस्यावतारांशकसाविसर्जिता
~~ ५
व्रजाम सवं शरण तमव्ययम्‌ RU
ahariv bhavo yityam atho ’‘suradayo
manusya-tiryag-druma-gharma-jatayah
yasyavataramsa-kala-visarjita
vrajama sarve Saranar tam avyayam
aham—1I; bhavah—Lord Siva; yiyam —all of you demigods; atho—
as well as; asura-adayah—demons and others; manusya—the human
beings; tiryak—the animals; druma—the trees and plants; gharma-
Jjatayah—as well as the insects and germs born of perspiration; yasya—
of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead) ; avatara —of the purusa
incarnation; ar$a—of His part and parcel, the guna-avatara, Brahma;
kala—of Brahma’s sons; visarjitah—produced by the generation; vra-
jama —we shall go; sarve—all of us; Saranam—unto the shelter; tam —
unto the Supreme; avyayam—the inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: I, Lord Siva, all of you demigods, the
demons, the living entities born of perspiration, the living beings
born of eggs, the trees and plants sprouting from the earth, and
the living entities born from embryos—all come from the
Supreme Lord, from His incarnation of rajo-guna [Lord Brahma,
the guna-avatara] and from the great sages [rsis] who are part of
me. Let us therefore go to the Supreme Lord and take shelter of
His lotus feet.
PURPORT
Some creatures are born from embryos, some from perspiration, and
some from seeds. In this way, all living entities emanate from the guna-
avatara of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ultimately, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the shelter of all living entities.
TEXT 22
न यस्य वध्यो न च रक्षणीयो
नोपेश्चणीयाद्रणीयपश्चः |


--- Page 163 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
तथापि सग॑सितिसंयमाथं
धत्ते रजःसत्त्वतमांसि कारे RRA
na yasya vadhyo na ca raksaniyo
nopeksaniyadaraniya-paksah
tathapi sarga-sthiti-sarivyamartham
dhatte rajah-sattva-tamarisi kale
na—not; yasya—by whom (the Lord); vadhyah—anyone is to be
killed; na—nor; ca—also; raksaniyah—anyone is to be protected; na—
nor; upeksaniya—to be neglected; dadaraniya—to be worshiped;
paksah—part; tathapi—still; sarga—creation; sthiti—maintenance;
sarmyama—and annihilation; artham—for the sake of; dhatte—He ac-
cepts; rajah—passion; sattva—goodness; tamarisi—and ignorance;
kale—in due course of time.
TRANSLATION
For the Supreme Personality of Godhead there is no one to be
killed, no one to be protected, no one to be neglected and no one
to be worshiped. Nonetheless, for the sake of creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation according to time, He accepts different
forms as incarnations either in the mode of goodness, the mode of
passion or the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
This verse explains that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal
to everyone. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita
(9.29):
samo ham sarva-bhiitesu
na me dvesyo ’sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
“I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a
friend to him.” Although the Lord is impartial, He gives special attention
to His devotees. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.8):


--- Page 164 ---
Text 23] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 159
paritrandya sadhiinam
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
“To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to re-
establish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after
millennium.” The Lord has nothing to do with anyone’s protection or
destruction, but for the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this
material world He apparently has to act either in goodness, in passion or
in darkness. Actually, however, He is unaffected by these modes of ma-
terial nature. He is the Supreme Lord of everyone. As a king sometimes
punishes or rewards someone to maintain law and order, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, although having nothing to do with the activities
of this material world, sometimes appears as various incarnations accord-
ing to the time, place and object.
TEXT 23
अयं च तस्य स्थितिपालनक्षणः
सत्वं जुषाणस्य भवाय देहिनाम्‌ ।
तसाद व्रजामः शरण जगद्गुरु
खानां स नो धास्यति হা सुरप्रियः ॥२३॥
ayari ca tasya sthiti-palana-ksanah
sattvarh jusanasya bhavaya dehinam
tasmad vrajamah Saranar jagad-gururiu
svanari sa no dhasyati Sari sura-priyah
ayam—this period; ca—also; tasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sthiti-palana-ksanah—the time for maintenance, or for
establishing His rule; sattvarm —the mode of goodness; jusanasya—ac-
cepting (now, without waiting); bhavaya—for the increased develop-
ment or establishment; dehinam—of all living entities who accept ma-
terial bodies; tasmat—therefore; vrajamah—let us take; Saranam—
shelter; jagat-gurum—at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the universal teacher; svanam—His own persons;


--- Page 165 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
sah—He (the Supreme Personality 01 Godhead); nah—unto us;
dhasyati—will give; sam—the good fortune we need; sura-priyah—be-
cause He is naturally very dear to the devotees.

TRANSLATION

Now is the time to invoke the mode of goodness of the living en-
tities who have accepted material bodies. The mode of goodness is
meant to establish the Supreme Lord’s rule, which will maintain
the existence of the creation. Therefore, this is the opportune
moment to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Because He is naturally very kind and dear to the demigods, He
will certainly bestow good fortune upon us.

PURPORT

The material world is conducted by the three modes of nature, namely
sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. By rajo-guna everything
material is created, by sattva-guna everything material is maintained
properly, and by tamo-guna, when the creation is improperly situated,
everything is destroyed.

From this verse we can understand the situation of Kali-yuga, through
which we are now passing. Just before the beginning of Kali-yuga—or,
in other words, at the end of Dvapara-yuga—Lord Sri Krsna appeared
and left His instructions in the form of Bhagavad-gita, in which He
asked all living entities to surrender unto Him. Since the beginning of
Kali-yuga, however, people have practically been unable to surrender to
the lotus feet of Krsna, and therefore, after some five thousand years,
Krsna came again as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu just to teach the entire
world how to surrender unto Him, unto Sri Krsna, and thus be purified.

Surrendering unto the lotus feet of Krsna means achieving complete
purification. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (18.66):

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam 61007 Saranarm vraja

aha tvari sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah


--- Page 166 ---
Text 23] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 161
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” Thus as soon as one
surrenders unto the lotus feet of Krsna, one certainly becomes free from
all contamination. |

Kali-yuga is full of contamination. This is described in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (12.3.51):

kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
asti hy eko mahan gunah
kirtanad eva krsnasya
mukta-sangah param vrajet
This age of Kali is full of unlimited faults. Indeed, it is just like an ocean
of faults (dosa-nidhi). But there is one chance, one opportunity.
Kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param vrajet: simply by chanting
the Hare Krsna mantra, one can be freed from the contamination of
Kali-yuga and, in his original spiritual body, can return home, back to
Godhead. This is the opportunity of Kali-yuga.

When Krsna appeared, He gave His orders, and when Krsna Himself
appeared as a devotee, as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He showed us the
path by which to cross the ocean of Kali-yuga. That is the path of the
Hare Krsna movement. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared, He
ushered in the era for the sarikirtana movement. It is also said that for
ten thousand years this era will continue. This means that simply by ac-
cepting the sarikirtana movement and chanting the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra, the fallen souls of this Kali-yuga will be delivered. After the
Battle of Kuruksetra, at which Bhagavad-gita was spoken, Kali-yuga
continues for 432,000 years, of which only 5,000 years have passed.
Thus there is still a balance of 427,000 years to come. Of these 427,000
years, the 10,000 years of the sarikirtana movement inaugurated by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu 500 years ago provide the opportunity for the
fallen souls of Kali-yuga to take to the Krsna consciousness movement,
chant the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra and thus be delivered from the
clutches of material existence and return home, back to Godhead.

Chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is potent always, but it is
especially potent in this age of Kali. Therefore Sukadeva Gosvami, while


--- Page 167 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
instructing Maharaja Pariksit, stressed this chanting of the Hare Krsna
mantra.
kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
asti hy eko mahan gunah
kirtanad eva krsnasya
mukta-sangah pararh vrajet = \
“My dear King, although Kali-yuga is full of faults, there is still one
good quality about this age. It is that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra, one can become free from material bondage and be pro-
moted to the transcendental kingdom.” (Bhag. 12.3.51) Those who have
accepted the task of spreading the Hare Krsna maha-mantra in full
Krsna consciousness should take this opportunity to deliver people very
easily from the clutches of material existence. Our duty, therefore, is to
follow the instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and preach the Krsna
consciousness movement all over the world very sincerely. This is the
best welfare activity for the peace and prosperity of human society.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s movement consists of spreading krsna-
sankirtana. Param vijayate $ri-krsna-sarikirtanam: “All glories to the
Sri Krsna sarikirtana!” Why is it so glorious? This has also been ex-
plained by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Ceto-darpana-marjanam: by the
chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, one’s heart is cleansed. The
whole difficulty is that in this age of Kali there is no sattva-guna and no
clearance of the heart, and therefore people are making the mistake of
identifying with their bodies. Even the big philosophers and scientists
with whom we deal are practically all under the impression that they are
their bodies. The other day we were discussing a prominent philosopher,
Thomas Huxley, who was proud of being an Englishman. This means
that he was in the bodily conception of life. Everywhere we find this
same misunderstanding. As soon as one is in the bodily conception of
life, one is nothing but an animal like a cat or a dog (sa eva go-kharah).
Thus the most dangerous of the dirty things within our hearts is this
misidentification of the body as the self. Under the influence of this mis-
understanding, one thinks, “I am this body. I am an Englishman. I am an
Indian. I am an American. I am Hindu. I am Muslim.” This misconcep-
tion is the strongest impediment, and it must be removed. That is the in-
struction of Bhagavad-gita and of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Indeed,
Bhagavad-gita begins with this instruction:


--- Page 168 ---
Text 23] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 163
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumararn yauvanam jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati

‘As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13) Al-
though the soul is within the body, nevertheless, because of misunder-
standing and animal propensities one accepts the body as the self.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore says, ceto-darpana-marjanam. To
cleanse the core of the heart, which is full of misunderstanding, is possi-
ble only through sri-krsna-sarikirtana. The leaders of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement should very seriously take this opportunity to be
kind to the fallen souls by delivering them from the misunderstanding of
materialistic life.

One cannot be happy in any way within this material world. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (8.16):

abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino ’rjuna

“From the highest planet in this material world down to the lowest, all
are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place.”
Therefore, not to speak of going to the moon, even if one is promoted to
the highest planetary system, Brahmaloka, there cannot be any happi-
ness in this material world. If one actually wants happiness, one must go
to the spiritual world. The material world is characterized by a struggle
for existence, and survival of the fittest is a well-known principle, but
the poor souls of this material world do not know what is survival and
who is fit. Survival does not mean that one should die; survival means
that one should not die, but should enjoy an everlastingly blissful life of
knowledge. This is survival. The Krsna consciousness movement is
meant to make every person fit for survival. Indeed, it is meant to stop
the struggle for existence. The Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita
give definite directions on how to stop the struggle for existence and how
to survive in eternal life. The sarikirtana movement, therefore, is a great


--- Page 169 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
opportunity. Simply by hearing Bhagavad-gita and chanting the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra, one becomes completely purified. Thus the strug-
gle for existence ceases, and one goes back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 24
श्रीशुक उवाच
a
हत्यामापष्य सुरान्वेधाः सह देवैररिन्दम |
अजितस्य पदं साक्षाज्ञगाम तमसः परम्‌ ।२४॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
ity abhasya suran vedhah
saha devair arindama
ajitasya [00007 saksaj
Jagama tamasah param
sri-sukah wvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; abhasya—
talking; suran —unto the demigods; vedhah—Lord Brahma, who is the
head of this universe and who gives everyone good sense in Vedic knowl-
edge; saha—with; devaih—the demigods; arim-dama—O Maharaja
Pariksit, subduer of all kinds of enemies (such as the senses); ajitasya—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; padam—to the place; saksat—
directly; jagama—went; tamasah—the world of darkness; param—
transcendental to, beyond.
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, subduer of all enemies, after Lord Brahma
finished speaking to the demigods, he took them with him to the
abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which is beyond
this material world. The Lord’s abode is on an island called
Svetadvipa, which is situated in the ocean of milk.
PURPORT
Maharaja Pariksit is addressed here as arindama, ‘“‘subduer of all
enemies.” Not only do we have enemies outside of our bodies, but within


--- Page 170 ---
Text 24] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 165
our bodies there are many enemies, such as lusty desires, anger and
greed. Maharaja Pariksit is specifically addressed as arindama because in
his political life he was able to subdue all kinds of enemies, and even
though he was a young king, as soon as he heard that he was going to die
within seven days, he immediately left his kingdom. He did not follow
the dictates of enemies within his body, such as lust, greed and anger. He
was not at all angry with the muni’s son who had cursed him. Rather, he
accepted the curse and prepared for his death in the association of
Sukadeva Gosvami. Death is inevitable; no one can surpass the force of
death. Therefore Maharaja Pariksit, while fully alive, wanted to hear
Srimad-Bhagavatam. He is consequently addressed here as arindama.

Another word, sura-priya, is also significant. Although Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is equal toward everyone, He is es-
pecially inclined toward His devotees (ye bhajanti tu mar bhaktya mayi
te tesu capy aham). The devotees are all demigods. There are two kinds
of men within this world. One is called the deva, and the other is called
the asura. The Padma Purana states:

dvau bhita-sargau loke ’smin
daiva dsura eva ca
vispu-bhaktah smrto daiva
asuras tad-viparyayah

Anyone who is a devotee of Lord Krsna is called a deva, and others, even
though they may be devotees of demigods, are called asuras. Ravana, for
example, was a great devotee of Lord Siva, but he is described as an
asura. Similarly, Hiranyaka$ipu is described as a great devotee of Lord
Brahma, yet he was also an asura. Therefore, only the devotee of Lord
Visnu is called sura, not asura. Lord Krsna is very much pleased with
His devotees, even if they are not on the topmost stage of devotional ser-
vice. Even on the lower stages of devotional service one is transcenden-
tal, and if one continues with devotional life, he continues to be a deva or
sura. If one continues in this way, Krsna will always be pleased with him
and will give him all instructions so that he may very easily return home,
back to Godhead.


--- Page 171 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
Concerning ajitasya padam, the abode of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in the milk ocean of this material world, Srila Vi§vanatha
Cakravarti Thakura says: padam ksirodadhi-stha-svetadvipari tamasah
prakrteh param. The island known as Svetadvipa, which is in the ocean
of milk, is transcendental. It has nothing to do with this material world.
A city government may have a rest house where the governor and impor-
tant government officers stay. Such a rest house is not an ordinary house.
Similarly, although Svetadvipa, which is in the ocean of milk, is in this
material world, it is param padam, transcendental.
TEXT 25
EN
तत्रादृ्टखरूपाय AWE वै प्रयः ।
स्तुतिमनूत दैवीमिर्गीभिस्त्ववदितेन्द्रियः ॥२५॥
tatradrsta-svaripaya
Sruta-pirvaya vai prabhuh
stutim abrita daivibhir
girbhis tv avahitendriyah $
tatra—there (at the Lord’s abode known as Svetadvipa); adrsta-
svaripdya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was not seen
even by Lord Brahma; Sruta-pirvaya—but who was heard about from
the Vedas; vai—indeed; prabhuh—Lord Brahma; stutim—prayers
derived from Vedic literature; abriita—performed; daivibhih—by
prayers mentioned in the Vedic literature or offered by persons strictly
following Vedic principles; girbhih —by such sound vibrations or songs;
tu—then; avahita-indriyah—fixed in mind, without deviation.
TRANSLATION
There [at Svetadvipa], Lord Brahma offered prayers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though he had never seen
the Supreme Lord. Simply because Lord Brahma had heard about
the Supreme Personality of Godhead from Vedic literature, with a
fixed mind he offered the Lord prayers as written or approved by
Vedic literature.


--- Page 172 ---
Text 25] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 167
PURPORT

It is said that when Brahma and the other demigods go to see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in Svetadvipa, they cannot directly see
Him, but their prayers are heard by the Lord, and the needful action is
taken. This we have seen in many instances. The word $ruta-pirvaya is
significant. We get experience by directly seeing or by hearing. If it is not
possible to see someone directly, we can hear about him from authentic
sources. Sometimes people ask whether we can show them God. This is
ludicrous. It is not necessary for one to see God before he can accept God.
Our sensory perception is always incomplete. Therefore, even if we see
God, we may not be able to understand Him. When Krsna was on earth,
many, many people saw Him but could not understand that He is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Avajananti mam mudha manusim
tanum asritam. Even though the rascals and fools saw Krsna personally,
they could not understand that He is the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Even upon seeing God personally, one who is unfortunate cannot
understand Him. Therefore we have to hear about God, Krsna, from the
authentic Vedic literature and from persons who understand the Vedic
version properly. Even though Brahma had not seen the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead before, he was confident that the Lord was there in
Svetadvipa. Thus he took the opportunity to go there and offer prayers to
the Lord.

These prayers were not ordinary concocted prayers. Prayers must be
approved by Vedic literature, as indicated in this verse by the words
daivibhir girbhih. In our Krsna consciousness movement we do not allow
any song that has not been approved or sung by bona fide devotees. We
cannot allow cinema songs to be sung in the temple. We generally sing
two songs. One is $ri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda $ri-advaita
gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. This is bona fide. It is always
mentioned in the Caitanya-caritamrta, and it is accepted by the acaryas.
The other, of course, is the maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Raima, Hare Rima, Rima Rama, Hare
Hare. We may also sing the songs of Narottama dasa Thakura,
Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Locana dasa Thakura, but these two songs—
“sri-krsna-caitanya’ and the Hare Krsna maha-mantra—are sufficient
to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although we cannot see


--- Page 173 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
Him. Seeing the Lord is not as important as appreciating Him from the
authentic literature or the authentic statements of authorized persons.
TEXT 26
saga
अविक्रियं सत्यमनन्तमाद्यं
५ ९
NEHER निष्कलमव्रतक्यंम्‌ |
मनोऽग्रयानं वचसानिरुक्तं
नमामहे देववरं Iq IRE
$ri-brahmovaca
avikriyar satyam anantam adyam
guha-sayam niskalam apratarkyam
mano-'grayanam vacasaniruktari
namamahe deva-varar varenyam
sri-brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; avikriyam—unto the Per-
sonality of Godhead, who never changes (as opposed to material exis-
tence); satyam—the eternal supreme truth; anantam—unlimited;
adyam—the original cause of all causes; guha-Sayam—present in
everyone’s heart; niskalam—without any decrease in potency;
apratarkyam—inconceivable, not within the jurisdiction of material
arguments; manah-agrayanam—more quick than the mind, incon-
ceivable to mental speculation; vacasa—by jugglery of words; aniruk-
tam—indescribable; namamahe—all of us demigods offer our respect-
ful obeisances; deva-varam—unto the Supreme Lord, who is not
equalled or surpassed by anyone; varenyam —the supreme worshipable,
who is worshiped by the Gayatri mantra.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: O Supreme Lord, O changeless, unlimited
supreme truth. You are the origin of everything. Being all-
pervading, You are in everyone’s heart and also in the atom. You
have no material qualities. Indeed, You are inconceivable. The
mind cannot catch You by speculation, and words fail to describe


--- Page 174 ---
Text 26] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 169
You. You are the supreme master of everyone, and therefore You
are worshipable for everyone. We offer our respectful obeisances
unto You.
PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not anything of material cre-
ation. Everything material must change from one form to another —for
example, from earth to earthen pot and from earthen pot to earth again.
All our creations are temporary, impermanent. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead, however, is eternal, and similarly the living entities, who
are parts of Him, are also eternal (mamaivarmso Jiva-loke jiva-bhitah
sanatanah). The Supreme Personality of Godhead 15 sandatana, eternal,
and the individual living entities are also eternal. The difference is that
Krsna, or God, is the supreme eternal, whereas the individual souls are
minute, fragmental eternals. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (13.3),
ksetrajiiarin capi marin viddhi sarva-ksetresu bhdarata. Although the Lord
is a living being and the individual souls are living beings, the Supreme
Lord, unlike the individual souls, is vibhu, all-pervading, and ananta,
unlimited. The Lord is the cause of everything. The living entities are in-
numerable, but the Lord is one. No one is greater than Him, and no one
is equal to Him. Thus the Lord is the supreme worshipable object, as
understood from the Vedic mantras (na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca
drsyate). The Lord is supreme because no one can evaluate Him by men-
tal speculation or jugglery of words. The Lord can travel more quickly
than the mind. In the $ruti-mantras of Ifopanisad it is said:

anejad eka manaso javiyo
nainad deva apnuvan purvam arsat
tad dhavato ’nyan atyeti tisthat
tasminn apo matarisva dadhati

‘Although fixed in His abode, the Personality of Godhead 15 swifter than
the mind and can overcome all others running. The powerful demigods
cannot approach Him. Although in one place, He controls those who sup-
ply the air and rain. He surpasses all in excellence.” (Isopanisad 4) Thus
the Supreme is never to be equaled by the subordinate living entities.

Because the Lord is situated in everyone’s heart and the individual liv-
ing entity is not, never should the individual living entity be equated


--- Page 175 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
with the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gita (15.15) the Lord says,
sarvasya cahar hrdi sannivistah: “I am situated in everyone’s heart.”
This does not mean, however, that everyone is equal to the Lord. In the
Sruti-mantras it is also said, hrdi hy ayam atma pratisthitah. In the
beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam itis said, satyarin param dhimahi. The
Vedic mantras say, satyari jianam anantam and niskalari niskriyarn
santari niravadyam. God is supreme. Although naturally He does not do
anything, He is doing everything. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita:
maya tatam 1007 sarvari
Jjagad avyakta-mirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani

na caham tesv avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.” (Bg. 9.4)

mayadhyaksena prakrtih

siwyate sacaracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate

“This material nature, working under My direction, O son of Kunti, is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifesta-
tion is created and annihilated again and again.” (Bg. 9.10) Thus al-
though the Lord is silent in His abode, He is doing everything through
His different energies (pardsya saktir vividhaiva sriyate) .

All the Vedic mantras, or Sruti-mantras, are included in this verse
spoken by Lord Brahma, for Brahma and his followers, the Brahma-
sampradadya, understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead through
the parampara system. We have to gain understanding through the
words of our predecessors. There are twelve mahdjanas, or authorities,
of whom Brahma is one.

svayambhiir naradah sambhuh
kumarah kapilo manuh


--- Page 176 ---
Text 27] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 171
prahlado janako bhismo
balir vaiyasakir vayam
(Bhag. 6.3.20)
We belong to the disciplic succession of Brahma, and therefore we are
known as the Brahma-sampradaya. As the demigods follow Lord Brahma
to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we also have to
follow the authorities of the parampara system to understand the Lord.
TEXT 27
विपञ्चितं प्राणमनोधियात्मना-
-
मर्येन्द्रियाभासभनिद्रमव्रणम्‌ ।
छायातपौ यत्र॒ न गृध्रपक्षौ
तमक्षरं खं त्रियुगं चजामहे Rell
vipaicitari prana-mano-dhiyatmanam
arthendriyabhasam anidram avranam
chayatapau yatra na grdhra-paksau
tam aksaram khar tri-yugarii vrajamahe
vipascitam—unto the omniscient; prana—how the living force is
working; manah—how the mind is working; dhiya—how the intelli-
gence is working; atmanam—of all living entities; artha—the objects of
the senses; indriya—the senses; abhasam —knowledge; anidram—al-
ways awake and free from ignorance; avranam—without a material
body subject to pains and pleasures; chaya-atapau—the shelter for all
who are suffering from ignorance; yatra—wherein; na—not; grdhra-
paksau—partiality toward any living being; tam—unto Him; ak-
saram—infallible; kham —all-pervading like the sky; tri-yugam—ap-
pearing with six opulences in three yugas (Satya, Treta and Detar);
vrajamahe —I take shelter.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead directly and indirectly

knows how everything, including the living force, mind and


--- Page 177 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
intelligence, is working under His control. He is the illuminator of
everything and has no ignorance. He does not have a material body
subject to the reactions of previous activities, and He is free from
the ignorance of partiality and materialistic education. I therefore
take shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, who is eternal,
all-pervading and as great as the sky and who appears with six opu-
lences in three yugas [Satya, Treta and Dvapara).
PURPORT

In the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is described in this way: janmady asya yato ’'nvayad itaratas
carthesv abhijiiah. The Lord is the origin of all emanations, and He
directly and indirectly knows everything about all the activities within
His creation. Therefore the Lord is addressed here as vipascitam, one
who is full of all knowledge or who knows everything. The Lord is the
Supreme Soul, and He knows everything about the living entities and
their senses.

The word anidram, meaning ‘always awake and free from ig-
norance,” is very important in this verse. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(15.15), mattah smrtir jidnam apohanar ca: it is the Lord who gives in-
telligence to everyone and who causes everyone to forget. There are
millions and millions of living entities, and the Lord gives them direc-
tions. Therefore He has no time to sleep, and He is never in ignorance of
our activities. The Lord is the witness of everything; He sees what we are
doing at every moment. The Lord is not covered by a body resulting from
karma. Our bodies are formed as a result of our past deeds (karmana
daiva-netrena), but the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not have a
material body, and therefore He has no avidya, ignorance. He does not
sleep, but is always alert and awake.

The Supreme Lord is described as tri-yuga because although He ap-
peared variously in Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga and Dvapara-yuga, when He
appeared in Kali-yuga He never declared Himself the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.

krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadam


--- Page 178 ---
Text 28] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 173
The Lord appears in Kali-yuga as a devotee. Thus although He is Krsna,
He chants the Hare Krsna mantra like a devotee. Still, Srimad-
Bhagavatam (11.5.32) recommends:
yajiaih sarikirtana-prayair
yajanti hi sumedhasah
Sr1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whose complexion is not black like that of
Krsna but is golden (tvisakrsnam), is the Supreme Personality of God-
head. He is accompanied by associates like Nityananda, Advaita,
Gadadhara and Srivasa. Those who are sufficiently intelligent worship
this Supreme Personality of Godhead by performing sarikirtana-yajiia.
In this incarnation, the Supreme Lord declares Himself not to be the
Supreme Lord, and therefore He is known as Tri-yuga.
TEXT 28
अजस्य चक्रं त्वजयेयंमाणं
मनोमयं पञ्चदज्ञारमाञ् |
त्रिनाभि विद्युचरमष्टनेमि
+ प
REAL ASC A प्रपद्य ॥२८॥
ajasya cakram tv ajayeryamanarn
manomayarm paricadasaram asu
tri-nabhi vidyuc-calam asta-nemi
yad-aksam ahus tam rtam prapadye
ajasya—of the living being; cakram —the wheel (the cycle of birth
and death in this material world); tu—but; ajaya—Dby the external en-
ergy of the Supreme Lord; iryamanam—going around with great force;
manah-mayam—which is nothing but a mental creation depending
chiefly on the mind; paicadasa—fifteen; aram—possessing spokes;
asu—very quick; tri-nabhi—having three naves (the three modes of
material nature); vidyut—like electricity; calam—moving; asta-nemi—
made of eight fellies (the eight external energies of the Lord — bhamir
apo १210 vayuh, etc.); yat—who; aksam—the hub; @huh—they say;


--- Page 179 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
tam—unto Him; rtam—the fact; prapadye—let us offer our respectful
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
In the cycle of material activities, the material body resembles
the wheel of a mental chariot. The ten senses [five for working and
five for gathering knowledge] and the five life airs within the body
form the fifteen spokes of the chariot’s wheel. The three modes of
nature [goodness, passion and ignorance] are its center of ac-
tivities, and the eight ingredients of nature [earth, water, fire, air,
sky, mind, intelligence and false ego] comprise the rim of the
wheel. The external, material energy moves this wheel like electri-
cal energy. Thus the wheel revolves very quickly around its hub or
central support, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
Supersoul and the ultimate truth. We offer our respectful obei-
sances unto Him.
PURPORT
The cycle of repeated birth and death is figuratively described herein.
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.5):
apareyam itas tv anyari
prakrtim viddhi me param
Jwa-bhatarn maha-baho
yayedari dharyate jagat
The entire world is going on because the living entity, who is part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, is utilizing the material energy. Under the
clutches of the material energy, the jiwatma is revolving on the wheel of
birth and death under the direction of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. The central point is the Supersoul. As explained in Bhagavad-gita
(18.61):
Svarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhatani
yantraridhani mayaya


--- Page 180 ---
Text 29] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 175
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” The material body of the living
entity is a result of the conditioned soul’s activities, and because the sup-
porter is the Supersoul, the Supersoul is the true reality. Every one of us,
therefore, should offer respectful obeisances to this central reality. One
should not be misguided by the activities of this material world and
forget the central point, the Absolute Truth. That is the instruction given
here by Lord Brahma.
TEXT 29
य॒ एक्वणं तमसः परं त-
दलोकमव्यक्तमनन्तपारम्‌ |
८५
आसाश्चकारोपसुपणमेन-
पाते योगरथेन धीराः ॥२९॥
ya eka-varnari tamasah parari tad
alokam avyaktam ananta-param
asam cakaropasuparnam enam
upasate yoga-rathena dhirah
yah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; eka-varnam—ab-
solute, situated in pure goodness; tamasah—to the darkness of the ma-
terial world; param —transcendental; tat—that; alokam—who cannot
be seen; avyaktam—not manifested; ananta-param—unlimited,
beyond the measurement of material time and space; dsam cakara—
situated; upa-suparnam—on the back of Garuda; enam—Him;
upasate—worship; yoga-rathena—by the vehicle of mystic yoga;
dhirah—persons who are sober, undisturbed by material agitation.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in pure good-
ness [$uddha-sattva], and therefore He 15 eka-varna— the ornkara
[pranava]. Because the Lord is beyond the cosmic manifestation,
which is considered to be darkness, He is not visible to material


--- Page 181 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
eyes. Nonetheless, He is not separated from us by time or space,
but is present everywhere. Seated on His carrier, Garuda, He is
worshiped by means of mystical yogic power by those who have
achieved freedom from agitation. Let us all offer our respectful
obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT

Sattvarin visuddham vasudeva-sabditam (Bhag. 4.3.23). In this ma-
terial world, the three modes of material nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance—prevail. Among these three, goodness is the platform of
knowledge, and passion brings about a mixture of knowledge and ig-
norance, but the mode of ignorance is full of darkness. Therefore the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is beyond darkness and passion. He is
on the platform where goodness or knowledge is not disturbed by passion
and ignorance. This is called the vasudeva platform. It is on this platform
of vasudeva that Vasudeva, or Krsna, can appear. Thus Krsna appeared
on this planet as the son of Vasudeva. Because the Lord is situated
beyond the three modes of material nature, He is unseen by those who
are dominated by these three modes. One must therefore become dhira,
or undisturbed by the modes of material nature. The process of yoga may
be practiced by one who is free from the agitation of these modes.
Therefore yoga is defined in this way: yoga indriya-sariyamah. As pre-
viously explained, we are disturbed by the indriyas, or senses. Moreover,
we are agitated by the three modes of material nature, which are imposed
upon us by the external energy. In conditional life, the living entity
moves turbulently in the whirlpool of birth and death, but when one is
situated on the transcendental platform of visuddha-sattva, pure good-
ness, he can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who sits on the
back of Garuda. Lord Brahma offers his respectful obeisances unto that
Supreme Lord.

TEXT 30
न यस्य॒ कथ्चातितिततिं मायां
यया जनो द्यति वेद॒ नार्थम्‌ |
तं निर्जितात्मात्मगुणं परेशं
नमाम भूतेषु समं चरन्तम्‌ ।३०॥


--- Page 182 ---
Text 30] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 177
na yasya kascatititarti mayar
yaya jano muhyati veda nartham
tam nirjitatmatma-gunam paresam
namama bhiitesu 50772077 carantam

na—not; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
kasca—anyone; atititarti—is able to overcome; mayam—the illusory
energy; yaya—by whom (by the illusory energy); janah—people in
general; muhyati—become bewildered; veda—understand; na—not;
artham—the aim of life; tam —unto Him (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); nirjita—completely controlling; atma—the living entities;
atma-gunam—and His external energy; para-iSam—the Lord, who is
transcendentally situated; namama—we offer our respectful obeisances;
bhitesu—unto all living beings; samam—equally situated, or
equipoised; carantam—controlling or ruling them.

TRANSLATION

No one can overcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s il-
lusory energy [maya], which is so strong that it bewilders every-
one, making one lose the sense to understand the aim of life. That
same maya, however, is subdued by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who rules everyone and who is equally disposed toward
all living entities. Let us offer our obeisances unto Him.

PURPORT

The prowess of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, certainly
controls all living entities, so much so that the living entities have forgot-
ten the aim of life. Na te viduh svartha-gatirm hi vispum: the living en-
tities have forgotten that the aim of life is to go back home, back to God-
head. The external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives
all conditioned souls what appears to be an opportunity to be happy
within this material world, but that is maya; in other words, it is a dream
that is never to be fulfilled. Thus every living being is illusioned by the
external energy of the Supreme Lord. That illusory energy is
undoubtedly very strong, but she is fully under the control of the tran-
scendental person who is described in this verse as paresam, the tran-
scendental Lord. The Lord is not a part of the material creation, but is


--- Page 183 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
beyond the creation. Therefore, not only does He control the conditioned
souls through His external energy, but He also controls the external en-
ergy itself. Bhagavad-gita clearly says that the strong material energy
controls everyone and that getting out of her control is extremely dif-
ficult. That controlling energy belongs to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and works under His control. The living entities, however,
being subdued by the material energy, have forgotten the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
N . a
इमे वयं afemd तन्वा
सत्वेन ष्टा बहिरन्तराविः |
गतिं न apne विद्महे
कुतोऽसुराद्या इतरप्रधानाः 1321
ime vayam yat-priyayaiva tanva
sattvena srsta bahir-antar-avih
80487 na siksmam rsayas ca vidmahe
kuto ’suradya itara-pradhanah
ime —these; vayam —we (the demigods); yat—to whom; priyaya—
appearing very near and dear; eva—certainly; tanvda—the material
body; sattvena—by the mode of goodness; srstah—created; bahih-an-
tah-avih—although fully aware, internally and externally; gatim—
destination; na—not; siksmam—very subtle; rsayah—great saintly
persons; ca—also; vidmahe —understand; kutah—how; asura-adyah—
the demons and atheists; itara—who are insignificant in their identities;
pradhanah —although they are leaders of their own societies.
TRANSLATION
Since our bodies are made of sattva-guna, we, the demigods, are
internally and externally situated in goodness. All the great saints
are also situated in that way. Therefore, if even we cannot under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, what is to be said of
those who are most insignificant in their bodily constitutions,
being situated in the modes of passion and ignorance? How can


--- Page 184 ---
Text 32] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 179
they understand the Lord? Let us offer our respectful obeisances
unto Him.
PURPORT

Atheists and demons cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although He is situated within everyone. For them the Lord
finally appears in the form of death, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(mrtyuh sarva-haras ८2/02). Atheists think that they are independent,
and therefore they do not care about the supremacy of the Lord, yet the
Lord asserts His supremacy when He overcomes them as death. At the
time of death, their attempts to use their so-called scientific knowledge
and philosophical speculation to deny the supremacy of the Lord cannot
work. Hiranyakasipu, for example, was an exalted representative of the
atheistic class of men. He always challenged the existence of God, and
thus he became inimical even toward his own son. Everyone was afraid
of Hiranyaka$ipu’s atheistic principles. Nonetheless, when Lord
Nrsirhhadeva appeared in order to kill him, Hiranyakadipu’s atheistic
principles could not save him. Lord Nrsirmhadeva killed Hiranyakasipu
and took away all his power, influence and pride. Atheistic men,
however, never understand how everything they create is annihilated.
The Supersoul is situated within them, but because of the predominance
of the modes of passion and ignorance, they cannot understand the
supremacy of the Lord. Even the demigods, the devotees, who are tran-
scendentally situated or situated on the platform of goodness, are not
fully aware of the qualities and position of the Lord. How then can the
demons and atheists understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead ? It
is not possible. Therefore, to gain this understanding, the demigods,
headed by Lord Brahma, offered their respectful obeisances to the Lord.

TEXT 32
पादौ महीयं खछृतैव यस्य
चतुर्विधो यत्र॒ हि भूतसगैः।
स॒ वै महापूरुष आत्मतन्त्रः
प्रसीदतां बह्म महाविभूतिः ।।२२॥


--- Page 185 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
padau mahiyam sva-krtaiva yasya
catur-vidho yatra hi bhita-sargah
sa vai maha-pirusa atma-tantrah
[07058001027 brahma maha-vibhitih

padau—His lotus feet; mahi—the earth; iyam—this; sva-krta—cre-
ated by Himself; eva—indeed; yasya—of whom; catuh-vidhah—of
four kinds of living entities; yatra—wherein; hi—indeed; bhita-
sargah—material creation; sah—He; vai —indeed; maha-piarusah —the
Supreme Person; atma-tantrah—self-sufficient; prasidatam—may He
be merciful to us; brahma—the greatest; maha-vibhitih—with un-
limited potency. :

TRANSLATION

On this earth there are four kinds of living entities, who are all
created by Him. The material creation rests on His lotus feet. He is
the great Supreme Person, full of opulence and power. May He be
pleased with us.

PURPORT

The word mahi refers to the five material elements—earth, water, air,
fire and sky—which rest upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Mahat-padar punya-yaso murareh. The mahat-tattva, the
total material energy, rests on His lotus feet, for the cosmic manifestation
is but another opulence of the Lord. In this cosmic manifestation there
are four kinds of living entities— jarayu-ja (those born from embryos),
anda-ja (those born from eggs), sveda-ja (those born from perspiration),
and udbhij-ja (those born from seeds). Everything is generated from the
Lord, as confirmed in the Vedanta-sitra (janmady asya yatah). No one
is independent, but the Supreme Soul is completely independent. Jan-
mady asya yato ‘nvayad itaratas carthesv abhijiah sva-rat. The word
sva-rat means “independent.” We are dependent, whereas the Supreme
Lord is completely independent. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the
greatest of all. Even Lord Brahma, who created the cosmic manifestation,
is but another opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The ma-
terial creation is activated by the Lord, and therefore the Lord is not a
part of the material creation. The Lord exists in His original, spiritual


--- Page 186 ---
Text 33] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 181
position. The universal form of the Lord, vairaja-marti, is another
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 33
अम्भस्तु यद्रेत = उदारवीयं
सिष्यन्ति जीवन्त्युत वधेमानाः |
लोकायथोऽथाखिललोकपालाः
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः ॥३३॥
ambhas tu yad-reta udara-viryam
sidhyanti jivanty uta vardhamanah
loka yato ’thakhila-loka-palah
[07058001077 nah sa maha-vibhatih

ambhah —the masses of water seen on this planet or on others; tu—
but; yat-retah—His semen; udara-viryam—so powerful; sidhyanti—
are generated; jivanti—live; uta—indeed; vardhamanah—flourish;
lokah—all the three worlds; yatah—from which; atha—also; akhila-
loka-palah—all the demigods throughout the universe; prasidatam—
may be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-vibhitih—a person
with unlimited potency.

TRANSLATION

The entire cosmic manifestation has emerged from water, and it
is because of water that all living entities endure, live and develop.
This water is nothing hut the semen of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore, may the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who has such great potency, be pleased with us.

PURPORT

Despite the theories of so-called scientists, the vast quantities of water
on this planet and on other planets are not created by a mixture of hy-
drogen and oxygen. Rather, the water is sometimes explained to be the
perspiration and sometimes the semen of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is from water that all living entities emerge, and because of


--- Page 187 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
water they live and grow. If there were no water, all life would cease.
Water is the source of life for everyone. Therefore, by the grace of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we have so much water all over the
world.
। TEXT 34
सोमं मनो यस्य॒ समामनन्ति
दिवौकसां यो बलमन्ध आयुः |
ईशो नगानां प्रजनः प्रजानां
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः ॥३४॥
somari mano yasya samamananti
divaukasari yo balam andha ayuh
76० naganam prajanah prajanarm
[07058001271 nah sa maha-vibhitih
somam—the moon; manah—the mind; yasya—of whom (of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); samamananti—they say;
divaukasam —of the denizens of the upper planetary systems; yah—
who; balam—the strength; andhah—the food grains; ayuh—the dura-
tion of life; iSah —the Supreme Lord; naganam—of the trees; prajanah
—the source of breeding; prajanam—of all living entities;
prasidatam—may He be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead; maha-vibhitih—the source of all opulences.
"TRANSLATION
Soma, the moon, is the source of food grains, strength and
longevity for all the demigods. He is also the master of all vegeta-
tion and the source of generation for all living entities. As stated
by learned scholars, the moon is the mind of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the source of all opulences, be pleased with us.
PURPORT
Soma, the predominating deity of the moon, is the source of food
grains and therefore the source of strength even for the celestial beings,


--- Page 188 ---
Text 35] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 183
the demigods. He is the vital force for all vegetation. Unfortunately,
modern so-called scientists, who do not fully understand the moon, de-
scribe the moon as being full of deserts. Since the moon is the source for
our vegetation, how can the moon be a desert? The moonshine is the
vital force for all vegetation, and therefore we cannot possibly accept that
the moon is a desert.
TEXT 35
fide यस्य तु जातवेदा
जातः क्रियाकाण्डनिमित्तजन्मा |
अन्तःसथरद्रेऽनुपचन्सखथातून्‌
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः ॥३५॥
agnir mukharn yasya tu jata-veda
jatah kriya-kanda-nimitta-janma
antah-samudre ’nupacan sva-dhatin
[07050010772 nah sa maha-vibhitih

agnih—fire; mukham—the mouth through which the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead eats; yasya—of whom; tu—but; jata-vedah—the
producer of wealth or of all necessities of life; jatah —produced; kriya-
kanda —ritualistic ceremonies; nimitta—for the sake of; janma—
formed for this reason; antah-samudre —within the depths of the ocean;
anupacan—always digesting; sva-dhatin—all elements; prasidatam—
may be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-vibhitih—the
supremely powerful.

TRANSLATION

Fire, which is born for the sake of accepting oblations in
ritualistic ceremonies, is the mouth of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Fire exists within the depths of the ocean to produce
wealth, and fire is also present in the abdomen to digest food and
produce various secretions for the maintenance of the body. May
that supremely powerful Personality of Godhead be pleased with
us.


--- Page 189 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
TEXT 36
>. .
यच्चषुरासीत्‌ तरणिदेवयानं
त्रयीमयो ब्रह्मण एष धिष्ण्यम्‌ |
दवारं च goad च सत्यु
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः NEN
yac-caksur asit taranir deva-yanari
trayimayo brahmana esa dhisnyam
dvaram ca mukter amrtam ca mrtyuh
prasidatar nah sa maha-vibhitih
yat—that which; caksuh—eye; asit—became; taranih—the sun-god;
deva-yanam—the predominating deity for the path of deliverance for
the demigods; trayi-mayah—for the sake of guidance in karma-kanda
Vedic knowledge; brahmanah—of the supreme truth; esah—this;
dhisnyam—the place for realization; dvaram ca—as well as the gate-
way; mukteh—for liberation; amrtam—the path of eternal life; ca—as
well as; mrtyuh—the cause of death; prasidatam—may He be pleased;
nah—upon us; sah—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; maha-
vibhiatih—the all-powerful.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god marks the path of liberation, which is called
arciradi-vartma. He is the chief source for understanding of the
Vedas, he is the abode where the Absolute Truth can be worshiped,
He is the gateway to liberation, and he is the source of eternal life
as well as the cause of death. The sun-god is the eye of the Lord.
May that Supreme Lord, who is supremely opulent, be pleased
with us.
PURPORT
The sun-god is considered to be the chief of the demigods. He is also
considered to be the demigod who watches the northern side of the uni-
verse. He gives help for understanding the Vedas. As confirmed in
Brahma-sanhita (5.52):


--- Page 190 ---
Text 37] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 185
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanarm
raja samasta-sura-miirtir asesa-tejah
yasyajiiaya bhramati sarmbhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusari tam aha bhajami
“The sun, full of infinite effulgence, is the king of all the planets and the
image of the good soul. The sun is like the eye of the Supreme Lord. I
adore the primeval Lord Govinda, in pursuance of whose order the sun
performs his journey, mounting the wheel of time.” The sun is actually
the eye of the Lord. In the Vedic mantras it is said that unless the
Supreme Personality of Godhead sees, no one can see. Unless there is
sunlight, no living entity on any planet can see. Therefore the sun is con-
sidered to be the eye of the Supreme Lord. That is confirmed here by the
words yac-caksur asit and in the Brahma-sarihita by the words yac-cak-
sur esa savita. The word savita means the sun-god.
TEXT 37
प्राणादमूद्‌ यस्थ चराचराणां
प्राणः सहो बरमोजशच वायुः |
अन्वास सम्राजमिवानुगा वयं
प्रसीदतां नः स॒ महाविभूतिः ।३७॥
pranad abhid yasya caracaranam
pranah saho balam ojas ca vayuh
anvasma samrajam ivanuga vaya
prasidatar nah sa maha-vibhitih
pranat—from the vital force; abhiit—generated; yasya—of whom;
cara-acaranam—of all living entities, moving and nonmoving;
pranah—the vital force; sahah—the basic principle of life; balam—
strength; ojah—the vital force; ca—and; vayuh—the air; anvasma—
follow; samrajam—an emperor; iva—like; anugah—followers;
vayam—all of us; prasidatam—may be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—
He; maha-vibhatih—the supremely powerful.


--- Page 191 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatamn [Canto 8, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
All living entities, moving and nonmoving, receive their vital
force, their bodily strength and their very lives from the air. All of
us follow the air for our vital force, exactly as servants follow an
emperor. The vital force of air is generated from the original vital
force of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. May that Supreme
Lord be pleased with us.
TEXT 38
श्रोत्राद्‌ হ্যা यस्य हृदश्च खानि
प्रजज्ञिरे खं पुरुषस्य नाभ्याः |
्राणेन्द्रियात्मासुञ्लरीरकेतः
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः ॥३८॥
ॐ०॥कव्‌ diso yasya hrdas ca khani
prajajitire khari purusasya nabhyah
pranendriyatmasu-sarira-ketah
prasidatam nah sa maha-vibhitih
srotrat—from the ears; disSah—different directions; yasya—of
whom; hrdah—from the heart; ca—also; khani—the holes of the body;
prajajiiire—generated; kham—the sky; purusasya—of the Supreme
Person; nabhyah—from the navel; prana—of the life force; indriya—
senses; atma—mind; asu—vital force; sarira—and body; ketah—the
shelter; prasidatam—may be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-
vibhitih—the supremely powerful.
TRANSLATION
May the supremely powerful Personality of Godhead be pleased
with us. The different directions are generated from His ears, the
holes of the body come from His heart, and the vital force, the
senses, the mind, the air within the body, and the ether, which is
the shelter of the body, come from His navel.


--- Page 192 ---
Text 40] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 187
TEXT 39
TERRA: भ्रसादा-
faa धिषणाद्‌ भिरिश्चः।
खेभ्यस्तु छन्दास्युषयो मेदूतः कः
प्रसीदतां नः स॒ महारिभूतिः ॥३९॥
balan mahendras tri-dasah prasadan
manyor giriso dhisanad virificah
khebhyas tu chandarisy rsayo medhratah kah
[07058001078 nah sa maha-vibhitih
balat—by His strength; maha-indrah—King Indra became possible;
tri-dasah—as well as the demigods; prasadat—by satisfaction;
manyoh—by anger; giri-iSah—Lord Siva; dhisanat—from sober intelli-
gence; virificah—Lord Brahma; khebhyah —from the bodily holes; tu—
as well as; chandarisi—Vedic mantras; rsayah—great saintly persons;
medhratah—from the genitals; kah—the prajapatis; prasidatam—may
be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-vibhitih—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who has extraordinary power.
TRANSLATION
Mahendra, the King of Heaven, was generated from the prowess
of the Lord, the demigods were generated from the mercy of the
Lord, Lord Siva was generated from the anger of the Lord, and
Lord Brahma from His sober intelligence. The Vedic mantras were
generated from the bodily holes of the Lord, and the great saints
and prajapatis were generated from His genitals. May that
supremely powerful Lord be pleased with us.
TEXT 40
¢.
श्रीवेक्षसः पितरश्छाययासन्‌
धमः स्तनादितरः पृष्ठतोऽभूत्‌ |


--- Page 193 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
6 =
আমন शीर्ष्णोऽप्सरसो विहारात्‌
प्रसीदतां न: स महाविभूतिः ॥४०॥
ङ vaksasah pitaras chayayasan
dharmah stanad itarah prsthato ’bhut
dyaur yasya Sirsno ’psaraso viharat
prasidatari nah sa maha-vibhitih
srih—the goddess of fortune; vaksasah—from His chest; pitarah—
the inhabitants of Pitrloka; chayaya—from His shadow; asan —became
possible; dharmah —the principle of religion; stanat—from His bosom;
itarah—irreligion (the opposite of dharma); prsthatah—from the back;
abhit—became possible; dyauh—the heavenly planets; yasya—of
whom; Sirsnah—from the top of the head; apsarasah—the inhabitants
of Apsaroloka; viharat—by His sense enjoyment; prasidatam—kindly
be pleased; nah —upon us; sah—He (the Supreme Personality of God-
head); maha-vibhitih —the greatest in all prowess.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune was generated from His chest, the in-
habitants of Pitrloka from His shadow, religion from His bosom,
and irreligion [the opposite of religion] from His back. The
heavenly planets were generated from the top of His head, and the
Apsaras from His sense enjoyment. May that supremely powerful
Personality of Godhead be pleased with us.
TEXT 41
विभ्रो gag সন্ধা च aw gd
राजन्य आसीद्‌ श्चजयोवंलं च ।
ऊर्बोरिंडोजोऽङूधिरवेद श्रौ
प्रसीदतां नः स॒ महाविभूतिः nen
vipro mukhad brahma ca yasya guhyam
rajanya asid bhujayor 01077 ca
arvor vid ojo ’righrir aveda-sudrau
prasidatarn nah sa maha-vibhitih )


--- Page 194 ---
Text 42] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 189
viprah—the brahmanas; mukhat—from His mouth; brahma—the
Vedic literatures; ca—also; yasya—of whom; guhyam —from His confi-
dential knowledge; rajanyah—the ksatriyas; asit—became possible;
bhujayoh—from His arms; balam ca —as well as bodily strength; irvoh-
—from the thighs; vit—wvaiSyas; ojah—and their expert productive
knowledge; arighrih—from His feet; aveda—those who are beyond the
jurisdiction of Vedic knowledge; Sidrau—the worker class;
prasidatam—may be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-
vibhitih—the supremely powerful Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas and Vedic knowledge come from the mouth of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ksatriyas and bodily
strength come from His arms, the vaiSyas and their expert knowl-
edge in productivity and wealth come from His thighs, and the
sudras, who are outside of Vedic knowledge, come from His feet.
May that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full in prowess,
be pleased with us.
TEXT 42
(५
लोमोऽधरात्‌ श्रीतिरुपयं भूद्‌ gfa-
dm: पशव्यः स्पर्शेन कामः |
भ्रुवोर्यमः पक्ष्ममवस्तु कालः
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः ॥४२॥
lobho ’dharat pritir upary abhad dyutir
nastah pasavyah sparsena kamah
bhruvor yamah paksma-bhavas tu kalah
prasidatam nah sa maha-vibhuatih
lobhah—greed; adharat—from the lower lip; pritih—affection;
upari—from the upper lip; abhit—became possible; dyutih—bodily
luster; nastah—from the nose; pasavyah—ft for the animals; sparsena-
—by the touch; kamah—lusty desires; bhruvoh—from the eyebrows;
yamah—Yamardja became possible; paksma-bhavah—from the
eyelashes; tu—but; kalah—eternal time, which brings death;


--- Page 195 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
prasidatam—Dbe pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-vibhitih—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has great prowess.
TRANSLATION
Greed is generated from His lower lip, affection from His upper
lip, bodily luster from His nose, animalistic lusty desires from His
sense of touch, Yamaraja from His eyebrows, and eternal time
from His eyelashes. May that Supreme Lord be pleased with us.
TEXT 43
= वयः কম गुणान्विशेषं
यद्योगमायाविहितान्वदन्ति ।
यद्‌ दुर्विभाव्यं प्रबुधापबाधं
प्रसीदतां नः स महाविभूतिः nei
dravyam vayah karma gunan 075९5८7
yad-yogamaya-vihitan vadanti
yad durvibhavyari prabudhapabadhari
prasidatariv nah sa maha-vibhatih
dravyam—the five elements of the material world; vayah—time;
karma —fruitive activities; gunan—the three modes of material nature;
visesam —the varieties caused by combinations of the twenty-three ele-
ments; yat—that which; yoga-maya—by the Lord’s creative potency;
vihitan—all done; vadanti—all learned men say; yat durvibhavyam—
which is actually extremely difficult to understand; prabudha-
apabadham—rejected by the learned, by those who are fully aware;
prasidatam—may be pleased; nah—upon us; sah—He; maha-
vibhitih—the controller of everything.
TRANSLATION
All learned men say that the five elements, eternal time, fruitive
activity, the three modes of material nature, and the varieties pro-
duced by these modes are all creations of yogamiya. This material
world is therefore extremely difficult to understand, but those


--- Page 196 ---
Text 43] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 191
who are highly learned have rejected it. May the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is the controller of everything, be
pleased with us.
PURPORT

The word durvibhavyam is very important in this verse. No one can
understand how everything is happening in this material world by the
arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead through His ma-
terial energies. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), mayadhyaksena
prakrtih sityate sacaracaram: everything is actually happening under
the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This much we can
learn, but how it is happening is extremely difficult to understand. We
cannot even understand how the affairs within our body are
systematically taking place. The body is a small universe, and since we
cannot understand how things are happening in this small universe, how
can we understand the affairs of the bigger universe? Actually this uni-
verse is very difficult to understand, yet learned sages have advised, as
Krsna has also advised, that this material world is duhkhalayam
asasvatam; in other words, it is a place of misery and temporality. One
must give up this world and go back home, back to the Personality of
Godhead. Materialists may argue, “If this material world and its affairs
are impossible to understand, how can we reject 1127" The answer is pro-
vided by the word prabudhapabadham. We have to reject this material
world because it is rejected by those who are learned in Vedic wisdom.
Even though we cannot understand what this material world is, we
should be ready to reject it in accordance with the advice of learned per-

sons, especially the advice of Krsna. Krsna says:

mam upetya punar janma

duhkhalayam asasvatam

napnuvanti mahatmanah
samsiddhirih paramari gatah

“After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they
have attained the highest perfection.” (Bg. 8.15) One has to return
home, back to Godhead, for this is the highest perfection of life. To go


--- Page 197 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
back to Godhead means to reject this material world. Although we cannot
understand the functions of this material world and whether it is good
for us or bad for us, in accordance with the advice of the supreme au-
thority we must reject it and go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 44
नमोऽस्तु तसा उपशान्तशक्तये
खाराज्यलामगप्रतिपूरितात्मने ।
=
गुणेषु _ मायारचितेषु व्तिभि-
नै सज्ञमानाय नमखदूतये ।४४॥
namo ‘stu tasma upasanta-saktaye
svarajya-labha-pratipiritatmane
gunesu maya-racitesu vrttibhir
na sajjamandya nabhasvad-itaye
namah—our respectful obeisances; astu—Ilet there be; tasmai—unto
Him; upasanta-saktaye—who does not endeavor to achieve anything
else, who is free from restlessness; svarajya—completely independent;
labha—of all gains; pratipirita—fully achieved; atmane—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; gunesu—of the material world, which
is moving because of the three modes of nature; maya-racitesu—things
created by the external energy; vritibhih—by such activities of the
senses; na sajjamandaya—one who does not become attached, or one who
is above material pains and pleasures; nabhasvat—the air; @taye—unto
the Lord, who has created this material world as His pastime.
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is completely silent, free from endeavor,
and completely satisfied by His own achievements. He is not at-
tached to the activities of the material world through His senses.
Indeed, in performing His pastimes in this material world, He is
just like the unattached air.


--- Page 198 ---
Text 45] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 193
PURPORT

We can simply understand that behind the activities of material nature
is the Supreme Lord, by whose indications everything takes place, al-
though we cannot see Him. Even without seeing Him, we should offer
Him our respectful obeisances. We should know that He is complete.
Everything is done systematically by His energies (parasya saktir
vividhaiva srizyate), and therefore He has nothing to do (na tasya
karyar karanam ca vidyate). As indicated here by the word upasanta-
Saktaye, His different energies act, but although He sets these energies in
action, He Himself has nothing to do. He is not attached to anything, for
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, let us offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto Him.

TEXT 45
सत्वं नो दुशच॑यात्मानमसत्करणगोचरम्‌ |
प्रपन्नानां ego ससितं ते garg ।४५॥
sa tvar no darsayatmanam
asmat-karana-gocaram
prapannanam didrksindm
sasmitari te mukhambujam

sah—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); tvam—You are my
Lord; nah—to us; darsaya—be visible; atmanam—in Your original
form; asmat-karana-gocaram—appreciable by our direct senses, es-
pecially by our eyes; prapannanam—we are all surrendered unto You;
didrksinam—yet we wish to see You; sasmitam—smiling; te— Your;
mukha-ambujam —lotuslike face.

TRANSLATION

O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we are surrendered unto
You, yet we wish to see You. Please make Your original form and
smiling lotus face visible to our eyes and appreciable to our other
senses.


--- Page 199 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatamn [Canto 8, Ch. 5
PURPORT
The devotees are always eager to see the Supreme Personality of God-
head in His original form, with His smiling lotuslike face. They are not
interested in experiencing the impersonal form. The Lord has both im-
personal and personal features. The impersonalists have no idea of the
personal feature of the Lord, but Lord Brahma and the members of his
disciplic succession want to see the Lord in His personal form. Without a
personal form there can be no question of a smiling face, which is clearly
indicated here by the words sasmitam te mukhambujam. Those who are
in the Vaisnava sampradaya of Brahma always want to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. They are eager to realize the Lord’s personal
feature, not the impersonal feature. As clearly stated here, asmat-
karana-gocaram: the personal feature of the Lord can be directly per-
ceived by our senses.
TEXT 46
तैस्तैः स्वेच्छाभूतै ডঃ काठे কান্ঠ खयं विमो |
क्म दुर्विषहं यन्नो भगवांस्तत्‌ करोति हि ।४६॥
tais taih sveccha-bhitai ripaih
kale kale svayarn vibho
karma durvisaham yan no
bhagavaris tat karoti hi
taih—by such appearances; taih—by such incarnations; sva-iccha-
bhitaih —all appearing by Your personal sweet will; ripaih—Dby factual
forms; kale kale—in different millenniums; svayam—personally;
vibho—O Supreme; karma—activities; durvisaham—uncommon (un-
able to be enacted by anyone else); yat—that which; nak—unto us;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat—that; karoti—
executes; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, by Your sweet will
You appear in various incarnations, millennium after millennium,
and act wonderfully, performing uncommon activities that would
be impossible for us.


--- Page 200 ---
Text 47] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 195
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanarin srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion —at that time I
descend Myself.” Thus it is not imagination but a fact that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by His sweet will, appears in different incarna-
tions, such 85 Matsya, Karma, Varaha, Nrsimmha, Vamana, Parasurama,
Ramacandra, Balarama, Buddha and many other forms. Devotees are al-
ways eager to see one of the Lord’s innumerable forms. It is said that just
as no one can count how many waves there are in the sea, no one can
count the forms of the Lord. This does not mean, however, that anyone
can claim to be a form of the Lord and be acceptable as an incarnation.
The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead must be ac-
cepted in terms of the descriptions found in the $astras. Lord Brahma 15
eager to see the incarnation of the Lord, or the original source of all in-
carnations; he is not eager to see an imposter. The incarnation’s activities
are proof of His identity. All the incarnations described in the $astras act
wonderfully (kesava dhrta-mina-sarira jaya jagadisa hare). It is only by
the personal sweet will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that He
appears and disappears, and only fortunate devotees can expect to see
Him face to face.
TEXT 47
्ेशमूर्यल्यसाराणि कर्माणि विफलानि वा |
देहिनां विषयार्तानां न तथेवार्पितं त्वयि ॥४७॥
klesa-bhiiry-alpa-sarani
karmani viphalani va
dehinar visayartanari
na tathaivarpitari tvayi
klesa—hardship; bhitri—very much; alpa—very little; sarani—good
result; karmani—activities;  viphalani—frustration; va—either;


--- Page 201 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
dehinam —of persons; visaya-artanam—who are eager to enjoy the ma-
terial world; na—not; tathaG—like that; eva—indeed; arpitarm—dedi-
cated; tvayi—unto Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION

Karmis are always anxious to accumulate wealth for their sense
gratification, but for that purpose they must work very hard. Yet
even though they work hard, the results are not satisfying. Indeed,
sometimes their work results only in frustration. But devotees
who have dedicated their lives to the service of the Lord can
achieve substantial results without working very hard. These
results exceed the devotee’s expectations.

PURPORT

We can practically see how the devotees who have dedicated their lives
for the service of the Lord in the Krsna consciousness movement are get-
ting immense opportunities for the service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead without working very hard. The Krsna consciousness move-
ment actually started with only forty rupees, but now it has more than
forty crores worth of property, and all this opulence has been achieved
within eight or ten years. No karmi can expect to improve his business so
swiftly, and besides that, whatever a karmi acquires is temporary and
sometimes frustrating. In Krsna consciousness, however, everything is
encouraging and improving. The Krsna consciousness movement is not
very popular with the karmis because this movement recommends that
one refrain from illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication.
These are restrictions that karmis very much dislike. Nonetheless, in the
presence of so many enemies, this movement is progressing, going for-
ward without impediments. If the devotees continue to spread this move-
ment, dedicating life and soul to the lotus feet of Krsna, no one will be
able to check it. The movement will go forward without limits. Chant
Hare Krsna!

TEXT 48
नावमः कर्मकल्पोऽपि विफलायेश्वरापिंतः |
कर्पते पुरुषस्यैष स ह्यात्मा दयितो हितः wen


--- Page 202 ---
Text 48] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 197
navamah karma-kalpo ‘pi
viphalayesvararpitah
kalpate purusasyaiva
sa hy atma dayito hitah

na—not; avamah—very little, or insignificant; karma—activities;
kalpah —rightly executed; api—even; viphaldya—go in vain; @vara-
arpitah—because of being dedicated to the Supreme Personality of God-
head; kalpate—it is so accepted; purusasya—of all persons; eva—in-
deed; sah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hi —certainly; atma—
the Supersoul, the supreme father; dayitah—extremely dear; hitah—
beneficial.

TRANSLATION

Activities dedicated to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
even if performed in small measure, never go in vain. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, being the supreme father, is
naturally very dear and always ready to act for the good of the liv-
ing entities.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (2.40), the Lord says svalpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat: this dharma, devotional service, is so important
that even if performed to a very small, almost negligible extent, it can
give one the supreme result. There are many instances in the history of
the world in which even a slight service rendered to the Lord has saved a
living entity from the greatest danger. Ajamila, for example, was saved
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the greatest danger, that of
going to hell. He was saved simply because he chanted the name
Narayana at the end of his life. When Ajamila chanted this holy name of
the Lord, Narayana, he did not chant knowingly; actually he was calling
his youngest son, whose name was Narayana. Nonetheless, Lord
Narayana took this chanting seriously, and thus Ajamila achieved the
result of ante narayana-smrtih, remembering Narayana at the end of
life. If one somehow or other remembers the holy name of Narayana,
Krsna or Rama at the end of life, he immediately achieves the transcen-
dental result of going back home, back to Godhead.


--- Page 203 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the only object of our
love. As long as we are in this material world we have so many desires to
fulfill, but when we come in touch with the Supreme Personality of God-
head, we immediately become perfect and fully satisfied, just as a child is
fully satisfied when he comes to the lap of his mother. Dhruva Maharaja
went to the forest to achieve some material result by austerity and
penance, but when he actually saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead
he said, “I do not want any material benediction. I am completely
satisfied.” Even if one wants some material benefit from serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, this can be achieved extremely easily,
without hard labor. Therefore the sastra recommends:
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusar param
“Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the
existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving
service.” (Bhag. 2.3.10) Even if one has material desires, one can un-
doubtedly achieve what he wants by rendering service to the Lord.
TEXT 49
3 ©
यथा हि स्कन्धशाखानां तरोमुलावसेचनम्‌ |
एवमाराधनं विष्णोः सर्वेषामात्मनश्च हि ॥४९॥
yatha hi skandha-sakhanar
taror miilavasecanam
evam aradhanar visnoh
sarvesam atmanas ca hi
yatha—as; hi—indeed; skandha—of the trunk; sakhanam—and of
the branches; taroh—of a tree; miila—the root; avasecanam—water-
ing; evam—in this way; aradhanam—worship; visnoh—of Lord Visnu;
sarvesam—of everyone; atmanah—of the Supersoul; ca—also; hi—in-
deed.


--- Page 204 ---
Text 49] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 199
TRANSLATION

When one pours water on the root of a tree, the trunk and
branches of the tree are automatically pleased. Similarly, when one
becomes a devotee of Lord Visnu, everyone is served, for the Lord
is the Supersoul of everyone.

PURPORT
As stated in the Padma Purana:
aradhananari sarvesarm
visnor aradhanari param
tasmat parataram devi
tadiyanarh samarcanam
“Of all types of worship, worship of Lord Visnu is best, and better than
the worship of Lord Visnu is the worship of His devotee, the Vaisnava.”
There are many demigods worshiped by people who are attached to ma-
terial desires (kamais tais tair hrta-jianah prapadyante ‘nya-devatah).
Because people are embarrassed by so many material desires, they wor-
ship Lord Siva, Lord Brahma, the goddess Kali, Durga, Ganesa and Sarya
to achieve different results. However, one can achieve all these results
simultaneously just by worshiping Lord Visnu. As stated elsewhere in
the Bhagavatam (4.31.14):
yatha taror mila-nisecanena
trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopasakhah
pranopaharac ca yathendriyanar
tathaiva sarvarhanam acyutejya

“Just by pouring water on the root of a tree, one nourishes its trunk and
all of its branches, fruits and flowers, and just by supplying food to the
stomach, one satisfies all the limbs of the body. Similarly, by worshiping
Lord Visnu one can satisfy everyone.” Krsna consciousness is not a sec-
tarian religious movement. Rather, it is meant for all-embracing welfare
activities for the world. One can enter this movement without dis-
crimination in terms of caste, creed, religion or nationality. If one is
trained to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, who is


--- Page 205 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 5
the origin of visnu-tattva, one can become fully satisfied and perfect in
all respects.
TEXT 50
नमस्तुभ्यमनन्ताय दुविंतकर्यात्मकर्मणे |
निगणाय गुणेज्ाय EET च साम्प्रतम्‌ ।॥५०॥
namas tubhyam anantaya
durvitarkyatma-karmane
nirgundya gunesaya
sattva-sthaya ca sampratam
namah—all obeisances; tubhyam—unto You, my Lord; anantaya—
who are everlasting, transcending the three phases of time (past, present
and future); durvitarkya-atma-karmane —unto You, who perform in-
conceivable activities; nirgundya—which are all transcendental, free
from the inebriety of material qualities; guna-iSadya—unto You, who
control the three modes of material nature; sattva-sthaya—who are in
favor of the material quality of goodness; ca—also; sampratam—at pre-
sent.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, all obeisances unto You, who are eternal, beyond
time’s limits of past, present and future. You are inconceivable in
Your activities, You are the master of the three modes of material
nature, and, being transcendental to all material qualities, You are
free from material contamination. You are the controller of all
three of the modes of nature, but at the present You are in favor of
the quality of goodness. Let us offer our respectful obeisances
unto You.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls the material activities
manifested by the three modes of material nature. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, nirgunar guna-bhoktr ca: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is always transcendental to the material qualities (sattva-guna,
rajo-guna and tamo-guna), but nonetheless He is their controller. The


--- Page 206 ---
Text 50] The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 201
Lord manifests Himself in three features—as Brahma, Visnu and
Mahesvara—to control these three qualities. He personally takes charge
of sattva-guna as Lord Visnu, and He entrusts the charge of rajo-guna
and tamo-guna to Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. Ultimately, however, He
is the controller of all three gunas. Lord Brahma, expressing his ap-
preciation, said that because Lord Visnu had now taken charge of the ac-
tivities of goodness, there was every hope that the demigods would be
successful in fulfilling their desires. The demigods were harassed by the
demons, who were infested with tamo-guna. However, as Lord Brahma
has previously described, since the time of sattva-guna had now arrived,
the demigods could naturally expect to fulfill their desires. The demigods
are supposedly well advanced in knowledge, yet they could not under-
stand the knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
the Lord is addressed here as anantaya. Although Lord Brahma knows
past, present and future, he is unable to understand the unlimited
knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fifth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Demigods Appeal to
the Lord for Protection.”


--- Page 207 ---
CHAPTER SIX
The Demigods
and Demons Declare a Truce
This chapter describes how the Lord appeared before the demigods when
they offered Him their prayers. Following the advice of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the demigods executed a truce with the demons
for the purpose of churning nectar from the sea.

Because of the prayers offered by the demigods in the previous
chapter, Lord Ksirodakasayi Visnu was pleased with the demigods, and
thus He appeared before them. The demigods were almost blinded by His
transcendental bodily effulgence. At first, therefore, they could not even
see any part of His body. After some time, however, when Brahma could
see the Lord, he, along with Lord Siva, began to offer the Lord prayers.

Lord Brahma said: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being
beyond birth and death, is eternal. He has no material qualities. Yet He is
the ocean of unlimited auspicious qualities. He is subtler than the most
subtle, He is invisible, and His form is inconceivable. He is worshipable
for all the demigods. Innumerable universes exist within His form, and
therefore He is never separated from these universes by time, space or
circumstances. He is the chief and the pradhana. Although He is the
beginning, the middle and the end of the material creation, the idea of
pantheism conceived by Mayavadi philosophers has no validity. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead controls the entire material manifesta-
tion through His subordinate agent, the external energy. Because of His
inconceivable transcendental position, He is always the master of the ma-
terial energy. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His various
forms, is always present even within this material world, but the ma-
terial qualities cannot touch Him. One can understand His position only
by His instructions, as given in Bhagavad-gita.”” As stated in Bhagavad-
gita (10.10), dadami buddhi-yogarn tam. Buddhi-yoga means bhakti-
yoga. Only through the process of bhakti-yoga can one understand the
Supreme Lord.

203


--- Page 208 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6

When offered prayers by Lord Siva and Lord Brahma, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead was pleased. Thus He gave appropriate instruc-
tions to all the demigods. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
known as Ajita, unconquerable, advised the demigods to make a peace
proposal to the demons, so that after formulating a truce, the demigods
and demons could churn the ocean of milk. The rope would be the big-
gest serpent, known as Vasuki, and the churning rod would be Mandara
Mountain. Poison would also be produced from the churning, but it
would be taken by Lord Siva, and so there would be no need to fear it.
Many other attractive things would be generated by the churning, but
the Lord warned the demigods not to be captivated by such things. Nor
should the demigods be angry if there were some disturbances. After ad-
vising the demigods in this way, the Lord disappeared from the scene.

Following the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
demigods established a peace with Maharaja Bali, the King of the
demons. Then both the demons and the demigods started for the ocean,
taking Mandara Mountain with them. Because of the great heaviness of
the mountain, the demigods and demons became fatigued, and some of
them actually died. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu,
appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuda, and by His mercy He
brought these demigods and demons back to life. The Lord then lifted
the mountain with one of His hands and placed it on the back of Garuda.
The Lord sat on the mountain and was carried to the spot of the churning
by Garuda, who placed the mountain in the middle of the sea. Then the
Lord asked Garuda to leave that place because as long as Garuda was
present, Vasuki could not come there.

TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं स्तुतः सुरगणेर्भगवान्‌ हरिरीश्वरः |
तेषामाविरभूद्‌ राजन्सदघार्कोदयद्युतिः ॥ १ ॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
evar stutah sura-ganair
bhagavan harir Bvarah


--- Page 209 ---
Text 2] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 205
tesam avirabhud rajan
sahasrarkodaya-dyutih
Sri-Sukah wvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
stutah—being worshiped by prayers; sura-ganaih—by the demigods;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harih—the van-
quisher of all inauspiciousness; iSvarah—the supreme controller;
tesam—in front of Lord Brahma and all the demigods; avirabhit—ap-
peared there; rajan—O King (Pariksit); sahasra—of thousands; arka—
of suns; udaya—like the rising; dyutih—His effulgence.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King Pariksit, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, being thus worshiped with prayers by
the demigods and Lord Brahma, appeared before them. His bodily
effulgence resembled the simultaneous rising of thousands of
suns.
TEXT 2
तेनैव सहसा सर्वे देवाः प्रतिहतेक्षणाः |
नापश्यन्खं दिशः क्षौणीमात्मानं च कुतो विशम्‌ ॥।२॥
tenaiva sahasa sarve
devah pratihateksanah
napasyan kham disah ksaunim
atmanam ca kuto vibhum
tena eva—because of this; sahasa—all of a sudden; sarve—all;
devah—the demigods; pratihata-iksanah—their vision being blocked;
na—not; apasSyan—could see; kham—the sky; diSah—the directions;
ksaunim—land; atmanam ca—also themselves; kutah—and where is
the question of seeing; vibhum—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
The vision of all the demigods was blocked by the Lord’s
effulgence. Thus they could see neither the sky, the directions, the


--- Page 210 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
land, nor even themselves, what to speak of seeing the Lord, who
was present before them.
TEXTS 3-7
विरिश्ो मगवान्टषटरा सह शर्वेण तां 939 ।
खच्छां मरकतड्यामां कञ्चगर्मारुणेक्षणाम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥
तक्षहेमावदातेन लसत्कोेयवाससा |
प्रसन्नचारुसवा्गीं सुमुखीं सुन्दर प्रवम्‌ ।॥ ४ ॥
महामणिकिरीटेन केयुराम्यां च भूषिताम्‌ ।
कर्णा मरणनिर्भातकपोरश्रीयुखाम्बुजाम्‌ ॥ ५॥
काश्चीकलापवलयहारनपुरश्चोभिताम्‌ |
कौस्तुभाभरणां लक्ष्मीं बिभ्रतीं वनमालिनीम्‌ ॥ & ॥
सदस्नादिभिः खास््रभूतिमद्धिरुपासिताम्‌ |
geld देवप्रवरः सशर्वः पुरुषं परम्‌ |
५ =
सर्वामरगणैः साकं सवङ्खिरवनिं गतैः ॥ ७॥
virifico bhagavan drstva
saha Sarvena tar tanum
svaccharh marakata-Syamarn
kanja-garbharuneksanam
tapta-hemavadatena
lasat-kauseya-vasasa
prasanna-caru-sarvangir
sumukhirm sundara-bhruvam
maha-mani-kiritena
keydrabhyam ca bhuasitam
karnabharana-nirbhata-
kapola-sri-mukhambujam
kancikalapa-valaya-
hara-niipura-sobhitam


--- Page 211 ---
Text 7] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 207
kaustubhabharanam (८577772
bibhratih vana-malinim
sudarsanadibhih svastrair
mairtimadbhir upasitam
tustava deva-pravarah
sasarvah [01071850778 param
sarvamara-ganaih sakari
sarvangair avanim gataih
viriicah—Lord Brahma; bhagavan—who is also addressed as
bhagavan because of his powerful position; drstva—by seeing; saha—
with; sarvena—Lord Siva; tam —unto the Supreme Lord; tanum—His
transcendental form; svaccham—without material contamination;
marakata-Syamam—with a bodily luster like the light of a blue gem;
kanja-garbha-aruna-iksanam —with pinkish eyes like the womb of a
lotus flower; tapta-hema-avadatena—with a luster like that of molten
gold; lasat—shining; kauseya-vasasa—dressed in yellow silk garments;
prasanna-caru-sarva-arigim—all the parts of whose body were graceful
and very beautiful; su-mukhim—with a smiling face; sundara-
bhruvam —whose eyebrows were very beautifully situated; maha-mani-
kiritena—with a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels; keyarabhyam ca
bhisitam —decorated with all kinds of ornaments; karna-abharana-
nirbhata—illuminated by the rays of the jewels on His ears; kapola—
with cheeks; sri-mukha-ambujam —whose beautiful lotuslike face;
karnci-kalapa-valaya—ornaments like the belt on the waist and bangles
on the hands; hara-nipura—with a necklace on the chest and ankle
bells on the legs; Ssobhitam—all beautifully set; kaustubha-
abharanam —whose chest was decorated with the Kaustubha gem;
laksmim —the goddess of fortune; bibhratim—moving; vana-
malinim—with flower garlands; sudarsana-adibhih—bearing the
Sudarsana cakra and others; sva-astraih—with His weapons; mar-
timadbhih—in His original form; updasitam—being worshiped;
tustava —satisfied; deva-pravarah—the chief of the demigods; sa-
sarvah—with Lord Siva; purusam param—the Supreme Personality;
sarva-amara-ganaih—accompanied by all the demigods; sakam —with;
sarva-arigath—with all the parts of the body; avanim—on the ground;
gataih—prostrated.


--- Page 212 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma, along with Lord Siva, saw the crystal-clear per-
sonal beauty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose
blackish body resembles a marakata gem, whose eyes are reddish
like the depths of a lotus, who is dressed with garments that are
yellow like molten gold, and whose entire body is attractively
decorated. They saw His beautiful, smiling, lotuslike face,
crowned by a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels. The Lord has
attractive eyebrows, and His cheeks are adorned with earrings.
Lord Brahma and Lord Siva saw the belt on the Lord’s waist, the
bangles on His arms, the necklace on His chest, and the ankle bells
on His legs. The Lord is bedecked with flower garlands, His neck is
decorated with the Kaustubha gem, and He carries with Him the
goddess of fortune and His personal weapons, like His disc and
club. When Lord Brahma, along with Lord Siva and the other
demigods, thus saw the form of the Lord, they all immediately fell

to the ground, offering their obeisances.

TEXT 8
श्रीवह्मोवाच
अजातजन्मस्ितिसंयमाया-
€.
गुणाय निर्वाणसुखार्णंवाय |
अणोरणिन्नेऽपरिगण्यधाम्ने
महानुभावाय नमो नमस्ते।॥ ८ ॥
Sri-brahmovaca
ajata-janma-sthiti-sariyamaya-
gunaya nirvana-sukhdrnavaya
anor animne ’‘pariganya-dhamne
mahanubhavaya namo namas te

§ri-brahma  wvaca—Lord Brahma said; ajata-janma-sthiti-
sartyamaya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never
born but whose appearance in different incarnations never ceases;
agundya—never affected by the material modes of nature (sattva-guna,


--- Page 213 ---
Text 8] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 209
rajo-guna and tamo-guna); nirvana-sukha-arnavaya—unto the ocean
of eternal bliss, beyond material existence; anoh animne—smaller than
the atom; apariganya-dhamne—whose bodily features are never to be
conceived by material speculation; maha-anubhavaya—whose existence
is inconceivable; namah—offering our obeisances; namah—again offer-
ing our obeisances; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: Although You are never born, Your ap-
pearance and disappearance as an incarnation never cease. You are
always free from the material qualities, and You are the shelter of
transcendental bliss resembling an ocean. Eternally existing in
Your transcendental form, You are the supreme subtle of the most
extremely subtle. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances
unto You, the Supreme, hose existence is inconceivable.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.6):
ajo ’pi sann avyayatma
bhatanam isvaro ‘pi san
prakrtirn svam adhisthaya
sambhavamy atma-mdyaya
‘Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates,
and although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every
millennium in My original transcendental form.” In the following verse
in Bhagavad-gita (4.7), the Lord says:
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanar srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.”” Thus although the Supreme Lord is unborn, there is no


--- Page 214 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
cessation to His appearance in different forms as incarnations like Lord
Krsna and Lord Rama. Since His incarnations are eternal, the various ac-
tivities performed by these incarnations are also eternal. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead does not appear because He is forced to do so by
karma like ordinary living entities who are forced to accept a certain type
of body. It is to be understood that the Lord’s body and activities are all
transcendental, being free from the contamination of the material modes
of nature. These pastimes are transcendental bliss to the Lord. The word
apariganya-dhamne is very significant. There is no limit to the Lord’s
appearance in different incarnations. All of these incarnations are eter-
nal, blissful and full of knowledge.
TEXT 9
+ on.
रूपं तवैतत्‌ पुरूपषभेज्यं
Sr
भेयोऽर्थिभिर्वेदिकतान्तरिकेण ।
योगेन धातः सह नच्िलोकान्‌
प्याम्यघुष्मिन्ु ह विश्वमूर्तौ ।॥ ९ ॥
ripari tavaitat purusarsabhejyam
Sreyo ’rthibhir vaidika-tantrikena
yogena dhatah saha nas tri-lokan
pasyamy amusminn u ha visva-miirtau
ripam—form; tava—Your; etat—this; purusa-rsabha—O best of all
personalities; ijyam—worshipable; Sreyah—ultimate auspiciousness;
arthibhih—by persons who desire; vaidika—under the direction of
Vedic instructions; tantrikena—realized by followers of Tantras, like
Narada-paiicaratra; yogena—by practice of mystic yoga; dhatah—O
supreme director; saha—with; nah—us (the demigods); tri-lokan —
controlling the three worlds; pasyami—we see directly; amusmin—in
You; u—oh; ha—completely manifested; visva-mirtau—in You, who
have the universal form.
TRANSLATION
O best of persons, O supreme director, those who actually aspire
for supreme good fortune worship this form of Your Lordship ac-


--- Page 215 ---
Text 10] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 211
cording to the Vedic Tantras. My Lord, we can see all the three
worlds in You.
PURPORT
The Vedic mantras say: yasmin vijiate sarvam evar vijiiatari
bhavati. When the devotee sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
his meditation, or when he sees the Lord personally, face to face, he be-
comes aware of everything within this universe. Indeed, nothing is
unknown to him. Everything within this material world is fully
manifested to a devotee who has seen the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Bhagavad-gita (4.34) therefore advises:
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jiianarm
Jhaninas tattva-darsinah
“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”
Lord Brahmi is one of these self-realized authorities (svayambhar
naradah sambhuh kumarah kapilo manuh). One must therefore accept
the disciplic succession from Lord Brahma, and then one can understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in fullness. Here the word visva-
mairtau indicates that everything exists in the form of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. One who is able to worship Him can see everything
in Him and see Him in everything.
TEXT 10
त्वय्यग्र आसीत्‌ त्वयि मध्य आसीत्‌
[IAT आसीदिदमारमतन्त्रे |
त्वमादिरन्तो जगतोऽख मध्यं
घरस्य TET परः परस्मात्‌ ॥१०॥
tvayy agra asit tvayi madhya asit
tvayy anta asid idam atma-tantre


--- Page 216 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
tvam adir anto jagato sya madhyarn
ghatasya mrtsneva parah parasmat
tvayi—unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; agre—in the
beginning; asit—there was; tvayi—unto You; madhye—in the middle;
asit—there was; tvayi—unto You; ante—in the end; asit—there was;
idam —all of this cosmic manifestation; atma-tantre—fully under Your
control; tvam—Your Lordship; adih—beginning; antah—end;
jagatah—of the cosmic manifestation; asya—of this; madhyam —mid-
dle; ghatasya—of an earthen pot; mrtsna iva—like the earth; parah—
transcendental; parasmat—because of being the chief.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, who are always fully independent, this entire cos-
mic manifestation arises from You, rests upon You and ends in
You. Your Lordship is the beginning, sustenance and end of every-
thing, like the earth, which is the cause of an earthen pot, which
supports the pot, and to which the pot, when broken, finally
returns.
TEXT 11
त्वं माययात्माश्रयया खयेदं
निर्माय विश्वं तदयुपरविष्टः।
परयन्ति युक्ता मनसा मनीषिणो
गुणव्यवायेऽप्यगुणं विप्ितः 1220
1৮৫? mayayatmasrayaya svayedariu
nirmaya viSvarn tad-anupravistah
pasyanti yukta manasa manisino
guna-vyavaye ‘py agunarh vipascitah
tvam—Your Lordship; mayaya—by Your eternal energy; atma-
asrayaya—whose existence is under Your shelter; svayd—emanated
from Yourself; idam—this; nirmaya—for the sake of creating;
viSvam—the entire universe; tat—into it; anupravistah—You enter;


--- Page 217 ---
Text 11] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 213
pasyanti—they see; yuktah—persons in touch with You; manasa—by
an elevated mind; manisinah—people with advanced consciousness;
guna—of material qualities; vyavdye—in the transformation; api—al-
though; agunam—still untouched by the material qualities;
vipascitah—those who are fully aware of the truth of astra.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme, You are independent in Your self and do not take
help from others. Through Your own potency, You create this cos-
mic manifestation and enter into it. Those who are advanced in
Krsna consciousness, who are fully in knowledge of the authorita-
tive $astra, and who, through the practice of bhakti-yoga, are
cleansed of all material contamination, can see with clear minds
that although You exist within the transformations of the material
qualities, Your presence is untouched by these qualities.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.10):
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
siyate sacaracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate
“This material nature, working under My direction, 0 son of Kunti, is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifesta-
tion is created and annihilated again and again.” The material energy
creates, maintains and devastates the entire cosmic manifestation be-
cause of directions given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
enters this universe as Garbhodakasayl Visnu but is untouched by the
material qualities. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord refers to maya, the exter-
nal energy, which creates this material world, as mama maya, “My en-
ergy,” because this energy works under the full control of the Lord.
These facts can be realized only by those who are well versed in Vedic
knowledge and advanced in Krsna consciousness.


--- Page 218 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
TEXT 12
यथाभ्निमेघस्यगृतं च गोषु
= अव्यन्नमम्बू्यमने च gf
योगेमंचुष्या अधियन्ति हि त्वां
गुणेषु बुद्धया कवयो वदन्ति ॥१२॥
yathagnim edhasy amrtari ca gosu
bhuvy annam ambudyamane ca vrttim
yogair manusya adhiyanti hi tvarn
gunesu buddhya kavayo vadanti
yatha—as; agnim—fire; edhasi—in wood; amrtam—milk, which is
like nectar; ca—and; gosu—from cows; bhuvi—on the ground; annam-
—food grains; ambu—water; udyamane—in enterprise; ca—also; vrt-
tim—livelihood; yogaih—by practice of bhakti-yoga; manusyah—
human beings; adhiyanti—achieve; hi—indeed; tvam—You; gunesu—
in the material modes of nature; buddhya—by intelligence; kavayah—
great personalities; vadanti—say.
TRANSLATION
As one can derive fire from wood, milk from the milk bag of the
cow, food grains and water from the land, and prosperity in one’s
livelihood from industrial enterprises, so, by the practice of
bhakti-yoga, even within this material world, one can achieve Your
favor or intelligently approach You. Those who are pious all affirm
this.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead 15 nirguna, not to be
found within this material world, the entire material world is pervaded
by Him, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (maya tatam idari sarvam). The ma-
terial world is nothing but an expansion of the Lord’s material energy,
and the entire cosmic manifestation rests upon Him (mat-sthani sarva-
bhatani). Nonetheless, the Supreme Lord cannot be found here (na
caham tesv avasthitah). A devotee, however, can see the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead through the practice of bhakti-yoga. One ordinarily
does not begin to practice bhakti-yoga unless he has practiced it in pre-


--- Page 219 ---
Text 12] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 215
vious births. Moreover, one can begin bhakti-yoga only by the mercy of
the spiritual master and Krsna. Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-
bija. The seed of devotional service is obtainable by the mercy of guru,
the spiritual master, and Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Only by the practice of bhakti-yoga can one achieve the favor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and see Him face to face (premanjana-
cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti). One
cannot see the Lord by other methods, such as karma, jana or yoga.
Under the direction of the spiritual master, one must cultivate bhakti-
yoga (Sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam). Then,
even within this material world, although the Lord is not visible, a devo-
tee can see Him. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (bhaktya mam
abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah) and in Srimad-Bhdgavatam
(bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah). Thus by devotional service one can
achieve the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although He is
not visible or understandable to materialistic persons.

In this verse, the cultivation of bhakti-yoga is compared to many ma-
terial activities. By friction one can get fire from wood, by digging the
earth one can get food grains and water, and by agitating the milk bag of
the cow one can get nectarean milk. Milk is compared to nectar, which
one can drink to become immortal. Of course, simply drinking milk will
not make one immortal, but it can increase the duration of one’s life. In
modern civilization, men do not think milk to be important, and
therefore they do not live very long. Although in this age men can live
up to one hundred years, their duration of life is reduced because they do
not drink large quantities of milk. This is a sign of Kali-yuga. In Kali-
yuga, instead of drinking milk, people prefer to slaughter an animal and
eat its flesh. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His instructions of
Bhagavad-gita, advises go-raksya, which means cow protection. The cow
should be protected, milk should be drawn from the cows, and this milk
should be prepared in various ways. One should take ample milk, and
thus one can prolong one’s life, develop his brain, execute devotional
service, and ultimately attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As it is essential to get food grains and water by digging the
earth, it is also essential to give protection to the cows and take nectarean
milk from their milk bags.

The people of this age are inclined toward industrial enterprises for


--- Page 220 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
comfortable living, but they refuse to endeavor to execute devotional
service, by which they can achieve the ultimate goal of life by returning
home, back to Godhead. Unfortunately, as it is said, na te viduh svartha-
gatirn hi visnuri durdasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah. People without
spiritual education do not know that the ultimate goal of life is to go back
home, back to Godhead. Forgetting this aim of life, they are working
very hard in disappointment and frustration (moghasa mogha-karmano
mogha-jiana vicetasah). The so-called vaiSyas—the industrialists or
businessmen —are involved in big, big industrial enterprises, but they
are not interested in food grains and milk. However, as indicated here,
by digging for water, even in the desert, we can produce food grains;
when we produce food grains and vegetables, we can give protection to
the cows; while giving protection to the cows, we can draw from them
abundant quantities of milk; and by getting enough milk and combining
it with food grains and vegetables, we can prepare hundreds of nectarean
foods. We can happily eat this food and thus avoid industrial enterprises
and joblessness.

Agriculture and cow protection are the way to become sinless and thus
be attracted to devotional service. Those who are sinful cannot be at-
tracted by devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.28):

295৫7 tv anta-gatarh paparn
Jananar punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mar drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the
duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determina-
tion.” The majority of people in this age of Kali are sinful, short-living,
unfortunate and disturbed (mandah sumanda-matayo manda-bhagya
hy upadrutah). For them, Caitanya Mahaprabhu has advised:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha


--- Page 221 ---
Text 13] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 217
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.”
TEXT 13
तं त्वां वयं नाथ মন্তুজিহান
(२
सरोजनाभातिचिरेष्सिताथम्‌ ।
০ ~
wg गता fama स्वे
गजा दवातां হল गाङ्गमम्भः ॥१२॥
tari tvar vayam natha samujjihanari
saroja-nabhaticirepsitartham
drstva gata nirvrtam adya sarve
gaja davarta iva gangam ambhah
1071-0 Lord; tvam—Your Lordship; vayam—all of us; ndtha—O
master; samujjihanam—now appearing before us with all glories;
saroja-nabha—O Lord, whose navel resembles a lotus flower, or from
whose navel grows a lotus flower; ati-cira—for an extremely long time;
ipsita—desiring; artham—for the ultimate goal of life; drstva—seeing;
gatah—in our vision; nirvrtam—transcendental happiness; adya—
today; sarve—all of us; gajah—elephants; dava-artah—being afflicted
in a forest fire; iva—like; gangam ambhah—with water from the
Ganges.
TRANSLATION
Elephants afflicted by a forest fire become very happy when they
get water from the Ganges. Similarly, O my Lord, from whose
navel grows a lotus flower, since You have now appeared before us,
we have become transcendentally happy. By seeing Your Lordship,
whom we have desired to see for a very long time, we have
achieved our ultimate goal in life.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are always very eager to see the Supreme
Lord face to face, but they do not demand that the Lord come before


--- Page 222 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
them, for a pure devotee considers such a demand to be contrary to devo-
tional service. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches this lesson in His
Siksastaka. Adarsanan marma-hatar karotu va. The devotee is always
eager to see the Lord face to face, but if he is brokenhearted because he
cannot see the Lord, even life after life, he will never command the Lord
to appear. This is a sign of pure devotion. Therefore in this verse we find
the word ati-cira-ipsita-artham, meaning that the devotee aspires for a
long, long time to see the Lord. If the Lord, by His own pleasure, appears
before the devotee, the devotee feels extremely happy, as Dhruva
Maharaja felt when he personally saw the Supreme Personality of God-
head. When Dhruva Maharaja saw the Lord, he had no desire to ask the
Lord for any benediction. Indeed, simply by seeing the Lord, Dhruva
Maharaja felt so satisfied that he did not want to ask the Lord for any
benediction (svamin krtartho ’smi varam na yace). A pure devotee,
whether able or unable to see the Lord, always engages in the Lord’s
devotional service, always hoping that at some time the Lord may be
pleased to appear before him so that he can see the Lord face to face.
TEXT 14
7 त्वं विधर्खाखिरलोकपाला
वयं यदर्थास्तव पादसूलम्‌ |
समागतास्ते बहिरन्तरात्मन्‌
किं बान्यविज्ञाप्यमज्ञेषसाक्षिणः | १४॥
sa tvari vidhatsvakhila-loka-pala
vayarh yad arthas tava pada-milam
samagatas te bahir-antar-atman
kirh vanya-vijiapyam asesa-saksinah
sah—that; tvam—Your Lordship; vidhatsva—kindly do the needful;
akhila-loka-palah—the demigods, directors of different departments of
this universe; vayam—all of us; yat—that which; arthah—purpose;
tava—at Your Lordship’s; pada-miilam—lotus feet; samagatah—we
have arrived; te—unto You; bahih-antah-atman—O Supersoul of


--- Page 223 ---
Text 15] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 219
everyone, O constant internal and external witness; kim—what; va—
either; anya-vijiapyam—we have to inform You; asesa-saksinah—the
witness and knower of everything.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, we, the various demigods, the directors of this uni-
verse, have come to Your lotus feet. Please fulfill the purpose for
which we have come. You are the witness of everything, from
within and without. Nothing is unknown to You, and therefore it
is unnecessary to inform You again of anything.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (13.3), ksetra-jiarn capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharata. The individual souls are proprietors of their in-
dividual bodies, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the proprie-
tor of all bodies. Since He is the witness of everyone’s body, nothing is
unknown to Him. He knows what we need. Our duty, therefore, is to
execute devotional service sincerely, under the direction of the spiritual
master. Krsna, by His grace, will supply whatever we need in executing
our devotional service. In the Krsna consciousness movement, we simply
have to execute the order of Krsna and guru. Then all necessities will be
supplied by Krsna, even if we do not ask for them.
TEXT 15
अहं ffs सुरादयो ये
दक्षाद योऽग्रेरिव केतवस्ते |
किं না विदामेश एथभ्विमाता
विधत शं नो द्विजदेवमन्त्रम्‌ ॥ १५॥
1/1 giritras ca suradayo ye
daksadayo ’gner iva ketavas te
kirh va vidamesa prthag-vibhata
vidhatsva sari no dvija-deva-mantram


--- Page 224 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6

aham—I (Lord Brahma); giritrah—Lord Siva; ca—also; sura-
adayah—all the demigods; ye—as we are; daksa-adayah—headed by
Maharaja Daksa; agneh—of fire; iva—like; ketavah—sparks; te—of
You; kim—what; va—either; vidama—can we understand; 64 -0 my
Lord; prthak-vibhatah—independently of You; vidhatsva—kindly
bestow upon us; sam—good fortune; nah —our; dvija-deva-mantram—
the means of deliverance suitable for the brahmanas and demigods.

TRANSLATION

I [Lord Brahma), Lord Siva and all the demigods, accompanied
by the prajapatis like Daksa, are nothing but sparks illuminated by
You, who are the original fire. Since we are particles of You, what
can we understand about our welfare? O Supreme Lord, please
give us the means of deliverance that is suitable for the brahmanas
and demigods.

PURPORT

In this verse, the word dvija-deva-mantram is very important. The
word mantra means ‘‘that which delivers one from the material world.”
Only the dvijas (the brahmanas) and the devas (the demigods) can be
delivered from material existence by the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Whatever is spoken by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is a mantra and is suitable for delivering the conditioned
souls from mental speculation. The conditioned souls are engaged in a
struggle for existence (manah sasthanindriyani prakrti-sthani karsati).
Deliverance from this struggle constitutes the highest benefit, but unless
one gets a mantra from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, deliverance
is impossible. The beginning mantra is the Gayatri mantra. Therefore,
after purification, when one is qualified to become a brahmana (dvija),
he is offered the Gayatri mantra. Simply by chanting the Gayatri mantra,
one can be delivered. This mantra, however, is suitable only for the
brahmanas and demigods. In Kali-yuga, we are all in a very difficult
position, in which we need a suitable mantra that can deliver us from the
dangers of this age. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in
His incarnation as Lord Caitanya, gives us the Hare Krsna mantra.


--- Page 225 ---
Text 16] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 221
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
ndsty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” In His Siksastaka, Lord Caitanya
says, param vijayete sri-krsna-sankirtanam: “All glories to the chanting
of sri-krsna-sankirtana!”’ The maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Raima, Hare Rima, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare —is directly chanted by the Lord Himself, who gives us this mantra
for deliverance.

We cannot invent any means to be delivered from the dangers of ma-
terial existence. Here, even the demigods, such as Lord Brahma and Lord
Siva, and the prajapatis, such as Daksa, are said to be like illuminating
sparks in the presence of the Supreme Lord, who is compared to a great
fire. Sparks are beautiful as long as they are in the fire. Similarly, we
have to remain in the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and always engage in devotional service, for then we shall always be
brilliant and illuminating. As soon as we fall from the service of the
Lord, our brilliance and illumination will immediately be extinguished,
or at least stopped for some time. When we living entities, who are like
sparks of the original fire, the Supreme Lord, fall into a material condi-
tion, we must take the mantra from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as it is offered by >] Caitanya Mahaprabhu. By chanting this Hare Krsna
mantra, we shall be delivered from all the difficulties of this material
world.

TEXT 16
श्रीयुक उवाच
एवं विरिच्वादिभिरीडितस्तद्‌
विज्ञाय तेषां हदयं यथैव ।
जगाद जीमूतगभीरया गिरा
बद्धाञ्जलीन्संडृतसर्वकारकान्‌  ॥।१६॥


--- Page 226 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
Sri-Suka uvaca
evari virificadibhir iditas tad
vijiidya tesa hrdayam yathaiva
jagada jimita-gabhiraya gira
baddhanjalin sariwrta-sarva-karakan
sri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus; virifica-
adibhih—Dby all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma; iditah—being
worshiped; tat vijidya—understanding the expectation; tesam—of all of
them; hrdayam—the core of the heart; yatha—as; eva—indeed;
jagada—replied; jimita-gabhiraya—like the sound of clouds; gira—by
words; baddha-anjalin—unto the demigods, who stood with folded
hands; sanmwvrta—restrained; sarva—all; karakan —senses.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When the Lord was thus offered
prayers by the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, He understood
the purpose for which they had approached Him. Therefore, in a
deep voice that resembled the rumbling of clouds, the Lord
replied to the demigods, who all stood there attentively with
folded hands.
TEXT 17
एक एवेश्वरस्तसिन्सुरकाये सुरेश्वरः |
विहतुकामस्तानाह सथुद्रोन्मथनादिभिः ॥१७॥
eka evesvaras tasmin
sura-karye suresvarah
vihartu-kamas tan aha
samudronmathanadibhih
ekah—alone; eva—indeed; iSvarah—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tasmin—in that; sura-karye—the activities of the demigods;
sura-isvarah—the Lord of the demigods, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vihartu—to enjoy pastimes; kamah—desiring; tan —unto the


--- Page 227 ---
Text 19] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 223
demigods; aha—said; samudra-unmathana-adibhih—by activities of
churning the ocean.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of
the demigods, was capable of performing the activities of the
demigods by Himself, He wanted to enjoy pastimes in churning
the ocean. Therefore He spoke as follows.
TEXT 18
श्रीभगवालुवाच
हन्त ब्रह्मलहो शम्मो हे देवा मम भाषितम्‌ |
मृण॒ताबदहिताः सरे ्रेयो वः स्थाद्‌ यथा सुराः ॥ १८॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
hanta brahmann aho sambho
he deva mama bhasitam
Srnutavahitah sarve
Sreyo vah syad yatha surah
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
hanta—addressing them; brahman aho—O Lord Brahma; sambho—O
Lord Siva; he—O; devah—demigods; mama—My; bhasitam—state-
ment; Srnuta—hear; avahitah—with great attention; sarve—all of you;
Sreyah—good fortune; vah—for all of you; syat—shall be; yatha—as;
surah—for the demigods.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Lord Brahma,
Lord Siva and other demigods, please hear Me with great attention,
for what I say will bring good fortune for all of you.
TEXT 19
Asa
यात॒ दानवदं तेयेस्तायत्‌ सन्धिर्विधीयताम्‌ |
कालेनायुगृदतेस्तेर्यावद्‌ बो भव आत्मनः ॥ १९॥


--- Page 228 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
yata danava-daiteyais
tavat sandhir vidhiyatam
kalenanugrhitais tair
yavad vo bhava atmanah
yata—just execute; danava—with the demons; daiteyaih—and the
asuras; tavat—so long; sandhih—a truce; vidhiyatam —execute;
kalena—by a favorable time (or kavyena—by Sukracarya);
anugrhitaih—receiving benedictions; taih—with them; yavat—as long
as; vah—of you; bhavah—good fortune; atmanah—of yourselves.
TRANSLATION
As long as you are not flourishing, you should make a truce with
the demons and asuras, who are now being favored by time.
PURPORT
One word in this verse has two readings—kdlena and kavyena.
Kalena means “favored by time,” and kavyena means ‘favored by
Sukracarya,” Sukracarya being the spiritual master of the Daityas. The
demons and Daityas were favored in both ways, and therefore the
demigods were advised by the Supreme Lord to execute a truce for the
time being, until time favored them.
TEXT 20
अरयोऽपि हि सन्धेयाः सति कार्याथगौरवे ।
प हे,
अदिमूषिकवद्‌ देवा ह्यथ पदवीं गतैः ॥२०॥
arayo ‘pi hi sandheyah
sati karyartha-gaurave
ahi-musikavad deva
hy arthasya padavim gataih
arayah—enemies; api—although; hi—indeed; sandheyah—eligible
for a truce; sati—being so; karya-artha-gaurave—in the matter of an


--- Page 229 ---
Text 21] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 225
important duty; ahi—snake; misika—mouse; vat—like; devah—O
demigods; hi—indeed; arthasya—of interest; padavim—oposition;
gataih—so being.
TRANSLATION
O demigods, fulfilling one’s own interests is so important that
one may even have to make a truce with one’s enemies. For the
sake of one’s self-interest, one has to act according to the logic of
the snake and the mouse.
PURPORT
A snake and a mouse were once caught in a basket. Now, since the
mouse is food for the snake, this was a good opportunity for the snake.
However, since both of them were caught in the basket, even if the snake
ate the mouse, the snake would not be able to get out. Therefore, the
snake thought it wise to make a truce with the mouse and ask the mouse
to make a hole in the basket so that both of them could get out. The
snake’s intention was that after the mouse made the hole, the snake
would eat the mouse and escape from the basket through the hole. This is
called the logic of the snake and the mouse.
TEXT 21
अगरतोत्पादने যলঃ क्रियतामविरम्वितम्‌ |
© नव
यस्य पीत ঈ जन्तुतयुग्रस्तोऽमरो भवेत्‌ R20
amrtotpadane yatnah
kriyatam avilambitam
yasya pitasya vai jantur
mrtyu-grasto ‘maro bhavet
amrta-utpadane—in generating nectar; yatnah—endeavor;
kriyatam —do; avilambitam—without delay; yasya—of which nectar;
pitasya—anyone who drinks; wvai—indeed; jantuh—living entity;
mrtyu-grastah—although in imminent danger of death; amarah—im-
mortal; bhavet—can become.


--- Page 230 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Immediately endeavor to produce nectar, which a person who is
about to die may drink to become immortal.
€ TEXTS 22-23
किप्त्वा क्षीरोदधौ सर्वा वीरुत्तृणलतौषधीः |
मन्थानं मन्दरं कृत्वा नेत्रं कृत्वा तु वासुकिम्‌ ॥२२॥
(स [>
सहायेन मया देवा निमेन्थध्वमतन्द्रिताः |
স্তীহামাজী मविष्यन्ति दैत्या यूयं फलग्रहाः ।॥२२॥
ksiptva ksirodadhau sarva
virut-trna-latausadhih
manthanarm mandaram krtva
netram krtva tu vasukim
sahayena maya deva
nirmanthadhvam atandritah
klesa-bhajo bhavisyanti
daitya 7007 phala-grahah
ksiptva— putting; ksira-udadhau—in the ocean of milk; sarvah—all
kinds of; virut—creepers; trna—grass; lata—vegetables; ausadhih—
and drugs; manthanam—the churning rod; mandaram—Mandara
Mountain; krtva—making; netram—the churning rope; krtva—mak-
ing; tu—but; vasukim—the snake Vasuki; sahdyena—with a helper;
maya—by Me; devah—all the demigods; nirmanthadhvam—go on
churning; atandritah—very carefully, without diversion; klesa-
bhajah—sharetakers of sufferings; bhavisyanti—will be; daityah—the
demons; yi#yam—but all of you; phala-grahah—gainers of the actual
result.
TRANSLATION
O demigods, cast into the ocean of milk all kinds of vegetables,
grass, creepers and drugs. Then, with My help, making Mandara
Mountain the churning rod and Vasuki the rope for churning,


--- Page 231 ---
Text 25] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 227
churn the ocean of milk with undiverted attention. Thus the
demons will be engaged in labor, but you, the demigods, will gain
the actual result, the nectar produced from the ocean.
PURPORT
It appears that when different kinds of drugs, creepers, grass and
vegetables are put into this milk and the milk is churned, as milk is
churned for butter, the active principles of the vegetables and drugs mix
with the milk, and the result is nectar.
TEXT 24
युयं तदनुमोदध्वं यदिच्छन्त्यसुराः gu |
न संरम्भेण सिध्यन्ति सर्वार्थाः सान्त्वया यथा।।२४॥
yityari tad anumodadhvari
yad icchanty asurah surah
na sarmrambhena sidhyanti
sarvarthah santvaya yatha
yiyam—all of you; tat—that; anumodadhvam —should accept; yat—
whatever; icchanti—they desire; asurah—the demons; surah—O
demigods; na—not; sarmrambhena—by being agitated in anger;
sidhyanti—are very successful; sarva-arthah—all desired ends;
santvaya—by peaceful execution; yatha—as.
TRANSLATION
My dear demigods, with patience and peace everything can be
done, but if one is agitated by anger, the goal is not achieved.
Therefore, whatever the demons ask, agree to their proposal.
TEXT 25
न भेतव्यं कालकूटाद्‌ Aas Emerg |
लोभः कार्यो न वो जातु रोषः कामस्तु वस्त॒षु।। २५॥।


--- Page 232 ---
228 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
na bhetavyam kalakitad
visaj jaladhi-sambhavat
lobhah karyo na vo jatu
rosah kamas tu vastusu
na—not; bhetavyam—should be afraid; kalakiutat—of kalakita;
visat—from the poison; jaladhi—from the ocean of milk; sambhavat—
which will appear; lobhah—greed; karyah—execution; na —not; vah—
unto you; jatu—at any time; rosah—anger; kamah—lust; tu—and;
vastusu—in the products.
TRANSLATION
A poison known as kalakiita will be generated from the ocean of
milk, but you should not fear it. And when various products are
churned from the ocean, you should not be greedy for them or
anxious to obtain them, nor should you be angry.
PURPORT
It appears that by the churning process many things would be gener-
ated from the ocean of milk, including poison, valuable gems, nectar and
many beautiful women. The demigods were advised, however, not to be
greedy for the gems or beautiful women, but to wait patiently for the
nectar. The real purpose was to get the nectar.
TEXT 26
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
इति देवान्समादिङ्य मगवान्‌ पुरुषोत्तमः |
तेषामन्तदंधे राजन्खच्छन्दग तिरीश्वर; ॥२६।।
sri-Suka uvaca
iti devan samadisya
bhagavan purusottamah
tesam antardadhe rajan
svacchanda-gatir कषयाय?


--- Page 233 ---
Text 28] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 229
sri-sukah uvdaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; devan—all
the demigods; samadisya—advising; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; purusa-uttamah—the best of all persons; tesam—
from them; antardadhe—disappeared; rajan—O King; svacchanda—
free; gatih—whose movements; iSvarah—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O King Pariksit, after advising
the demigods in this way, the independent Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the best of all living entities, disappeared from their
presence.
TEXT 27
अथ तस्मै भगवते नमस्कृत्य पितामहः |
. 9 aw ©
भवश्च जग्मतुः स्वं स्वं धामोपेयुवछिं सुराः ॥२७॥
atha tasmai bhagavate
namaskrtya pitamahah
bhavas ca jagmatuh svari svar
dhamopeyur balirh surah
atha—after this; tasmai—unto Him; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; namaskrtya—offering obeisances; pita-
mahah—Lord Brahma; bhavah ca—as well as Lord Siva; jagmatuh—
returned; svam svam—to their own; dhama—abodes; upeyuh—ap-
proached; balim—King Bali; surah—all the other demigods.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, after offering their respectful
obeisances to the Lord, returned to their abodes. All the demigods
then approached Maharaja Bali.
TEXT 28
दृषटारीनप्यसंयत्ताज्ञातश्चोभान्सखनायकान्‌ ।
EN [३
न्यषेषद्‌ देत्यराट्‌ शछोक्यः सन्धिविग्रहकालवित्‌। २८॥


--- Page 234 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
drstvarin apy asarivyattan
Jjata-ksobhan sva-nayakan
nyasedhad daitya-rat slokyah
sandhi-vigraha-kalavit

drstva—observing; arin —the enemies; api —although; asarmyattan—
without any endeavor to fight; jata-ksobhan— who became agitated; sva-
nayakan—his own captains and commanders; nyasedhat—prevented;
daitya-rat—the Emperor of the Daityas, Maharaja Bali; slokyah —very
respectable and prominent; sandhi—for making negotiations; vigraha —
as well as for fighting; kala—the time; vit—completely aware of.

TRANSLATION

Maharaja Bali, a most celebrated king of the demons, knew very
well when to make peace and when to fight. Thus although his
commanders and captains were agitated and were about to kill the
demigods, Maharaja Bali, seeing that the demigods were coming to
him without a militant attitude, forbade his commanders to kill
them.

PURPORT

Vedic etiquette enjoins: grhe Satrum api [एकाक viSvastam
akutobhayam. When enemies come to their opponent’s place, they
should be received in such a way that they will forget that there is
animosity between the two parties. Bali Maharaja was well conversant
with the arts of peacemaking and fighting. Thus he received the
demigods very well, although his commanders and captains were agi-
tated. This kind of treatment was prevalent even during the fight be-
tween the Pandavas and the Kurus. During the day, the Pandavas and
Kurus would fight with the utmost strength, and when the day was over
they would go to each other’s camps as friends and be received as such.
During such friendly meetings, one enemy would offer anything the
other enemy wanted. That was the system.

TEXT 29
ते वेरोचनिमासीनं गुप्तं चाघुरपूथवैः ।
भरिया परमया जुष्टं जिताशेषमुपागमन्‌ ॥२९॥


--- Page 235 ---
Text 30] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 231
te vairocanim asinari
guptari casura-yitha-paih
Sriya paramaya justarn
Jitasesam upagaman
te—all the demigods; vairocanim—unto Baliraja, the son of Virocana;
asinam—sitting down; guptam —well protected; ca —and; asura-yitha-
paih—by the commanders of the asuras; sriya—by opulence;
paramayd—supreme; justam—blessed; jita-asesam —who became the
proprietor of all the worlds; upagaman—approached.
TRANSLATION
The demigods approached Bali Maharaja, the son of Virocana,
and sat down near him. Bali Maharaja was protected by the com-
manders of the demons and was most opulent, having conquered
all the universes.
TEXT 30
महेन्द्रःकष्णया वाचा सान्त्वयित्वा महामतिः।
अभ्यभाषत तत्‌ सवं हिक्षितं TET ॥২০।॥
mahendrah slaksnaya vaca
santvayitva maha-matih
abhyabhasata tat 52707
Siksitarh purusottamat
maha-indrah—the King of heaven, Indra; slaksnaya—very mild;
vdca—by words; santvayitva—pleasing Bali Maharaja very much;
maha-matih—the most intelligent person; abhyabhasata—addressed;
tat—that; sarvam—everything; Siksitam—that was learned; purusa-
uttamat—from Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
After pleasing Bali Maharaja with mild words, Lord Indra, the
King of the demigods, who was most intelligent, very politely sub-
mitted all the proposals he had learned from the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord Visnu.


--- Page 236 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
TEXT 31
a
तत्वरोचत TR तत्रान्ये येऽसुराधिपाः |
=
शम्बरोऽरिषटनेमिश्च ये च त्रिपुरवासिनः uz
tat tv arocata daityasya
tatranye ye ’suradhipah
sambaro ’ristanemis ca
ye ca tripura-vasinah
tat—all those words; tu—but; arocata—were very pleasing;
daityasya—to Bali Maharaja; tatra—as well as; anye—others; ye—who
were; asura-adhipah—the chiefs of the asuras; sambarah—Sambara;
aristanemih— Aristanemi; ca—also; ye—others who; ca—and; tripura-
vasinah—all the residents of Tripura.
TRANSLATION
The proposals submitted by King Indra were immediately ac-
cepted by Bali Maharaja and his assistants, headed by Sambara and
Aristanemi, and by all the other residents of Tripura.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that politics, diplomacy, the propensity to
cheat, and everything that we find in this world in individual and social
negotiations between two parties are also present in the upper planetary
systems. The demigods went to Bali Maharaja with the proposal to
manufacture nectar, and the Daityas, the demons, immediately accepted
it, thinking that since the demigods were already weak, when the nectar
was produced the demons would take it from them and use it for their
own purposes. The demigods, of course, had similar intentions. The only
difference is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, was
on the side of the demigods because the demigods were His devotees,
whereas the demons did not care about Lord Visnu. All over the universe
there are two parties—the Visnu party, or God-conscious party, and the
godless party. The godless party is never happy or victorious, but the
God-conscious party is always happy and victorious.


--- Page 237 ---
Text 32] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 233
TEXT 32
ततो देवासुराः कृत्वा संविदं कृतसौहृदाः |
. . ~
उद्यम परम चक्रुरताथ परन्तप ॥३२॥
tato devasurah krtva
sarwidari krta-sauhrdah
udyamari paramarn cakrur
amrtarthe parantapa
tatah—thereafter; deva-asurah—both the demons and the demigods;
krtva—executing; sarividam—indicating; krta-sauhrdah—an armistice
between them; udyamam—enterprise; paramam—supreme; cakruh—
they did; amrta-arthe—for the sake of nectar; parantapa—O Maharaja
Pariksit, chastiser of enemies.
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, chastiser of enemies, the demigods and the
demons thereafter made an armistice between them. Then, with
great enterprise, they arranged to produce nectar, as proposed by
Lord Indra.
PURPORT
The word sarvidam is significant in this verse. The demigods and
demons both agreed to stop fighting, at least for the time being, and en-
deavored to produce nectar. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura notes
in this connection:
sarwid yuddhe pratijiiayam
acare namni tosane
sambhasane kriyakare
sanketa-jiianayor api
The word samwit is variously used to mean “in fighting,” “in promis-
ing,” “for satisfying,” “in addressing,” ‘by practical action,”
“indication,” and “knowledge.”


--- Page 238 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
TEXT 33
ततस्ते मन्दरगिरिमोजसोत्पाव्य gaan |
नदन्त उदधि निन्युः शक्ताः परिघबाहवः ॥३३॥
tatas te mandara-girim
ojasotpatya durmadah
nadanta udadhirh ninyuh
Saktah parigha-bahavah
tatah—thereafter; te—all the demigods and demons; mandara-
girim—Mandara Mountain; ojasa—with great strength; utpatya—ex-
tracting; durmadah—very powerful and competent; nadanta—cried
very loudly; udadhim—toward the ocean; ninyuh—brought; Saktah—
very strong; parigha-bahavah—having long, strong arms.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, with great strength, the demons and demigods, who
were all very powerful and who had long, stout arms, uprooted
Mandara Mountain. Crying very loudly, they brought it toward the
ocean of milk.
TEXT 34
LRN
द्रभारोददश्रान्ताः रक्रवराचनादयः।
अपारयन्तस्तं Tig विवश्चा विजहुः पथि ॥২৬।।
diira-bharodvaha-srantah
Sakra-vairocanadayah
aparayantas tari vodhuri
vivasa vijahuh pathi
dira—for a great distance; bhara-udvaha—by carrying the great
load; srantah—being fatigued; Sakra—King Indra; wairocana-
ddayah—and Maharaja Bali (the son of Virocana) and others;
aparayantah—being unable; tam —the mountain; vodhum—to bear;
vivasah—being unable; vijahuh—gave up; pathi—on the way.


--- Page 239 ---
Text 36] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 235
TRANSLATION
Because of conveying the great mountain for a long distance,
King Indra, Maharaja Bali and the other demigods and demons be-
came fatigued. Being unable to carry the mountain, they left it on
the way.
TEXT 35
निपतन्स गिरिस्तत्र बहूनमरदानवान्‌ ।
€
चूणयामास महता भारेण कनकाचलः IER
nipatan sa giris tatra
bahian amara-danavan
carnayam asa mahata
bharena kanakacalah
nipatan—falling down; sah—that; girih—mountain; tatra—there;
bahiin —many; amara-danavan—demigods and demons; carnayam
asa—were smashed; mahata—by great; bharena—weight; kanaka-
acalah—the golden mountain known as Mandara.
TRANSLATION
The mountain known as Mandara, which was extremely heavy,
being made of gold, fell and smashed many demigods and demons.
PURPORT
By constitution, gold is heavier than stone. Since Mandara Mountain
was made of gold and was therefore heavier than stone, the demigods
and demons could not properly carry it to the ocean of milk.
TEXT 36
तांस्तथा मम्रमनसो मस्नवाहूरुकन्धरान्‌ |
विज्ञाय भगवांस्तत्र बभूव गरुडध्वजः ॥३६॥
tams tatha bhagna-manaso
bhagna-bahiuru-kandharan


--- Page 240 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
vijiaya bhagavarns tatra
babhitva garuda-dhvajah
tan—all the demigods and demons; tatha—thereafter; bhagna-
manasah—being brokenhearted; bhagna-bahu—with broken arms;
iru—thighs; kandharan—and shoulders; vjidya—knowing;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu; tatra—there;
babhiiva—appeared; garuda-dhvajah—being carried on Garuda.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons were frustrated and disheartened,
and their arms, thighs and shoulders were broken. Therefore the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who knows everything, ap-
peared there on the back of His carrier, Garuda.
TEXT 37
गिरिपातविनिष्पिष्टान्विलोक्यामरदानवान्‌ |
©
ईक्षया जीवयामास निर्जरान्‌ Famer ॥३७॥
giri-pata-vinispistan
vilokyamara-danavan
thsaya jivayam asa
nirjaran nirvranan yatha
giri-pata—because of the falling of Mandara Mountain; vinispistan —
crushed; vilokya—observing; amara—the demigods; danavan—and
the demons; thksaya—simply by His glance; jivayam asa —brought back
to life; nirjaran—without aggrievement; nirvranan-—without bruises;
yatha—as.
TRANSLATION
Observing that most of the demons and the demigods had been
crushed by the falling of the mountain, the Lord glanced over
them and brought them back to life. Thus they became free from
grief, and they even had no bruises on their bodies.


--- Page 241 ---
Text 38] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 237
TEXT 38
a
गिरिं चारोप्य गरुडे Tada लीलया ।
+ [५
आरुह्य ॒प्रययावन्धं सुरासुरगणेशचेतः ।३८॥
ভারা caropya garude
hastenaikena lilaya
aruhya prayayav abdhim
surdsura-ganair vrtah

girim—the mountain; ca—also; dropya—placing; garude—on the
back of Garuda; hastena—by the hand; ekena—one; lilaya—very easily
as His pastime; aruhya—getting on; prayayau—He went; abdhim—to
the ocean of milk; sura-asura-ganaih—by the demigods and asuras;
vrtah—surrounded.

TRANSLATION

The Lord very easily lifted the mountain with one hand and
placed it on the back of Garuda. Then, He too got on the back of
Garuda and went to the ocean of milk, surrounded by the
demigods and demons.

PURPORT

Here is proof of the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is above everyone. There are two classes of living entities—
the demons and the demigods —and the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is above them both. The demons believe in the *““chance” theory of cre-
ation, whereas the demigods believe in creation by the hand of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The omnipotence of the Supreme Lord
is proved here, for simply with one hand He lifted Mandara Mountain,
the demigods and the demons, placed them on the back of Garuda and
brought them to the ocean of milk. Now, the demigods, the devotees,
would immediately accept this incident, knowing that the Lord can lift
anything, however heavy it might be. But although demons were also
carried along with the demigods, demons, upon hearing of this incident,
would say that it is mythological. But if God is all-powerful, why would it


--- Page 242 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 6
be difficult for Him to lift a mountain? Since He is floating innumerable
planets with many hundreds and thousands of Mandara Mountains, why
can’t He lift one of them with His hand? This is not mythology, but the
difference between the believers and the faithless is that the devotees ac-
cept the incidents mentioned in the Vedic literatures to be true, whereas
the demons simply argue and label all these historical incidents
mythology. Demons would prefer to explain that everything happening
in the cosmic manifestation takes place by chance, but demigods, or de-
votees, never consider anything to be chance. Rather, they know that
everything is an arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
That is the difference between the demigods and the demons.
TEXT 39
= © .
अवरोप्य गिर स्कन्धात्‌ सुषणंः पततां वरः |
ययौ जलान्त उत्सृज्य हरिणा स विसर्जितः ॥३९॥
avaropya 81717 skandhat
suparnah patatamn varah
yayau jalanta utsrjya
harina sa visarjitah
avaropya—unloading; girim—the mountain; skandhat—from his
shoulder; suparnah—Garuda; patatam—of all the birds; varah—the
biggest or most powerful; yayau—went; jala-ante —where the water is;
utsrjya—placing; harina—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sah—he (Garuda); visarjitah—discharged from that place.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Garuda, the chief of birds, unloaded Mandara
Mountain from his shoulder and brought it near the water. Then
he was asked by the Lord to leave that place, and he left.
PURPORT
Garuda was asked by the Lord to leave that place because the snake
Vasuki, who was to be used as the rope for churning, could not go there
in the presence of Garuda. Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu, is not a


--- Page 243 ---
Text 39] The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce 239
vegetarian. He eats big snakes. Vasuki, being a great snake, would be
natural food for Garuda, the chief of birds. Lord Visnu therefore asked
Garuda to leave so that Vasuki could be brought to churn the ocean with
Mandara Mountain, which was to be used as the churning rod. These are
the wonderful arrangements of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Nothing" takes place by accident. Carrying Mandara Mountain on the
back of a bird and putting it in its right position might be difficult for
anyone, whether demigod or demon, but for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead everything is possible, as shown by this pastime. The Lord had
no difficulty lifting the mountain with one hand, and Garuda, His car-
rier, carried all the demons and demigods together by the grace of the
Supreme Lord. The Lord is known as Yogeévara, the master of all mystic
power, because of His omnipotence. If He likes, He can make anything
lighter than cotton or heavier than the universe. Those who do not
believe in the activities of the Lord cannot explain how things happen.
Using words like “accident,” they take shelter of ideas that are un-
believable. Nothing is accidental. Everything is done by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita
(9.10). Mayadhyaksena prakrtih sityate sacaracaram. Whatever actions
and reactions occur within the cosmic manifestation all take place under
the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. However,
because the demons do not understand the potency of the Lord, when
wonderful things are done, the demons think that they are accidental.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Sixth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Demigods and
Demons Declare a Truce.”


--- Page 244 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
Lord Siva Saves the Universe
by Drinking Poison

The summary of the Seventh Chapter is as follows. As described in this
chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing in His incarna-
tion as a tortoise, dove deep into the ocean to carry Mandara Mountain on
His back. At first the churning of the ocean produced kalakiita poison.
Everyone feared this poison, but Lord Siva satisfied them by drinking it.

With the understanding that when the nectar was generated from the
churning they would share it equally, the demigods and the demons
brought Vasuki to be used as the rope for the churning rod. By the ex-
pert arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demons
held the snake near the mouth, whereas the demigods held the tail of the
great snake. Then, with great endeavor, they began pulling the snake in
both directions. Because the churning rod, Mandara Mountain, was very
heavy and was not held by any support in the water, it sank into the
ocean, and in this way the prowess of both the demons and the demigods
was vanquished. The Supreme Personality of Godhead then appeared in
the form of a tortoise and supported Mandara Mountain on His back.
Then the churning resumed with great force. As a result of the churn-
ing, a huge amount of poison was produced. The prajapatis, seeing no
one else to save them, approached Lord Siva and offered him prayers full
of truth. Lord Siva is called ASutosa because he is very pleased if one 15 a
devotee. Therefore he easily agreed to drink all the poison generated by
the churning. The goddess Durga, Bhavani, the wife of Lord Siva, was
not at all disturbed when Lord Siva agreed to drink the poison, for she
knew Lord Siva’s prowess. Indeed, she expressed her pleasure at this
agreement. Then Lord Siva gathered the devastating poison, which was
everywhere. He took it in his hand and drank it. After he drank the
poison, his neck became bluish. A small quantity of the poison dropped
from his hands to the ground, and it is because of this poison that there
are poisonous snakes, scorpions, toxic plants and other poisonous things
in this world.

241


--- Page 245 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
TEXT 1
श्रीञ्ुक उवाच
ते नागराजमामन्त्र्य फरभागेन वासुकिम्‌ |
परिीय गिरौ तसिन्‌ नेत्रमन्धिं मदान्विताः |
आरेभिरे सुरायत्ता अमृतार्थे इरूढह ॥ १॥
sri-Suka uvaca
te naga-rajam amantrya
phala-bhagena vasukim
pariviya girau tasmin
netram abdhirin mudanvitah
arebhire sura yatta
amrtarthe kuridvaha
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; te—all of them (the
demigods and the demons); naga-rajam—the king of the Nagas, snakes;
amantrya—inviting, or requesting; phala-bhagena—by promising a
share of the nectar; vasukim—the snake Vasuki; pariviya—encircling;
girau—Mandara Mountain; tasmin—unto it; netram—the churning
rope; abdhim—the ocean of milk; muda anvitah—all surcharged with
great pleasure; arebhire—began to act; surah—the demigods; yattah—
with great endeavor; amrta-arthe—for gaining nectar; kuru-udvaha—0O
King Pariksit, best of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: 0 best of the Kurus, Maharaja Pariksit,
the demigods and demons summoned Vasuki, king of the ser-
pents, requesting him to come and promising to give him a share
of the nectar. They coiled Vasuki around Mandara Mountain as a
churning rope, and with great pleasure they endeavored to pro-
duce nectar by churning the ocean of milk.
TEXT 2
हरिः पुरस्ताज्जगृहे पूर्वं देवास्ततोऽभवन्‌ ॥ २ ॥


--- Page 246 ---
Text 3] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 243
harih purastaj jagrhe
pirvam devas tato ’bhavan
harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ajita; purastat—from
the front; jagrhe—took; pitrvam—at first; devah—the demigods;
tatah—thereafter; abhavan—took the front portion of Vasuki.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Ajita, grasped the front portion of
the snake, and then the demigods followed.
TEXT 3
a» A -
तन्नच्छन्‌ देत्यपतयो महापुरुषचष्टितम्‌ |
न॒गृह्ीमो वयं पुच्छमहेरङ्गममङ्गलम्‌ |
स्वाघ्यायश्चुतसम्पनाः प्रख्याता जन्मकमेभिः।। ३॥
tan naicchan daitya-patayo
maha-purusa-cestitam
na grhnimo vayar puccham
aher angam amangalam
svadhyaya-sruta-sampannah
prakhyata janma-karmabhih
tat—that arrangement; na aicchan—not liking; daitya-patayah—the
leaders of the demons; maha-purusa—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; cestitam —attempt; na—not; grhnimah —shall take; vayam—
all of us (the Daityas); puccham—the tail; aheh—of the serpent;
arigam—part of the body; amarngalam—inauspicious, inferior;
svadhyaya —with Vedic study; sruta—and Vedic knowledge; sampan-
nah—fully equipped; prakhyatah—prominent; janma-karmabhih—by
birth and activities.
TRANSLATION
The leaders of the demons thought it unwise to hold the tail, the
inauspicious portion of the snake. Instead, they wanted to hold the


--- Page 247 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
front, which had been taken by the Personality of Godhead and
the demigods, because that portion was auspicious and glorious.
Thus the demons, on the plea that they were all highly advanced
students of Vedic knowledge and were all famous for their birth
and activities, protested that they wanted to hold the front of the
snake.
PURPORT

The demons thought that the front of the snake was auspicious and
that catching hold of that portion would be more chivalrous. Moreover,
Daityas must always do the opposite of the demigods. That is their
nature. We have actually seen this in relation to our Krsna consciousness
movement. We are advocating cow protection and encouraging people to
drink more milk and eat palatable preparations made of milk, but the
demons, just to protest such proposals, are claiming that they are ad-
vanced in scientific knowledge, as described here by the words
svadhyaya-sruta-sampannah. They say that according to their scientific
way, they have discovered that milk is dangerous and that the beef ob-
tained by killing cows is very nutritious. This difference of opinion will
always continue. Indeed, it has existed since days of yore. Millions of
years ago, there was the same competition. The demons, as a result of
their so-called Vedic study, preferred to hold the side of the snake near
the mouth. The Supreme Personality of Godhead thought it wise to catch
hold of the dangerous part of the snake and allow the demons to hold the
tail, which was not dangerous, but because of a competitive desire, the
demons thought it wise to hold the snake near the mouth. If the
demigods were going to drink poison, the demons would resolve, “Why
should we not share the poison and die gloriously by drinking it?”

In regard to the words svadhyaya-Sruta-sampannah prakhyata
janma-karmabhih, another question may be raised. If one is actually
educated in Vedic knowledge, is famous for performing prescribed ac-
tivities and has been born in a great aristocratic family, why should he be
called a demon? The answer is that one may be highly educated and may
have been born in an aristocratic family, but if he is godless, if he does
not listen to the instructions of God, then he is a demon. There are many
examples in history of men like Hiranyakasipu, Ravana and Karnsa who
were well educated, who were born in aristocratic families and who were


--- Page 248 ---
Text 4] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 245
very powerful and chivalrous in fighting, but who, because of deriding
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, were called Raksasas, or demons.
One may be very well educated, but if he has no sense of Krsna con-
sciousness, no obedience to the Supreme Lord, he is a demon. That is de-
scribed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (7.15):
na mar duskrtino miadhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jiana
asuram bhavam asritah
“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.”” Asura bhavam refers to
not accepting the existence of God or the transcendental instructions of
the Personality of Godhead. Bhagavad-gita clearly consists of transcen-
dental instructions imparted directly by the Supreme Personality of God-
head. But asuras, instead of accepting these instructions directly, make
commentaries according to their own whimsical ways and mislead every-
one, without profit even for themselves. One should therefore be very
careful of demoniac, godless persons. According to the words of Lord
Krsna, even if a godless demon is very well educated, he must be con-
sidered a midha, naradhama and mayayapahrta-jiana.
TEXT 4
इति तृष्णीं ফিনান্টুয্যান্‌ विलोक्य पुरुषोत्तमः।
खसयमानो विसृज्याग्रं पुच्छ जग्राह सामरः lvl
iti [प्व sthitan daityan
vilokya purusottamah
smayamano visrjyagrari
puccham jagraha samarah
iti—thus; tasnim —silently; sthitan—staying; daityan—the demons;
vilokya—seeing; purusa-uttamah—the Personality of Godhead;
smayamanah—smiling; visrjya—giving up; agram—the front portion


--- Page 249 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
of the snake; puccham—the rear portion; jagraha—grasped; sa-
amarah—with the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Thus the demons remained silent, opposing the desire of the
demigods. Seeing the demons and understanding their motive, the
Personality of Godhead smiled. Without discussion, He im-
mediately accepted their proposal by grasping the tail of the snake,
and the demigods followed Him.
TEXT 5
कृतस्यानविमागास्त णवं करयपनन्दनाः |
ममन्थुः परमं यत्ता saan पयोनिधिम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
krta-sthana-vibhagas ta
evar ka§yapa-nandanah
mamanthuh [02707710718 yatta
amrtarthari payo-nidhim
krta—adjusting; sthana-vibhagah—the division of the places they
were to hold; te—they; evam—in this way; kaSyapa-nandanah—the
sons of Kasyapa (both the demigods and the demons); mamanthuh—
churned; paramam—with great; yattah—endeavor; amrta-artham—
for getting nectar; payah-nidhim —the ocean of milk.
TRANSLATION
After thus adjusting how the snake was to be held, the sons of
Kasyapa, both demigods and demons, began their activities, desir-
ing to get nectar by churning the ocean of milk.
TEXT 6
९ = =
मध्यमानेऽणंवे सोऽद्रिरनाधारो ह्यपोऽविशत्‌ |
धियमाणोऽपि बलिमिर्गोरवात्‌ पाण्डनन्दन | ६ ॥
mathyamane 70086 so "काद
anadharo hy apo visat


--- Page 250 ---
Text 7] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 247
dhriyamano pi balibhir
gauravat pandu-nandana
mathyamane —while the churning was going on; arnave—in the
ocean of milk; sah—that; adrih—hill; anadharah— without being sup-
ported by anything; hi—indeed; apah—in the water; avisat—drowned;
dhriyamanah—captured; api—although; balibhih—by the powerful
demigods and demons; gauravat—from being very heavy; pandu-nan-
dana—O son of Pandu (Maharaja Pariksit).
TRANSLATION
O son of the Pandu dynasty, when Mandara Mountain was thus
being used as a churning rod in the ocean of milk, it had no sup-
port, and therefore although held by the strong hands of the
demigods and demons, it sank into the water.
TEXT 7
ते सुनिर्विण्णमनसः परिम्लानघ्ुखभियः |
आसन्‌ खपौरुषे नष्टे देवेनातिबीयसा । ७ ॥
te sunirvinna-manasah
parimlana-mukha-sriyah
asan sva-pauruse naste
daivenatibaltyasa
te—all of them (the demigods and demons); sunirvinna-manasah—
their minds being very disappointed; parimlana—dried up; mukha-
sriyah—the beauty of their faces; @san—became; sva-pauruse—with
their own prowess; naste—being lost; daivena—by a providential ar-
rangement; ati-baliyasa—which is always stronger than anything else.
TRANSLATION
Because the mountain had been sunk by the strength of provi-
dence, the demigods and demons were disappointed, and their
faces seemed to shrivel.


--- Page 251 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
TEXT 8
विलोक्य विभ्ेशविधिं तदेश्वरो
दुरन्तवीर्योऽवितथामिसन्धिः ।
FAT वपुः कच्छपमद्भुतं महत्‌
प्रविश्य तोयं गिरिघरजदार ॥ ८ ॥
vilokya vighnesa-vidhir tadesvaro
duranta-viryo “vitathabhisandhih
krtva vapuh kacchapam adbhutam mahat
pravi§ya toyari girim ujjahdra
vilokya—observing; vighna—the obstruction (the sinking of the
mountain); iSa-vidhim —by the providential arrangement; tada—then;
iSvarah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; duranta-viryah—incon-
ceivably powerful; avitatha—infallible; abhisandhih—whose deter-
mination; krtva—expanding; vapuh—body; kacchapam—tortoise;
adbhutam —wonderful; mahat—very great; praviSya—entering;
toyam —the water; girim—the mountain (Mandara); wjahara—lifted.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the situation that had been created by the will of the
Supreme, the unlimitedly powerful Lord, whose determination is
infallible, took the wonderful shape of a tortoise, entered the
water, and lifted the great Mandara Mountain.
PURPORT
Here is evidence that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
supreme controller of everything. As we have previously described,
there are two classes of men—the demons and the demigods—but
neither of them are supremely powerful. Everyone has experienced that
hindrances are imposed upon us by the supreme power. The demons
regard these hindrances as mere accidents or chance, but devotees accept
them to be acts of the supreme ruler. When faced with hindrances,
therefore, devotees pray to the Lord. Tat te ’nukampari susamiksamano


--- Page 252 ---
Text 9] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 249
bhunjana evatma-krtari vipakam. Devotees endure hindrances, accept-
ing them to be caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
regarding them as benedictions. Demons, however, being unable to
understand the supreme controller, regard such hindrances as accidental.
Here, of course, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was present per-
sonally. It was by His will that there were hindrances, and by His will
those hindrances were removed. The Lord appeared as a tortoise to sup-
port the great mountain. Ksitir tha vipulatare tava tisthati prsthe. The
Lord held the great mountain on His back. Kesava dhrta-kirma-sarira
Jaya jagadisa hare. Dangers can be created by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and they can also be removed by Him. This is known to de-
votees, but demons cannot understand it.
TEXT 9
glad वीक्ष्य कुखाचरं पुनः
Coo
सथयता निमथितं सुरासुराः ।
दधार पृष्ठेन स लक्षयोजन-
प्रस्तारिणा द्वीप इवापरो महान्‌ ॥ ९॥
tam utthitari viksya kulacalari punah
samudyata nirmathitum surasurah
dadhara prsthena sa laksa-yojana-
prastarina dvipa ivaparo mahan
tam —that mountain; utthitam —lifted; viksya—observing;
kulacalam—known as Mandara; punah—again; samudyatdh—en-
livened; nirmathitum—to churn the ocean of milk; sura-asurah—the
demigods and the demons; dadhdara—carried; prsthena—by the back;
sah—the Supreme Lord; laksa-yojana—one hundred thousand yojanas
(eight hundred thousand miles); prastarina—extending; dvipah—a big
island; iva—like; aparah—another; mahan—very big.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods and demons saw that Mandara Mountain

had been lifted, they were enlivened and encouraged to begin


--- Page 253 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
churning again. The mountain rested on the back of the great tor-
toise, which extended for eight hundred thousand miles like a
large island.
TEXT 10
(© 6:
gual धैजवीयंवेपितं
परिप्रमन्तं गिरिमङ्ग gga: |
बिभ्रत्‌ तद्‌वतैनमादिकच्छयो
=
मेनेऽङ्गकण्डयनमत्रमेयः ॥१०॥
surasurendrair 11101111
paribhramantari girim ariga prsthatah
bibhrat tad-avartanam adi-kacchapo
mene ’riga-kandityanam aprameyah
sura-asura-indraih—by the leaders of the demons and the demigods;
bhuja-virya—by the strength of their arms; vepitam—moving;
paribhramantam —rotating; girim—the mountain; ariga—O Maharaja
Pariksit; prsthatah—on His back; bibhrat—bore; tat—of that;
avartanam—the rotating; ddi-kacchapah—as the supreme original tor-
toise; mene —considered; ariga-kandiyanam—as pleasing scratching of
the body; aprameyah—unlimited.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the demigods and demons, by the strength of
their arms, rotated Mandara Mountain on the back of the extraor-
dinary tortoise, the tortoise accepted the rolling of the mountain
as a means of scratching His body, and thus He felt a pleasing sen-
sation.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always the unlimited. Al-
though the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His body as a tortoise,
held on His back the largest of mountains, Mandara-parvata, He did not
feel any inconvenience. On the contrary, He apparently felt some itch-
ing, and thus the rotation of the mountain was certainly very pleasing.


--- Page 254 ---
Text 11] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 251
TEXT 11
तथासुरानाविशदासुरेण
रूपेण तेषां बर्वीयमीरयन्‌ |
उदीपयन्‌ देवगणांश्च विष्णु-
दैवेन नागेन्द्रमबोधरूपः॥।११॥
tathasuran avisad asurena
riapena tesarin bala-viryam irayan
uddipayan deva-ganams ca vispur
daivena nagendram abodha-ripah

tatha—thereafter; asurdn—unto the demons; avisat—entered;
asurena—Dby the quality of passion; ripena—in such a form; tesam—of
them; bala-viryam—strength and energy; irayan—increasing;
uddipayan—encouraging; deva-ganan—the demigods; ca—also;
visnuh—Lord Visnu; daivena—by the feature of goodness; naga-
indram —unto the King of the serpents, Vasuki; abodha-ripah—by the
quality of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, Lord Visnu entered the demons as the quality of
passion, the demigods as the quality of goodness, and Vasuki as the
quality of ignorance to encourage them and increase their various
types of strength and energy.

PURPORT

Everyone in this material world is under the different modes of ma-
terial nature. There were three different parties in the churning of
Mandara Mountain —the demigods, who were in the mode of goodness,
the demons, who were in the mode of passion, and the snake Vasuki, who
was in the mode of ignorance. Since they were all becoming tired (Vasuki
so much so that he was almost going to die), Lord Visnu, to encourage
them to continue the work of churning the ocean, entered into them


--- Page 255 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
according to their respective modes of nature—goodness, passion and ig-
norance.
TEXT 12
उपर्यगेन्द्रं गिरिराडिवान्य
आक्रम्य हस्तेन सहस्रबाहुः |
तस्यौ दिवि बहमवेन्द्रसुख्यै-
रभिष्डुवद्धिः सुमनोऽभिवृष्टः ॥ १२॥
upary agendrarm giri-rad ivanya
akramya hastena sahasra-bahuh
tasthau divi brahma-bhavendra-mukhyair
abhistuvadbhih sumano-"bhivrstah

upari—on the top of; agendram—the big mountain; giri-rat—the
king of mountains; iva—like; anyah—another; akramya—catching;
hastena—by one hand; sahasra-bahuh— exhibiting thousands of hands;
tasthau—situated; divi—in the sky; brahma—Lord Brahma; bhava—
Lord Siva; indra—the King of heaven; mukhyaih—headed by;
abhistuvadbhih—offered prayers to the Lord; sumanah—by flowers;
abhivrstah —being showered.

TRANSLATION

Manifesting Himself with thousands of hands, the Lord then ap-
peared on the summit of Mandara Mountain, like another great
mountain, and held Mandara Mountain with one hand. In the up-
per planetary systems, Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, along with
Indra, King of heaven, and other demigods, offered prayers to the
Lord and showered flowers upon Him.

PURPORT

To balance Mandara Mountain while it was being pulled from both
sides, the Lord Himself appeared on its summit like another great moun-
tain. Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and King Indra then expanded themselves
and showered flowers on the Lord.


--- Page 256 ---
Text 14] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 253
TEXT 13
ल ~ -
उपयेधश्चालमनि गोत्रनेत्रयोः
=
परेण ते प्राविशता समेधिताः ।
ममन्थुरब्धिं तरसा मदोत्कटा
महाद्रिणा क्षोभितनक्रचक्रम्‌ 1230
upary adhas$ catmani gotra-netrayoh
parena te pravisata samedhitah
mamanthur abdhiri tarasa madotkata
mahadrina ksobhita-nakra-cakram
upari—upward; adhah ca—and downward; atmani—unto the
demons and demigods; gotra-netrayoh—unto the mountain and Vasuki,
who was used as a rope; parena—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
te—they; pravisata—entering them; samedhitah —sufficiently agitated;
mamanthuh—churned; abdhim—the ocean of milk; tarasa —with great
strength; mada-utkatah —being mad; maha-adrina—with the great
Mandara Mountain; ksobhita—agitated; nakra-cakram—all the alliga-
tors in the water.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons worked almost madly for the nectar,
encouraged by the Lord, who was above and below the mountain
and who had entered the demigods, the demons, Vasuki and the
mountain itself. Because of the strength of the demigods and
demons, the ocean of milk was so powerfully agitated that all the
alligators in the water were very much perturbed. Nonetheless the
churning of the ocean continued in this way.
TEXT 14
अदीन्द्रसादस्रकटोरदडष्ुख-
=
श्वासाप्रिधूमादतवचसोऽसुराः ।
पौलोमकाठेयबरील्वलादयो
दवाभ्निद्ग्धाः सरला इवामवन्‌ ॥ १४॥


--- Page 257 ---
254. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
ahindra-sahasra-kathora-dri-mukha-
Svasagni-dhumahata-varcaso ‘surah
pauloma-kaleya-balilvaladayo
davagni-dagdhah sarala ivabhavan
ahindra —of the King of serpents; sahasra—by thousands; kathora—
very, very hard; drk—all directions; mukha—by the mouth; svasa—
breathing; agni—fire coming out; dhiama—smoke; ahata—being
affected; varcasah—by the rays; asurah—the demons; pauloma—
Pauloma; kaleya—Kaleya; bali—Bali; ilvala—Ilvala; adayah—headed
by; dava-agni—by a forest fire; dagdhah—burned; saralah—sarala
trees; iva—like; abhavan—all of them became.
TRANSLATION
Vasuki had thousands of eyes and mouths. From his mouths he
breathed smoke and blazing fire, which affected the demons,
headed by Pauloma, Kaleya, Bali and Ilvala. Thus the demons, who
appeared like sarala trees burned by a forest fire, gradually became
powerless.
TEXT 15
देवांश्च तच्छ्रासक्िखाहतग्रमान्‌
शूभ्राम्बरसग्वरकञ्चुकाननान्‌ |
समभ्यवषन्मगवद्ला धना
ववुः सथुद्रोम्यपगूढबायवः ॥१५॥
devams ca tac-chvasa-sikha-hata-prabhan
dhamrambara-srag-vara-kanicukananan
samabhyavarsan bhagavad-vasa ghana
vavuh samudrormy-upagidha-vayavah
devan—all the demigods; ca—also; tat—of Vasuki; $vasa—from the
breathing; sikha—by the flames; hata—being affected; prabhan—their
bodily luster; dhimra—smoky; ambara—dress; srak-vara—excellent
garlands; kaficuka—armaments; ananan—and faces; samabhyavarsan-
—sufficiently rained; bhagavat-vasah—under the control of the


--- Page 258 ---
Text 17] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 255
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ghanah—clouds; vavuh—blew;
samudra—of the ocean of milk; @#rmi—from the waves; upagidha—
bearing fragments of water; vayavah —breezes.
TRANSLATION
Because the demigods were also affected by the blazing breath of
Vasuki, their bodily lusters diminished, and their garments, gar-
lands, weapons and faces were blackened by smoke. However, by
the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, clouds appeared
on the sea, pouring torrents of rain, and breezes blew, carrying
particles of water from the sea waves, to give the demigods relief.
TEXT 16
मथ्यमानात्‌ तथा सिन्धोदेवासुरबरूथपैः |
यदा सुधा न जायेत निर्ममन्थाजितः खयम्‌ ।।१६॥
mathyamanat tatha sindhor
devasura-varitha-paih
yada sudha na jayeta
nirmamanthdjitah svayam
mathyamanat—sufficiently being churned; tatha—in this way;
sindhoh—{from the ocean of milk; deva—of the demigods; asura—and
the demons; varitha-paih—by the best; yada—when; sudhd —nectar;
na jayeta—did not come out; nirmamantha—churned; ajitah—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ajita; svayam—personally.
TRANSLATION
When nectar did not come from the ocean of milk, despite so
much endeavor by the best of the demigods and demons, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ajita, personally began to churn
the ocean.
TEXT 17
© =
मेषश्यामः कनकपरिधिः कणेविद्योतविदयु-
नमूर्भि त्राजद्विलुलितकचः खग्धरो रक्तनेत्रः |


--- Page 259 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
6, [|
EERE RCE CER CI যুহীল্লা
ang मञ्नाप्रतिगिरिरिवाशोमताथो धताद्रिः॥।
megha-syamah kanaka-paridhih karna-vidyota-vidyun
mirdhni bhrajad-vilulita-kacah srag-dharo rakta-netrah
jaitrair dorbhir jagad-abhaya-dair dandasikari grhitva
mathnan mathna pratigirir ivasobhatatho dhrtadrih
megha-§yamah—blackish like a cloud; kanaka-paridhih—wearing
yellow garments; karna—on the ears; vidyota-vidyut—whose earrings
shone like lightning; mirdhni—on the head; bhrajat—gleaming;
vilulita—disheveled; kacah—whose hair; srak-dharah—wearing a
flower garland; rakta-netrah—with red eyes; jaitraih—with victorious;
dorbhih—with arms; jagat—to the universe; abhaya-daih—which give
fearlessness; dandasiham—the snake (Vasuki); grhitva —after taking;
mathnan—churning; mathna—by the churning rod (Mandara Moun-
tain); pratigirih—another mountain; iva—like; asobhata—He ap-
peared; atho—then; dhrta-adrih—having taken the mountain.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared like a blackish cloud. He was dressed with
yellow garments, His earrings shone on His ears like lightning,
and His hair spread over His shoulders. He wore a garland of
flowers, and His eyes were pinkish. With His strong, glorious
arms, which award fearlessness throughout the universe, He took
hold of Vasuki and began churning the ocean, using Mandara
Mountain as a churning rod. When engaged in this way, the Lord
appeared like a beautifully situated mountain named Indranila.
TEXT 18
© oe
ECR CIC LCR IC EA
= ও
महास्वण हाठहलाह्यमग्रतः |
सम्भ्रान्तमीनोन्मकराहिकच्छपात्‌
>~
तिमिद्धिषग्राहतिमिङ्गिलाङुखात्‌ ॥१८॥


--- Page 260 ---
Text 19] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 257
nirmathyamanad udadher abhid visa
77100100007 halahalahvam agratah
sambhranta-minonmakarahi-kacchapat
timi-dvipa-graha-timingilakulat
nirmathyamanat—while the activities of churning were going on;
udadheh—from the ocean; abhiit—there was; visam—poison; maha-
ulbanam—very fierce; halahala-ahvam—by the name halahala;
agratah—at first; sambhranta —agitated and going here and there;
mina—various kinds of fish; unmakara—sharks; ahi—different kinds
of snakes; kacchapat—and many kinds of tortoises; timi—whales;
dvipa —water elephants; graha —crocodiles; timirngila—whales that can
swallow whales; akuldat—being very much agitated.
TRANSLATION
The fish, sharks, tortoises and snakes were most agitated and
perturbed. The entire ocean became turbulent, and even the large
aquatic animals like whales, water elephants, crocodiles and
timingila fish [large whales that can swallow small whales] came to
the surface. While the ocean was being churned in this way, it first
produced a fiercely dangerous poison called halahala.
TEXT 19
৬ ९
तदुग्रवेगं दिशि दिच्युपयधो
९
विसर्पदुस्सपेद सद्यमप्रति |
भीताः प्रजा दुदुबुरङ्ग सेरा
अरक््यमाणाः शरणं सदाशिवम्‌ ।॥ १९॥
tad ugra-vegam disi disy upary adho
visarpad utsarpad asahyam aprati
bhitah praja dudruvur 07180 sesvara
araksyamanah saranam sadasivam
tat—that; ugra-vegam—very fierce and potent poison; disi disi—in
all directions; upari—upward; adhah—downward; visarpat—curling;


--- Page 261 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
utsarpat—going upward; asahyam—unbearable; aprati—uncontrolla-
ble; bhitah—being very much afraid; prajah—the residents of all the
worlds; dudruvuh—moved here and there; ariga—O Maharaja Pariksit;
sa-iSvarah —with the Supreme Lord; araksyamanah—not being pro-
tected; saranam—shelter; sadasivam —unto the lotus feet of Lord Siva.
TRANSLATION
O King, when that uncontrollable poison was forcefully spread-
ing up and down in all directions, all the demigods, along with the
Lord Himself, approached Lord Siva [Sadasiva]. Feeling
unsheltered and very much afraid, they sought shelter of him.
PURPORT
One may question that since the Supreme Personality of Godhead was
personally present, why did He accompany all the demigods and people
in general to take shelter of Lord Sadasiva, instead of intervening Him-
self. In this connection Srila Madhvacarya warns:
rudrasya yasaso rthaya
svayarn visnur visarn vibhuh
na safijahre samartho pi
vayur coce prasantaye
Lord Visnu was competent to rectify the situation, but in order to give
credit to Lord Siva, who later drank all the poison and kept it in his neck,
Lord Visnu did not take action.
TEXT 20
विलोक्य तं देववरं त्रिलोक्या
भवाय देव्याभिमतं प्नीनाम्‌ ।
On =
आसीनमद्राव पवगहेतो-
स्तपो जुषाणं स्तुतिभिः प्रणेषुः ॥२०॥
vilokya tari deva-varar tri-lokya
bhavaya devyabhimatarin muninam


--- Page 262 ---
Text 21] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 259
asinam adrav apavarga-hetos
tapo jusanam stutibhih pranemuh
vilokya—observing; tam—him; deva-varam—the best of the
demigods; tri-lokyah—of the three worlds; bhavaya—for the flourish-
ing; devya—with his wife, Bhavani; abhimatam—accepted by;
muninam—great saintly persons; dsinam—sitting together; adrau—
from the top of Kailasa Hill; apavarga-hetoh—desiring liberation;
tapah—in austerity; jusanam—being served by them; stutibhih—by
prayers; pranemuh—offered their respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The demigods observed Lord Siva sitting on the summit of
Kailasa Hill with his wife, Bhavani, for the auspicious development
of the three worlds. He was being worshiped by great saintly per-
sons desiring liberation. The demigods offered him their obei-
sances and prayers with great respect.
TEXT 21
श्रीप्रजापतय FF?
देवदेव महादेव भूतारमन्‌ भूतभावन |
० >
त्राहिनः शरणापन्नास््रखाक्यद्‌हनाद्‌ विषात्‌। 12
Sri-prajapataya ticuh
deva-deva maha-deva
bhatatman bhita-bhavana
trahi nah $aranapannars
trailokya-dahanad visat
sri-prajapatayah iicuh—the prajapatis said; deva-deva—O Lord
Mahadeva, best of the demigods; maha-deva—O great demigod; bhita-
atman—O life and soul of everyone in this world; bhata-bhavana—O
the cause of the happiness and flourishing of all of them; trahi—deliver;
nah—us; Sarana-apannan—who have taken shelter at your lotus feet;
trailokya—of the three worlds; dahanat—which is causing the burning;
visat—from this poison.


--- Page 263 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
The prajapatis said: O greatest of all demigods, Mahadeva,
Supersoul of all living entities and cause of their happiness and
prosperity, we have come to the shelter of your lotus feet. Now
please save us from this fiery poison, which is spreading all over
the three worlds.
PURPORT
Since Lord Siva is in charge of annihilation, why should he be ap-
proached for protection, which is given by Lord Visnu? Lord Brahma
creates, and Lord Siva annihilates, but both Lord Brahma and Lord Siva
are incarnations of Lord Visnu and are known as Saktyavesa-avataras.
They are endowed with a special power like that of Lord Visnu, who is
actually all-pervading in their activities. Therefore whenever prayers for
protection are offered to Lord Siva, actually Lord Visnu is indicated, for
otherwise Lord Siva is meant for destruction. Lord Siva is one of the
iSvaras, or the controllers known as Saktyavesa-avataras. Therefore he
can be addressed as having the qualities of Lord Visnu.
TEXT 22
त्वमेकः स्व॑जगत ईश्वरो बन्धमोक्षयोः |
ক Cn ৬
तं त्वामचेन्ति gen प्रपन्नार्तिहरं गुरुम्‌ ॥२२॥
tvam ekah sarva-jagata
Svaro bandha-moksayoh
tari tvam arcanti kusalah
prapannadrti-haram gurum
tvam ekah—Your Lordship is indeed; sarva-jagatah—of the three
worlds; Svarah—the controller; bandha-moksayoh—of both bondage
and liberation; tam—that controller; tvam arcanti—worship you;
kusalah—persons who want good fortune; prapanna-arti-haram —who
can mitigate all the distresses of a sheltered devotee; gurum—you who
act as a good advisor to all fallen souls.


--- Page 264 ---
Text 23] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 261
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are the cause of bondage and liberation of the en-
tire universe because you are its ruler. Those who are advanced in
spiritual consciousness surrender unto you, and therefore you are
the cause of mitigating their distresses, and you are also the cause
of their liberation. We therefore worship Your Lordship.
PURPORT
Actually Lord Visnu maintains and accomplishes all good fortune. If
one has to take shelter of Lord Visnu, why should the demigods take
shelter of Lord Siva? They did so because Lord Visnu acts through Lord
Siva in the creation of the material world. Lord Siva acts on behalf of
Lord Visnu. When the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (14.4) that He is the
father of all living entities (aha: bija-pradah pita), this refers to actions
performed by Lord Visnu through Lord Siva. Lord Visnu is always unat-
tached to material activities, and when material activities are to be per-
formed, Lord Visnu performs them through Lord Siva. Lord Siva is
therefore worshiped on the level of Lord Visnu. When Lord Visnu is un-
touched by the external energy He is Lord Visnu, but when He is in
touch with the external energy, He appears in His feature as Lord Siva.
TEXT 23
¢
गुणमय्या खशक्त्यास्य सगेसित्यप्ययान्विभो।
धत्से यदा खदग्‌ भूमन्त्रह्मविष्णुशिवाभिधाम्‌ ॥२३॥
guna-mayya sva-saktydsya

sarga-sthity-apyayan vibho

dhatse yada sva-drg bhiiman

brahma-visnu-sivabhidham
guna-mayyda—acting in three modes of activity; sva-Saktya—by the
external energy of Your Lordship; asya—of this material world; sarga-
sthiti-apyayan —creation, maintenance and annihilation; vibho—O
lord; dhatse—you execute; yada—when; sva-drk—you manifest


--- Page 265 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
yourself; bhiaman—O great one; brahma-visnu-siva-abhidham —as
Lord Brahma, Lord Visnu or Lord Siva.
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are self-effulgent and supreme. You create this ma-
terial world by your personal energy, and you assume the names
Brahma, Visnu and Mahe§vara when you act in creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation.
PURPORT
This prayer is actually offered to Lord Visnu, the purusa, who in His
incarnations as the guna-avatdras assumes the names Brahma, Visnu
and Mahesvara.
TEXT 24
त्वं AF परमं YA सद सद्धावभवनम्‌।
नानाशक्तिभिराभातस्त्वमातमा जगदीश्वरः ॥२४॥
1007 brahma paramari guhyam
sad-asad-bhava-bhavanam
nana-saktibhir abhatas
tvam atma jagad-iSvarah
tvam—Your Lordship; brahma—impersonal Brahman; paramam—
supreme; guhyam—confidential; sat-asat-bhava-bhavanam—the cause
of varieties of creation, its cause and effect; nana-saktibhih—with
varieties of potencies; abhatah—manifest; tvam—you are; atma—the
Supersoul; jagat-isvarah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
You are the cause of all causes, the self-effulgent, inconceivable,
impersonal Brahman, which is originally Parabrahman. You
manifest various potencies in this cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
This prayer is offered to the impersonal Brahman, which consists of
the effulgent rays of Parabrahman. Parabrahman is the Supreme Per-


--- Page 266 ---
Text 26] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 263
sonality of Godhead (param brahma param dhama pavitrari paramari
bhavan). When Lord Siva is worshiped as Parabrahman, the worship is
meant for Lord Visnu.
TEXT 25
त्व॑ शन्दयोनिर्जगदादिरात्मा
प्राणेन्द्रियद्रव्यगुणः खमावः |
कालः क्रतुः सस्यगरतं च धर्म-
4 (~ o.
स्त्वय्यक्षर यत्‌ त्रिब्रदामनान्त ॥२५॥
(एव Sabda-yonir jagad-adir atma
pranedriya-dravya-gunah svabhavah
kalah kratuh satyam rtam ca dharmas
tvayy aksarari yat tri-vrd-amananti
tvam—Your Lordship; sabda-yonih—the origin and source of Vedic
literature; jagat-adih—the original cause of material creation; atma—
the soul; prana—the living force; indriya—the senses; dravya—the
material elements; gunah—the three qualities; sva-bhdvah—material
nature; kdalah—eternal time; kratuh—sacrifice; satyam—truth; rtam—
truthfulness; ca—and; dharmah—two different types of religion;
tvayi—unto you; aksaram—the original syllable, 07৫72) yat—that
which; tri-vrt—consisting of the letters a, u and m; amananti—they say.
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are the original source of Vedic literature. You are
the original cause of material creation, the life force, the senses,
the five elements, the three modes and the mahat-tattva. You are
eternal time, determination and the two religious systems called
truth [satya] and truthfulness [rta]. You are the shelter of the sylla-
ble orn, which consists of three letters ‘‘a-u-m.”’
TEXT 26
Ce =
Afgd तेऽखिलदेवतात्मा
क्षितिं विदुर्लोकमवाङ धिपङ्कजम्‌ |


--- Page 267 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
काटं गतिं तेऽखिर्देवतात्मनो
fra कर्णो रसनं जलेशम्‌ UREN
agnir 71000077 te ’khila-devatatma
ksitirn vidur loka-bhavanghri-pankajam
kala gatim te ’khila-devatatmano
disas ca karnau rasanam [८1९50771
agnih—fire; mukham —mouth; te—of Your Lordship; akhila-devata-
atma—the origin of all demigods; ksitim—the surface of the globe;
viduh —they know; loka-bhava—O origin of all planets; arghri-panka-
jam—your lotus feet; kalam—eternal time; gatim—progress; te—of
Your Lordship; akhila-devata-atmanah—the total aggregate of all the
demigods; disah—all directions; ca—and; karnau—your ears;
rasanam—taste; jala-iSam—the demigod controller of the water.
TRANSLATION
O father of all planets, learned scholars know that fire is your
mouth, the surface of the globe is your lotus feet, eternal time is
your movement, all the directions are your ears, and Varuna,
master of the waters, is your tongue.
PURPORT
In the Sruti-mantras it is said, agnih sarva-devatah: “Fire is the ag-
gregate of all demigods.”” Agni is the mouth of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. It is through Agni, or fire, that the Lord accepts all sacrificial
oblations.
TEXT 27
नाभिनैमस्ते छसनं नमखाच्‌
घ्य चक्षुषि जलं ख रेतः ।
परावरात्माश्रयणं तवात्मा
सोमो मनो diva शिरस्ते ।॥२७॥
nabhir nabhas te 5४50710४ nabhasvan
siryas ca caksivrisi jalan sma retah


--- Page 268 ---
Text 28] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 265
paravaratmadsrayanam tavatma
somo mano dyaur bhagavan Siras te
nabhih—navel; nabhah—the sky; te—of Your Lordship;
Svasanam—breathing; nabhasvan—the air; siryah ca—and the sun
globe; caksirsi—your eyes; jalam—the water; sma—indeed; retah—
semen; para-avara-atma-asrayanam—the shelter of all living entities,
low and high; tava—your; atma—self; somah—the moon; manah—
mind; dyauh—the higher planetary systems; bhagavan—O Your Lord-
ship; Sirah—head; te—of you.
TRANSLATION
O lord, the sky is your navel, the air is your breathing, the sun
is your eyes, and the water is your semen. You are the shelter of all
kinds of living entities, high and low. The god of the moon is your
mind, and the upper planetary system is your head.
TEXT 28
क्षिः समुद्रा गिरयोऽखिसक्घा
रोमाणि सर्वोषधिवीरुस्ते ।
छन्दांसि साक्षात्‌ तव सप्त धातव.
ख्रयीमयात्मन्‌ हृदयं सवेधमंः ।२८॥
kuksih samudra girayo ’sthi-sangha
romani sarvausadhi-virudhas te
chandarisi saksat tava sapta dhatavas
trayi-mayatman hrdayam sarva-dharmah
kuksih—abdomen; samudrah—the oceans; girayah—the mountains;
asthi—bones; sanighdh— combination; romani—the hairs of the body;
sarva—all; ausadhi—drugs; virudhah—plants and creepers; te—your;
chandarisi—Vedic mantras; saksat—directly; tava—your; sapta—
seven; dhatavah—layers of the body; trayi-maya-atman—O three
Vedas personified; hrdayam—core of the heart; sarva-dharmah—all
kinds of religion.


--- Page 269 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are the three Vedas personified. The seven seas are
your abdomen, and the mountains are your bones. All drugs,
creepers and vegetables are the hairs on your body, the Vedic
mantras like Gayatri are the seven layers of your body, and the
Vedic religious system is the core of your heart.
TEXT 29
मुखानि पञ्चोपनिषदस्तवेश
a ९
येिशदष्टोत्तरमन्त्रवगंः |
यत्‌ तच्छिवाख्यं परमात्मत्वं
देव खयंज्योतिरवस्ितिस्ते ural
mukhani paficopanisadas tavesa
yais trim$ad-astottara- mantra-vargah
yat tac chivakhyam paramatma-tattvam
deva svayam-jyotir avasthitis te
mukhani—faces; padca—five; upanisadah—Vedic literatures;
tava—your; i5a—O lord; yaih—by which; trirsat-asta-uttara-mantra-
vargah—in the category of thirty-eight important Vedic mantras; yat—
that; tat—as it is; Siva-akhyam —celebrated by the name Siva; parama-
atma-tattvam—which ascertain the truth about Paramatma; deva—O
lord; svayam-jyotih—self-illuminated; avasthitih—situation; te—of
Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
O lord, the five important Vedic mantras are represented by
your five faces, from which the thirty-eight most celebrated Vedic
mantras have been generated. Your Lordship, being celebrated as
Lord Siva, is self-illuminated. You are directly situated as the
supreme truth, known as Paramatma.
PURPORT
The five mantras mentioned in this connection are as follows:
(1) Purusa, (2) Aghora, (3) Sadyojata, (4) Vamadeva, and (5) Isana.


--- Page 270 ---
Text 30] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 267
These five mantras are within the category of thirty-eight special Vedic
mantras chanted by Lord Siva, who is, therefore celebrated as Siva or
Mahadeva. Another reason why Lord Siva is called Siva, which means
““all-auspicious,” is that he is self-illuminated, exactly like Lord Visnu,
who is the Paramatma. Because Lord Siva is directly an incarnation of
Lord Visnu, he is situated as Lord Visnu’s direct representative. This fact
is corroborated by a Vedic mantra: pati visvasyatmesvararm sasvatari
sivam acyutam. The Supersoul is called by many names, of which
Mahesvara, Siva and Acyuta are especially mentioned.
TEXT 30
a
छाया स्वधर्मोर्मिषु येविसर्गो
नेत्रत्रयं सत्वरजस्तमांसि |
साख्यात्मनः शाख्रकृतस्तवेक्षा
छन्दोमयो देव ऋषिः पुराणः ॥२०॥
chaya tv adharmormisu yair visargo
netra-trayam sattva-rajas-tamarnsi
sarkhyatmanah astra-krtas taveksa
chandomayo deva rsih puranah
chaya—shadow; tu—but; adharma-irmisu—in the waves of ir-
religion, like kama, krodha, lobha and moha; yaih—by which;
visargah—so many varieties of creation; netra-trayam—three eyes;
sattva—goodness; rajah—passion; tamariasi—and darkness; sarkhya-
atmanah—the origin of all Vedic literatures; $astra—scriptures;
krtah—made; tava—by you; iksa—simply by glancing; chandah-
mayah—full of Vedic verses; deva—O lord; rsih—all Vedic literatures;
puranah—and the Puranas, the supplementary Vedas.
TRANSLATION
O lord, your shadow is seen in irreligion, which brings about
varieties of irreligious creations. The three modes of nature—
goodness, passion and ignorance—are your three eyes. All the
Vedic literatures, which are full of verses, are emanations from


--- Page 271 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
you because their compilers wrote the various scriptures after
receiving your glance.
TEXT 31
नते गिचित्राखिललोकपाल-
EY
विरिश्ववेङ्ृण्टसुरेन्द्रगम्यम्‌ |
ज्योतिः দর ফল रजस्तमश्च
as न ag बह्म निरस्तभेदम्‌ ।३१॥
na te giri-trakhila-loka-pala-
viriica-vaikuntha-surendra-gamyam
Jyotih param yatra rajas tamas ca
sattvari na yad brahma nirasta-bhedam
na—not; te—of Your Lordship; giri-tra—O King of the mountains;
akhila-loka-pala—all the directors of departments of material activities;
virifica—Lord Brahma; vaikuntha—Lord Visnu; sura-indra—the King
of heaven; gamyam—they can understand; jyotih—effulgence;
param —transcendental; yatra—wherein; rajah—the mode of passion;
tamah ca—and the mode of ignorance; sattvam—the mode of goodness;
na—not; yat brahma—which is impersonal Brahman; nirasta-
bhedam —without distinction between demigods and human beings.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Girisa, since the impersonal Brahman effulgence is tran-
scendental to the material modes of goodness, passion and ig-
norance, the various directors of this material world certainly
cannot appreciate it or even know where it is. It is not under-
standable even to Lord Brahma, Lord Visnu or the King of heaven,
Mahendra.
PURPORT
The brahmajyoti is actually the effulgence of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As stated in Brahma-sarihita (5.40):


--- Page 272 ---
Text 31] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 269
yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-
kotisv asesa-vasudhadi-vibhiti-bhinnam
tad brahma niskalam anantam asesa-bhiitam
govindam adi-purusan tam aham bhajami
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great
power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the imper-
sonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which
displays the varieties of countless planets, with their different opulences,
in millions and millions of universes.” Although the impersonal feature
of the Absolute is an expansion of the rays of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, He does not need to take care of the impersonalists who enter
the brahmajyoti. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (9.4), maya tatam idan
sarvam jagad avyakta-mirtina: “In My impersonal feature I pervade
this entire universe.” Thus the avyakta-miirti, the impersonal feature, is
certainly an expansion of Krsna’s energy. Mayavadis, who prefer to
merge into this Brahman effulgence, worship Lord Siva. The mantras
referred to in text 29 are called mukhani pacopanisadas tavesa.
Mayavadis take all these mantras seriously in worshiping Lord Siva.
These mantras are as follows: (1) tat purusaya vidmahe santyai,
(2) maha-devaya dhimahi vidyayai, (3) tan no rudrah pratisthayai,
(4) pracodayat dhrtyai, (5) aghorebhyas tama..., (6) atha
ghorebhyo moha..., (7) aghorebhyo raksa..., (8) aghoratarebhyo
nidra..., (9) sarvebhyah sarva-vyadhyai, (10) sarva-sarvebhyo
mrtyave, (11) namas te ’stu ksudha..., (12) rudra-rupebhyas
trsna..., (13) vamadevaya raja..., (14) jyesthaya svaha...,
(15) sresthaya ratyai, (16) rudraya kalyanyai, (17) kalaya kama. . .,
(18) kala-vikaranaya sandhinyai, (19) bala-vikaranaya kriya...,
(20) balaya vrddhyai, (21) balacchaya..., (22) pramathanaya
dhatryai, (23) sarva-bhita-damanaya bhramanyai, (24) manah-
Sosinyai, (25) unmandya jvara..., (26) sadyojatarin prapadyami sid-
dhyai, (27) sadyojataya vai namah rddhyai, (28) bhave dityai,
(29) abhave laksmyai, (30) natibhave medha. . . , (31) bhajasva mar
kantyai, (32) bhava svadha..., (33) udbhavaya prabha...,
(34) [88700 sarva-vidyanam Sasinyai, (35) (00701) sarva-bhutanam
abhaya-da..., (36) brahmadhipatir brahmanodhipatir brahman
brahmesta-da. . . , (37) 52४० me astu maricyai, (38) sadasivah jvalinyai.


--- Page 273 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
The impersonal Brahman is unknown even to the other directors of
the material creation, including Lord Brahma, Lord Indra and even Lord
Visnu. This does not mean, however, that Lord Visnu is not omniscient.
Lord Visnu is omniscient, but He does not need to understand what is
going on in His all-pervading expansion. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita the
Lord says that although everything is an expansion of Him (maya tatam
10077 sarvam), He does not need to take care of everything (na caham
tesv avasthitah), since there are various directors like Lord Brahma,
Lord Siva and Indra.
TEXT 32
कामाध्वरत्रिपुरकालगरायनेक-
age: क्षपयतः स्तुतये न तत्‌ ते ।
यस्त्वन्तकाल इद मात्मकृतं स्वनेत्र
बद्धिस्फुणिङ्गशिखया भसितं न वेद्‌।॥।२२॥
kamadhvara-tripura-kalagarady-aneka-
bhita-druhah ksapayatah stutaye na tat te
yas tv anta-kala idam atma-krtam sva-netra-
vahni-sphuliniga-sikhaya bhasitarih na veda
kama-adhvara—sacrifices for sense gratification (like Daksa-yajia,
the sacrifices performed by Daksa); tripura—the demon named
Tripurasura; kalagara—Kalagara; adi—and others; aneka—many;
bhita-druhah—who are meant for giving trouble to the living entities;
ksapayatah—being engaged in their destruction; stutaye—your prayer;
na—not; tat—that; te—speaking to you; yah tu—because; anta-kile—
at the time of annihilation; idam —in this material world; atma-krtam—
done by yourself; sva-netra—by your eyes; vahni-sphuliriga-Sikhaya—
by the sparks of fire; bhasitam—burned to ashes; na veda—I do not
know how it is happening.
TRANSLATION
When annihilation is performed by the flames and sparks
emanating from your eyes, the entire creation is burned to ashes.
Nonetheless, you do not know how this happens. What then is to


--- Page 274 ---
Text 33] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 271
be said of your destroying the Daksa-yajia, Tripurasura and the
kalakiaita poison? Such activities cannot be subject matters for
prayers offered to you.
PURPORT
Since Lord Siva considers the great acts he performs to be very unim-
portant, what was to be said of counteracting the strong poison produced
by the churning? The demigods indirectly prayed that Lord Siva coun-
teract the kalakiita poison, which was spreading throughout the uni-
verse.
TEXT 33
ये त्वास्मरामगुरुभिहेदि चिन्तिताङ्घि-
द्न्द्रं TAWA तपसाभितप्तम्‌ |
कत्थन्त उग्रपरुषं निरतं उमशाने
ते नूनमूतिमविदंस्तव हातलजाः 120
ye tv atma-rama-gurubhir hrdi cintitanghri-
dvandvarir carantam umaya tapasabhitaptam
katthanta ugra-parusarin niratar Smasane
te nitnam atim avidaras tava hata-lajjah
ye—persons who; tu—indeed; atma-rama-gurubhih—by those who
are self-satisfied and who are considered to be spiritual masters of the
world; hrdi—within the heart; cintita-arighri-dvandvam —thinking of
your two lotus feet; carantam—moving; umaya—with your consort,
Uma; tapasa abhitaptam—highly advanced through practice of austerity
and penance; katthante—criticize your acts; ugra-parusam—not a gen-
tle person; niratam—always; smasane—in the crematorium; te—such
persons; ninam—indeed; tim —such activities; avidan—not knowing;
tava—your activities; hata-lajjah —shameless.
TRANSLATION
Exalted, self-satisfied persons who preach to the entire world
think of your lotus feet constantly within their hearts. However,


--- Page 275 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
when persons who do not know your austerity see you moving
with Uma, they misunderstand you to be lusty, or when they see
you wandering in the crematorium they mistakenly think that you
are ferocious and envious. Certainly they are shameless. They can-
not understand your activities.
PURPORT
Lord Siva is the topmost Vaisnava (vaispavanam yatha Sambhuh). Tt
is therefore said, vaisnavera kriya-mudra vijiie na bujhaya. Even the
most intelligent person cannot understand what a Vaisnava like Lord
Siva is doing or how he is acting. Those who are conquered by lusty
desires and anger cannot estimate the glories of Lord Siva, whose posi-
tion is always transcendental. In all the activities associated with lusty
desires, Lord Siva is an implement of atma-rama. Ordinary persons,
therefore, should not try to understand Lord Siva and his activities. One
who tries to criticize the activities of Lord Siva is shameless.
TEXT 34
तत्‌ तस्य ते सदसतोः परतः परस्य
नाञ्जः खरूपगमने प्रभवन्ति भूम्नः |
्रह्मादयः किश्चुत संस्तवने वयं तु
9 ©
तत्सगंसगेविषया अपि शक्तिमात्रम्‌ ॥३४॥
tat tasya te sad-asatoh paratah parasya
nanjah svarapa-gamane prabhavanti bhumnah
brahmadayah kim uta saristavane vayar tu
tat-sarga-sarga-visaya api Sakti-matram
tat —therefore; tasya—of that; te—of Your Lordship; sat-asatoh—of
the living entities, moving and not moving; paratah—transcendentally
situated; parasya—very difficult to understand; na—nor; afjah—as it
is; svariipa-gamane —to approach your reality; prabhavanti—it is possi-
ble; bhiamnah—O great one; brahma-ddayah—even such persons as
Lord Brahma; kim uta —what to speak of others; saristavane—in offer-
ing prayers; vayam tu—as far as we are concerned; tat—of you; sarga-


--- Page 276 ---
Text 35] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 273
sarga-visayah—creations of the creation; api—although; sakti-
matram—to our ability.
TRANSLATION
Even personalities like Lord Brahma and other demigods cannot
understand your position, for you are beyond the moving and
nonmoving creation. Since no one can understand you in truth,
how can one offer you prayers? It is impossible. As far as we are
concerned, we are creatures of Lord Brahma’s creation. Under the
circumstances, therefore, we cannot offer you adequate prayers,
but as far as our ability allows, we have expressed our feelings.
TEXT 35
ক ডে 4
एतत्‌ परं ATE न परं ते महेश्वर ।
चि त
ম্বতনায हि लोकस्य व्यक्तिस्तेऽन्यक्तकमेणः।। २५॥
etat param prapasyamo
na parariv te mahesvara
mrdanaya hi lokasya
vyaktis te "vyakta-karmanah
etat—all these things; param—transcendental; prapasyamah—we
can see; na—not; param—the actual transcendental position; te—of
Your Lordship; maha-&svara—O great ruler; mrdanaya—for the happi-
ness; hi—indeed; lokasya—of all the world; vyaktih—manifested; te—
of Your Lordship; avyakta-karmanah—whose activities are unknown to
everyone.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of all rulers, your actual identity is impossible for us
to understand. As far as we can see, your presence brings flourish-
ing happiness to everyone. Beyond this, no one can appreciate
your activities. We can see this much, and nothing more.
PURPORT
When the demigods offered these prayers to Lord Siva, their inner
purpose was to please him so that he would rectify the disturbing


--- Page 277 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
situation created by the halahala poison. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(7.20), kamais tais tair hrta-jianah prapadyante ’nya-devatah: when
one worships demigods, this is certainly because of deep-rooted desires
he wants fulfilled by the mercy of those demigods. People are generally
attached to the worship of demigods for some motive.
TEXT 36
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
तद्वीक्ष्य व्यसनं तासां कृपया भृशपीडितः |
सर्वभूतसुहृद्‌ देव इदमाह सतीं प्रियाम्‌ ।२३६॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
tad viksya vyasanari tasamm
krpaya bhrsa-piditah
sarva-bhita-suhrd deva
idam aha 50177 priyam
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; tat—this situation;
viksya—seeing; vyasanam—dangerous; tasam—of all the demigods;
krpaya—out of compassion; bhrsa-piditah—greatly aggrieved; sarva-
bhita-suhrt—the friend of all living entities; devah—Mahadeva;
idam—this; aha—said; satim—unto Satidevi; priyam—his very dear
wife.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Lord Siva is always
benevolent toward all living entities. When he saw that the living
entities were very much disturbed by the poison, which was
spreading everywhere, he was very compassionate. Thus he spoke
to his eternal consort, Sati, as follows.
TEXT 37
श्रीशिव उवाच
अहो चत भवान्येतत्‌ प्रजानां पश्य वैशसम्‌ ।
क्षीरोदमथनोद्धतात्‌ कालङ्ूटादु पस्थितम्‌ |।|২৩।।


--- Page 278 ---
Text 38] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 275
Sri-Siva uvdca
aho bata bhavany etat
prajanam pasya vaisasam
ksiroda-mathanodbhitat
kalakatad upasthitam
$ri-sivah uvaca—Sri Siva said; ako bata —how pitiable; bhavani—my
dear wife, Bhavani; etat—this situation; prajanam—of all living en-
tities; paSya—just see; vaiSasam—very dangerous; ksira-uda—of the
ocean of milk; mathana-udbhitat—produced by the churning;
kalakatat—because of the production of poison; upasthitam —the pres-
ent situation.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva said: My dear Bhavani, just see how all these living en-
tities have been placed in danger because of the poison produced
from the churning of the ocean of milk.
TEXT 38
आसां प्राणपरीष्डनां ram हि मे ।
एतावान्हि प्रमोरर्थो यद्‌ दीनपरिपालनम्‌ ।३८॥।
asam prana-paripsanarm
vidheyam abhayari hi me
etavan hi prabhor artho
yad dina-paripalanam
asam—all of these living entities; prana-paripsiinam—very strongly
desiring to protect their lives; vidheyam—something must be done;
abhayam—safety; hi—indeed; me—by me; etavan—this much; hi—
indeed; prabhoh—of the master; arthah—duty; yat—that which; dina-
paripalanam—to give protection to suffering humanity.
TRANSLATION
It is my duty to give protection and safety to all living entities
struggling for existence. Certainly it is the duty of the master to
protect his suffering dependents.


--- Page 279 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
TEXT 39
A Ey
प्राणि; स्वैः प्राणिनः पान्ति साधवः OER: ।
a
TERY भूतेषु मोदितेप्वात्ममायया ॥२९॥
pranaih svaih praninah panti
sadhavah ksana-bhariguraih
baddha-vairesu bhitesu
mohitesv atma-mayayda
pranaih—by lives; svaih—their own; praninah—other living en-
tities; panti—protect; sadhavah—devotees; ksana-bhariguraih —tem-
porary;  baddha-vairesu—unnecessarily engaged in animosity;
bhiitesu—unto living entities; mohitesu —bewildered; atma-mayaya—
by the external energy of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
People in general, being bewildered by the illusory energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are always engaged in
animosity toward one another. But devotees, even at the risk of
their own temporary lives, try to save them.
PURPORT
This is the characteristic of a Vaisnava. Para-duhkha-duhkhi: a
Vaisnava is always unhappy to see the conditioned souls unhappy. Other-
wise, he would have no business teaching them how to become happy. In
materialistic life, people must certainly engage in activities of animosity.
Materialistic life is therefore compared to sariisara-davanala, a blazing
forest fire that automatically takes place. Lord Siva and his followers in
the parampara system try to save people from this dangerous condition
of materialistic life. This is the duty of devotees following the principles
of Lord Siva and belonging to the Rudra-sampradaya. There are four
Vaisnava sampraddyas, and the Rudra-sampradaya is one of them be-
cause Lord Siva (Rudra) is the best of the Vaisnavas (vaisnavanam yatha
sambhuh). Indeed, as we shall see, Lord Siva drank all the poison for the
benefit of humanity.


--- Page 280 ---
Text 41] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 277
TEXT 40
पुंसः कृपयतो भद्रे सर्वात्मा प्रीयते हरिः ।
प्रीते हरी भगवति ASE सचराचरः |
तसादिदं गरं স্তুপ प्रजानां खस्तिरस्तु मे ॥४०॥
puriisah krpayato bhadre
sarvatma priyate harih
prite harau bhagavati
priye চো? sacaracarah
tasmad idari 87078 bhunje
prajanari svastir astu me
purisah—with a person; krpayatah—engaged in benevolent ac-
tivities; bhadre—O most gentle Bhavani; sarva-atma—the Supersoul;
priyate—becomes pleased; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
prite—because of His pleasure; harau—the Supreme Lord, Hari;
bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; priye—also become pleased;
aham—1; sa-cara-acarah—with all others, moving and nonmoving;
tasmat—therefore; idam —this; garam —poison; bhufije—let me drink;
prajanam—of the living entities; svastih—welfare; astu—Ilet there be;
me—by me.
TRANSLATION
My dear gentle wife Bhavani, when one performs benevolent ac-
tivities for others, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is
very pleased. And when the Lord is pleased, I am also pleased,
along with all other living creatures. Therefore, let me drink this
poison, for all the living entities may thus become happy because
of me.
TEXT 41
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
एवमामन्त्र्य मगबान्भवानीं विश्वभावनः |
तद्‌ विषं जग्धुमारेभे प्रभावन्ञान्बमोदत 1220


--- Page 281 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
sri-suka uvaca
evam amantrya bhagavan
bhavanim visva-bhavanah
tad visa jagdhum arebhe
prabhava-jiianvamodata
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
amantrya—addressing; bhagavan—Lord Siva; bhavanim —Bhavani;
viSva-bhavanah—the well-wisher of all the universe; tat visam—that
poison; jagdhum—to drink; darebhe—began; prabhdva-jiia—mother
Bhavani, who perfectly knew the capability of Lord Siva; anvamodata —
gave her permission.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After informing Bhavani in
this way, Lord Siva began to drink the poison, and Bhavani, who
knew perfectly well the capabilities of Lord Siva, gave him her per-
mission to do so.
TEXT 42
ततः करतलीङृत्य व्यापि हालाहलं विषम्‌ |
अभक्षयन्महादेवः कृपया भूतभावनः BRI
tatah karatali-krtya
vyapi halahalari visam
abhaksayan maha-devah
krpaya bhita-bhavanah
tatah—thereafter; karatali-krtya—taking in his hand; vyapi—
widespread; halahalam—called halahala; visam—poison; abha-
ksayat—drank; maha-devah—Lord Siva; krpaya—out of compassion;
bhita-bhavanah—for the welfare of all living entities.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Lord Siva, who is dedicated to auspicious,
benevolent work for humanity, compassionately took the whole
quantity of poison in his palm and drank it.


--- Page 282 ---
Text 44] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 279
PURPORT
Although there was such a great quantity of poison that it spread all
over the universe, Lord Siva had such great power that he reduced the
poison to a small quantity so that he could hold it in his palm. One should
not try to imitate Lord Siva. Lord Siva can do whatever he likes, but
those who try to imitate Lord Siva by smoking ganja and other poisonous
things will certainly be killed because of such activities.
TEXT 43
तस्यापि दक्षंयामास खवीयं जलकल्मषः |
यचकार गले नीलं तच साधोर्विभूषणम्‌ 1830
tasyapi darsayam asa
sva-viryam jala-kalmasah
yac cakara gale nila
tac ca sadhor vibhisanam
tasya—of Lord Siva; api—also; darsayam asa—exhibited; sva-
viryam—its own potency; jala-kalmasah—that poison born of the
water; yat—which; cakdra—made; gale—on the neck; nilam—bluish
line; tat—that; ca—also; sadhoh—of the saintly person; vibhiisanam—
ornament.
TRANSLATION
As if in defamation, the poison born from the ocean of milk
manifested its potency by marking Lord Siva’s neck with a bluish
line. That line, however, is now accepted as an ornament of the
Lord.
TEXT 44
तप्यन्ते लोकतापेन साधवः प्रायशो जनाः ।
परभाराधनं तद्धि पुरुषस्याखिलात्मनः ॥४४॥
tapyante loka-tapena
sadhavah prayaso janah
paramaradhanam tad dhi
purusasyakhilatmanah


--- Page 283 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7

tapyante—voluntarily suffer; loka-tapena—because of the suffering
of people in general; sadhavah —saintly persons; prayasah—almost al-
ways; janah—such persons; parama-aradhanam—the topmost method
of worshiping; tat—that activity; hi—indeed; purusasya—of the
Supreme Person; akhila-atmanah—who is the Supersoul of everyone.

TRANSLATION

It is said that great personalities almost always accept voluntary
suffering because of the suffering of people in general. This is
considered the highest method of worshiping the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is present in everyone’s heart.

PURPORT

Here is an explanation of how those engaged in activities for the
welfare of others are very quickly recognized by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (18.68-69), ya
idan paramari 8800 078 mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati . . . na ca tasman
manusyesu kascin me priya-krttamah: “One who preaches the message
of Bhagavad-gita to My devotees is most dear to Me. No one can excel
him in satisfying Me by worship.” There are different kinds of welfare
activities in this material world, but the supreme welfare activity is the
spreading of Krsna consciousness. Other welfare activities cannot be
effective, for the laws of nature and the results of karma cannot be
checked. It is by destiny, or the laws of karma, that one must suffer or
enjoy. For instance, if one is given a court order, he must accept it,
whether it brings suffering or profit. Similarly, everyone is under obliga-
tions to karma and it reactions. No one can change this. Therefore the
Sastra says:

tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatam upary adhah
(Bhag. 1.5.18)

One should endeavor for that which is never obtained by wandering up
and down the universe as a result of the reactions of karma. What is
that? One should endeavor to become Krsna conscious. If one tries to
spread Krsna consciousness all over the world, he should be understood


--- Page 284 ---
Text 45] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 281
to be performing the best welfare activity. The Lord is automatically
very pleased with him. If the Lord is pleased with him, what is left for
him to achieve? If one has been recognized by the Lord, even if he does
not ask the Lord for anything, the Lord, who is within everyone, supplies
him whatever he wants. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (695৫7
nityabhiyuktanar yoga-ksemari vahamy aham). Again, as stated here,
tapyante loka-tapena sadhavah prayaso janah. The best welfare activity
is raising people to the platform of Krsna consciousness, since the condi-
tioned souls are suffering only for want of Krsna consciousness. The
Lord Himself also comes to mitigate the suffering of humanity.
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanari srjamy aham
paritranaya sadhinari
vindsaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself. To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as
well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millen-
nium after millennium.” (Bg. 4.7-8) All the sastras conclude,
therefore, that spreading the Krsna consciousness movement is the best
welfare activity in the world. Because of the ultimate benefit this bestows
upon people in general, the Lord very quickly recognizes such service
performed by a devotee.
TEXT 45
লিহাজ্ম क्म॑तच्छम्भोरदेवदेवस्य High: |
a fo
प्रजा दाक्षायणी HEN বস্তুত शशंसिरे ॥४५॥
nisamya karma tac chambhor
deva-devasya midhusah


--- Page 285 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 7
praja daksayani brahma
vaikuntha$ ca sasamsire
nisamya—after hearing; karma—the act; tat—that; Sambhoh—of
Lord Siva; deva-devasya—who is worshipable even for the demigods;
midhusah—he who bestows great benedictions upon people in general;
prajah—the people in general; daksayani—Bhavani, the daughter of
Daksa; brahma—Lord Brahma; wvaikunthah ca—Lord Visnu also;
Sasarisire—praised very much.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing of this act, everyone, including Bhavani [the
daughter of Maharaja Daksa], Lord Brahma, Lord Visnu, and the
people in general, very highly praised this deed performed by
Lord Siva, who is worshiped by the demigods and who bestows
benedictions upon the people.
TEXT 46
्रस्कनं पिवतः पाणे्थत्‌ किश्चिजगृहुः स तत्‌ |
इशिकादिविषोपध्यो दन्द शकाश्च येऽपरे ॥ ৬৪
praskannam pibatah paner
yat kisicij jagrhuh sma tat
vricikahi-visausadhyo
dandasikas ca ye ‘pare
praskannam—scattered here and there; pibatah—of Lord Siva while
drinking; paneh—from the palm; yat—which; kifcit—very little;
Jjagrhuh—took the opportunity to drink; sma—indeed; tat—that;
vricika—the scorpions; ahi—the cobras; visa-ausadhyah—poisonous
drugs; dandasikah ca—and animals whose bites are poisonous; ye—
who; apare—other living entities.
TRANSLATION
Scorpions, cobras, poisonous drugs and other animals whose
bites are poisonous took the opportunity to drink whatever little


--- Page 286 ---
Text 46] Lord Siva Saves the Universe 283
poison had fallen and scattered from Lord Siva’s hand while he was
drinking.
PURPORT

Mosquitoes, jackals, dogs and other varieties of dandosiika, or animals
whose bites are poisonous, drank the poison of the samudra-manthana,
the churned ocean, since it was available after it fell from the palms of
Lord Siva.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Seventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Lord Siva Saves the
Universe by Drinking Poison.”


--- Page 287 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT

The Churning of the Milk Ocean
This chapter describes how the goddess of fortune appeared during the
churning of the ocean of milk and how she accepted Lord Visnu as her
husband. As described later in the chapter, when Dhanvantari appeared
with a pot of nectar the demons immediately snatched it from him, but
Lord Visnu appeared as the incarnation Mohini, the most beautiful
woman in the world, just to captivate the demons and save the nectar for
the demigods. ,

After Lord Siva drank all the poison, both the demigods and demons
took courage and resumed their activities of churning. Because of this
churning, first a surabhi cow was produced. Great saintly persons ac-
cepted this cow to derive clarified butter from its milk and offer this
clarified butter in oblations for great sacrifices. Thereafter, a horse
named Uccaihérava was generated. This horse was taken by Bali
Maharaja. Then there appeared Airavata and other elephants that could
go anywhere in any direction, and she-elephants also appeared. The gem
known as Kaustubha was also generated, and Lord Visnu took that gem
and placed it on His chest. Thereafter, a parijata flower and the Apsaras,
the most beautiful women in the universe, were generated. Then the
goddess of fortune, Laksmi, appeared. The demigods, great sages,
Gandharvas and others offered her their respectful worship. The goddess
of fortune could not find anyone to accept as her husband. At last she
selected Lord Visnu to be her master. Lord Visnu gave her a place to stay
everlastingly at His chest. Because of this combination of Laksmi and
Narayana, all who were present, including the demigods and people in
general, were very pleased. The demons, however, being neglected by
the goddess of fortune, were very depressed. Then Viruni, the goddess
of drinking, was generated, and by the order of Lord Visnu the demons
accepted her. Then the demons and demigods, with renewed energy,
began to churn again. This time a partial incarnation of Lord Visnu
called Dhanvantari appeared. He was very beautiful, and he carried a jug
containing nectar. The demons immediately snatched the jug from

285


--- Page 288 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
Dhanvantari’s hand and began to run away, and the demigods, being
very morose, took shelter of Visnu. After the demons snatched the jug
from Dhanvantari, they began to fight among themselves. Lord Vispu
solaced the demigods, who therefore did not fight, but remained silent.
While the fighting was going on among the demons, the Lord Himself
appeared as the incarnation Mohini, the most beautiful woman in the
universe.
TEXT 1
श्री्युक उवाच
पीते गरे इषाङ्केण प्रीतास्तेऽमरदानवाः ।
ममन्भुस्तरसा सिन्धुं हविर्धानी ततोऽभवत्‌ ॥ १॥
sri-Suka uvaca
pite gare vrsarkena
pritas te ‘'mara-danavah
mamanthus tarasa sindhuri
havirdhant tato ’bhavat

sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; pite—was drunk;
gare—when the poison; vrsa-antkena—by Lord Siva, who sits on a bull;
pritah—being pleased; te—all of them; amara—the demigods;
danavah—and the demons; mamanthuh—again began to churn;
tarasa—with great force; sindhum—the ocean of milk; havirdhani—the
surabhi cow, who is the source of clarified butter; tatah—from that
churning; abhavat—was generated.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Upon Lord Siva’s drinking the
poison, both the demigods and the demons, being very pleased,
began to churn the ocean with renewed vigor. As a result of this,
there appeared a cow known as surabhi.

PURPORT

The surabhi cow is described as havirdhani, the source of butter. But-

ter, when clarified by melting, produces ghee, or clarified butter, which


--- Page 289 ---
Text 2] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 287
is inevitably necessary for performing great ritualistic sacrifices. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.5), yajiia-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyarn
karyam eva tat: sacrifice, charity and austerity are essential to keep
human society perfect in peace and prosperity. 10770, the performance
of sacrifice, is essential; to perform yajnia, clarified butter is absolutely
necessary; and to get clarified butter, milk is necessary. Milk is produced
when there are sufficient cows. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita (18.44), cow
protection is recommended (krsi-go-raksya-vanijyari vaisya-karma
svabhava-jam).
TEXT 2
ताम्निहोत्रीखषयो जगृहरक्षवादिनः |
यज्ञस्य देवयानस्य मेध्याय हविषे FTN २॥
tam agni-hotrim rsayo
jagrhur brahma-vadinah
yajiiasya deva-yanasya
medhyaya havise nrpa

tam —that cow; agni-hotrim—absolutely necessary for the production
of yogurt, milk and ghee to offer as oblations in the fire; rsayah—sages
who perform such sacrifices; jagrhuh—took in charge; brahma-
vadinah—because such sages know the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies;
yajiiasya—of sacrifice; deva-yanasya—which fulfills the desire to be
elevated to the higher planetary systems and to Brahmaloka;
medhyaya—fit for offering oblations; havise—for the sake of pure
clarified butter; nrpa—O King.

TRANSLATION

O King Pariksit, great sages who were completely aware of the
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies took charge of that surabhi cow,
which produced all the yogurt, milk and ghee absolutely necessary
for offering oblations into the fire. They did this just for the sake
of pure ghee, which they wanted for the performance of sacrifices
to elevate themselves to the higher planetary systems, up to
Brahmaloka.


--- Page 290 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
PURPORT
Surabhi cows are generally found on the Vaikuntha planets. As de-
scribed in Brahma-sarhita, Lord Krsna, on His planet, Goloka
Vrndavana, engages in tending the surabhi cows (surabhir abhipalayan-
tam). These cows are the Lord’s pet animals. From the surabhi cows one
can take as much milk as one needs, and one may milk these cows as
many times as he desires. In other words, the surabhi cow can yield milk
unlimitedly. Milk is necessary for the performance of yajiia. Sages know
how to use milk to elevate human society to the perfection of life. Since
cow protection is recommended everywhere in the $astras, the brahma-
৮৫০85 took charge of the surabhi cow, in which the demons were not very
interested.
TEXT 3
RN
तत SHAT नाम हयोऽभूचन्द्रपाण्डुरः |
तसिन्वलिः स्पृहां चक्रे नेन्द्र Salim ॥ २ ॥
tata uccaihSrava nama
hayo 6127८ candra-pandurah
tasmin balih sprharm cakre
nendra $vara-Siksaya
tatah—thereafter; uccaihSravah nama—by the name Uccaihérava;
hayah—a horse; abhit—was generated; candra-pandurah—being as
white as the moon; tasmin—unto it; balth—Maharaja Bali; sprham
cakre—desired to possess; na—not; indrah —the King of the demigods;
iSvara-$iksaya—Dby the previous advice of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, a horse named Uccaihs$rava, which was as white as
the moon, was generated. Bali Maharaja desired to possess this
horse, and Indra, the King of heaven, did not protest, for he had
previously been so advised by the Supreme Personality of God-
head.


--- Page 291 ---
Text 5] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 289
TEXT 4
UI नाम वारणेन्द्रो विनिगैतः ।
- .
दन्तैश्तरमिः वेतादरहैरन्मगवतो महिम्‌ ॥ ४॥
tata airavato nama
varanendro vinirgatah
dantais caturbhih svetadrer
haran bhagavato mahim
tatah—thereafter; airavatah nama—of the name Airavata; vdrana-
indrah—the king of elephants; vinirgatah—was generated; dantaih—
with its tusks; caturbhih—four; Sveta—white; adreh—of the mountain;
haran—defying; bhagavatah—of Lord Siva; mahim—the glories.
TRANSLATION
As the next result of the churning, the king of elephants,
named Airavata, was generated. This elephant was white, and with
its four tusks it defied the glories of Kailasa Mountain, the
glorious abode of Lord Siva.
TEXT 5
एेरावणादयस्त्वष्टौ दिग्‌गजा अभवंस्ततः |
ও
অপম্তুসম্বনযীত্ী च करिण्यस्त्वभवनृप ॥ ||
airavanadayas tv astau
dig-gaja abhavaris tatah
abhramu-prabhrtayo stan ca
karinyas tv abhavan nrpa
airavana-adayah—headed by Airavana; tu—but; astau—eight; dik-
gajah —elephants that could go in any direction; abhavan—were gener-
ated; tatah—thereafter; abhramu-prabhrtayah—headed by the she-
elephant named Abhramu; astau—eight; ca—also; karinyah—female
elephants; tu—indeed; abhavan—also generated; nrpa—O King.


--- Page 292 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O King, eight great elephants, which could go in any
direction, were generated. They were headed by Airavana. Eight
she-elephants, headed by Abhramu, were also generated.
PURPORT
The names of the eight elephants were Airavana, Pundarika, Vamana,
Kumuda, Afijana, Puspadanta, Sarvabhauma and Supratika.
TEXT 6
कौ [1 -
स्त॒माख्यमभूद्‌ TH पद्मरागो महोदधेः |
तसिन्‌ मणो स्पृहां चक्रे वक्षोऽलङ्करणे हरि; |
नो ৬
ततोऽमवत्‌ पारिजातः सुरलोकविभूषणम्‌ |
पूरयत्यर्थिनो योऽर्थे; शश्वद्‌ थुवि यथा मवान्‌।। ६ ॥
kaustubhakhyam abhid ratnam
padmarago mahodadheh
tasmin manau sprham cakre
vakso-’larikarane harih
tato ’bhavat parijatah
sura-loka-vibhasanam
purayaty arthino yo ’rthaih
$asvad bhuvi yatha bhavan
kaustubha-akhyam—known as Kaustubha; abhit—was generated;
ratnam—a valuable gem; padmaragah—another gem, named
Padmaraga; maha-udadheh—from that great ocean of milk; tasmin—
that; manau—jewel; sprham cakre—desired to possess; vaksah-
alankarane —to decorate His chest; harih—the Lord, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; tatah—thereafter; abhavat—was generated;
parijatah—the celestial flower named parijata; sura-loka-vibhisanam—
which decorates the heavenly planets; pirayati—fulfills; arthinah—
giving persons desiring material wealth; yah —that which; arthaih—by
what 15 desired; Sasvat—always; bhuvi—on this planet; yatha—as;
bhavan—Your Lordship (Maharaja Pariksit).


--- Page 293 ---
Text 8] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 291
TRANSLATION
Generated thereafter from the great ocean were the celebrated
gems Kaustubha-mani and Padmaraga-mani. Lord Visnu, to deco-
rate His chest, desired to possess them. Generated next was the
parijata flower, which decorates the celestial planets. O King, as
you fulfill the desires of everyone on this planet by fulfilling all
ambitions, the parijata fulfills the desires of everyone.
TEXT 7
ततश्वाप्सरसो जाता निष्ककण्ठ्यः सुवाससः |
रमण्यः खर्भिणां बल्गुगतिलीलावलोकनेः ॥ ७॥।
(4105 capsaraso jata
niska-kanthyah suvasasah
ramanyah ৩৮৫18800718 valgu-
gati-lilavalokanaih
tatah—thereafter; ca —also; apsarasah—the residents of Apsaroloka;
jatah—were generated; niska-kanthyah—decorated with golden
necklaces; su-vasasah—dressed with fine clothing; remanyah—ex-
tremely beautiful and attractive; svarginam—of the inhabitants of the
heavenly planets; valgu-gati-lila-avalokanaih—moving very softly,
they attract everyone’s heart.
TRANSLATION
Next there appeared the Apsaras [who are used as prostitutes on
the heavenly planets]. They were fully decorated with golden or-
naments and lockets and were dressed in fine and attractive
clothing. The Apsaras move very slowly in an attractive style that
bewilders the inhabitants of the heavenly planets.
TEXT 8
ततश्वाविरभूत्‌ साक्षाच्छरी रमा मगवत्परा |
रञ्जयन्ती दिश्चः कान्त्या विद्युत्‌ सौदामनी यथा॥।८॥


--- Page 294 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
tatas cavirabhit saksac
chri rama bhagavat-para
raijayanti disah kantya
vidyut saudamani yatha
tatah—thereafter; ca—and; avirabhiit—manifested; saksat—
directly; sri—the goddess of fortune; rama—known as Rama; bhagavat-
para—absolutely inclined to be possessed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; raijayanti—illuminating; disah—all directions; kantya—by
luster; vidyut—lightning; saudamani—Saudamani; yatha—as.
TRANSLATION
Then there appeared the goddess of fortune, Rama, who is ab-
solutely dedicated to being enjoyed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. She appeared like electricity, surpassing the lightning
that might illuminate a marble mountain.
PURPORT
Sri means opulence. Krsna is the owner of all opulences.
bhoktaram yajiia-tapasar
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdar sarva-bhitanarm
JAatva mam santim rechati
This peace formula for the world is given in Bhagavad-gita (5.29).
When people know that the Supreme Lord, Krsna, is the supreme en-
joyer, the supreme proprietor and the most intimate well-wishing friend
of all living entities, peace and prosperity will ensue all over the world.
Unfortunately, the conditioned souls, being placed into illusion by the
external energy of the Lord, want to fight with one another, and
therefore peace is disturbed. The first prerequisite for peace is that all
the wealth presented by Sri, the goddess of fortune, be offered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone should give up his false
proprietorship over worldly possessions and offer everything to Krsna.
This is the teaching of the Krsna consciousness movement.


--- Page 295 ---
Text 9] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 293
TEXT 9
तस्यां चक्रः स्पृहां सर्वे ससुरासुरमानवाः |
(य ¢
रूपौदार्यवयोवणंमहिमाकिप्तचेतसः ne
tasyar cakruh sprharm sarve
sasurasura-manavah
ripaudarya-vayo-varna-
mahimaksipta-cetasah

tasyam—unto her; cakruh—did; sprham—desire; sarve—everyone;
sa-sura-asura-manavah—the demigods, the demons and the human
beings; ripa-audarya—by the exquisite beauty and bodily features;
vayah—youth; varna—complexion; mahima—glories; aksipta—agi-
tated; cetasah—their minds.

TRANSLATION

Because of her exquisite beauty, her bodily features, her youth,
her complexion and her glories, everyone, including the
demigods, the demons and the human beings, desired her. They
were attracted because she is the source of all opulences.

PURPORT

Who in this world does not want to possess wealth, beauty and the
social respectability that come from these opulences? People generally
desire material enjoyment, material opulence and the association of
aristocratic family members (bhagaisvarya-prasaktanam). Material en-
joyment entails money, beauty and the reputation they bring, which can
all be achieved by the mercy of the goddess of fortune. The goddess of
fortune, however, never remains alone. As indicated in the previous
verse by the word bhagavat-para, she is the property of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and is enjoyable only by Him. If one wants the
favor of the goddess of fortune, mother Laksmi, because she is by nature
bhagavat-para one must keep her with Narayana. The devotees who al-
ways engage in the service of Narayana (ndrayana-parayana) can easily


--- Page 296 ---
294. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
achieve the favor of the goddess of fortune without a doubt, but ma-
terialists who try to get the favor of the goddess of fortune only to possess
her for personal enjoyment are frustrated. Theirs is not a good policy.
The celebrated demon Ravana, for example, wanted to deprive Rama-
candra of Laksmi, Sita, and thus be victorious, but the result was just the
opposite. Sita, of course, was taken by force by Lord Ramacandra, and
Ravana and his entire material empire were vanquished. The goddess of
fortune is desirable for everyone, including human beings, but one
should understand that the goddess of fortune is the exclusive property
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One cannot achieve the mercy of
the goddess of fortune unless one prays both to her and to the supreme
enjoyer, the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
FE आसनमानिन्ये महेन्द्रो महदद्धतम्‌ |
मूर्तिमत्यः सरि्रेठा हेमङम्भैजैलं शुचि ॥१०॥
tasyd asanam daninye
mahendro mahad-adbhutam
martimatyah saric-chrestha
hema-kumbhair jalam Suci

tasyah—for her; dsanam—a sitting place; aninye—brought; maha-
indrah—the King of heaven, Indra; mahat—glorious; adbhutam —won-
derful; maurti-matyah—accepting forms; sarit-sresthah—the best of
various sacred waters; hema—golden; kumbhaih—with waterpots;
Jalam —water; Suci—pure.

TRANSLATION

The King of heaven, Indra, brought a suitable sitting place for
the goddess of fortune. All the rivers of sacred water, such as the
Ganges and Yamuna, personified themselves, and each of them
brought pure water in golden waterpots for mother Laksmi, the
goddess of fortune.


--- Page 297 ---
Text 11] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 295
TEXT 11
आभिषेचनिका भूमिरादरत्‌ सकलोषभीः |
गावः पश्च पवित्राणि वसन्तो मधुमाधवौ ॥११।
abhisecanika bhamir
aharat sakalausadhth
gavah pafica pavitrani
vasanto madhu-madhavau

abhisecanikah —paraphernalia required for installing the Deity;
bhitmih—the land; aharat—collected; sakala—all kinds of ; ausadhih—
drugs and herbs; gavah—the cows; paiica—five different varieties of
products from the cow, namely milk, yogurt, clarified butter, cow dung
and cow urine; pavitrani—uncontaminated; wvasantah—personified
springtime; madhu-madhavau—flowers and fruits produced during
spring, or in the months of Caitra and Vaisakha.

TRANSLATION

The land became a person and collected all the drugs and herbs
needed for installing the Deity. The cows delivered five products,
namely milk, yogurt, ghee, urine and cow dung, and spring per-
sonified collected everything produced in spring, during the
months of Caitra and Vaisakha [April and May].

PURPORT

Pafica-gavya, the five products received from the cow, namely milk,
yogurt, ghee, cow dung and cow urine, are required in all ritualistic
ceremonies performed according to the Vedic directions. Cow urine and
cow dung are uncontaminated, and since even the urine and dung of a
cow are important, we can just imagine how important this animal is for
human civilization. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, directly advocates go-raksya, the protection of cows. Civilized
men who follow the system of varndsrama, especially those of the vaisya
class, who engage in agriculture and trade, must give protection to the
cows. Unfortunately, because people in Kali-yuga are mandah, all bad,


--- Page 298 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
and sumanda-matayah, misled by false conceptions of life, they are kill-
ing cows in the thousands. Therefore they are unfortunate in spiritual
consciousness, and nature disturbs them in so many ways, especially
through incurable diseases like cancer and through frequent wars and
among nations. As long as human society continues to allow cows to be
regularly killed in slaughterhouses, there cannot be any question of
peace and prosperity.
TEXT 12
ऋषयः कल्पयाच्क्तुरामिषेकं यथामिधि |
९
जगुर्भद्राणि गन्धर्वा नयश्च ATES: 1201
rsayah kalpayari cakrur
abhisekari yatha-vidhi
Jagur bhadrani gandharva
natyas ca nanrtur jaguh

rsayah—the great sages; kalpayam cakruh—executed; abhisekam—
the abhiseka ceremony, which is required during the installation of the
Deity; yatha-vidhi—as directed in the authorized scriptures; jaguh—
chanted Vedic mantras; bhadrani—all good fortune; gandharvah—and
the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; natyah—the women who were
professional dancers; ca—also; nanrtuh—very nicely danced on the oc-
casion; jaguh—and sang authorized songs prescribed in the Vedas.

TRANSLATION

The great sages performed the bathing ceremony of the goddess
of fortune as directed in the authorized scriptures, the Gandharvas
chanted all-auspicious Vedic mantras, and the professional women
dancers very nicely danced and sang authorized songs prescribed
in the Vedas.

TEXT 13
मेधा मृद ङ्गपणवयरजानकगोधुखान्‌ |
व्यनादयन्‌ शह्ववेणुरीणास्तुशुलनिःखनान्‌।।१३॥


--- Page 299 ---
Text 14] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 297
megha mrdanga-panava-
murajanaka-gomukhan
vyanadayan Sankha-venu-
vinas tumula-nihsvanan
meghah—personified clouds; mrdariga—drums; panava—ket-
tledrums; muraja—another kind of drum; anaka—another type of
drum; gomukhan—a type of bugle; vyanddayan—vibrated; sankha—
conchshells; venu—flutes; vinah—stringed instruments; tumula—
tumultuous; nihsvanan—vibration.
TRANSLATION
The clouds in personified form beat various types of drums,
known as mrdangas, panavas, murajas and anakas. They also blew
conchshells and bugles known as gomukhas and played flutes and
stringed instruments. The combined sound of these instruments
was tumultuous.
TEXT 14
ततोऽभिपिपिचुदेवीं भियं aust सतीम्‌ |
2 ry 2
दिगिभाः पूण कलशैः छक्तवाके्ंजरितेः ।१४॥
tato ’bhisisicur devirn
Sriyarn padma-karam satim
digibhah purna-kalasaih
sikta-vakyair dvijeritaih
tatah—thereafter; abhisisicuh —poured all-auspicious water on the
body; devim—the goddess of fortune; sriyam—very beautiful; padma-
karam —with a lotus in her hand; satim —she who is most chaste, not
knowing anyone but the Supreme Personality of Godhead; digibhah—
the great elephants; piarna-kalasaih—by completely full waterjugs;
sakta-vakyaih—with Vedic mantras; dvi-ja—by brahmanas; iritaih—
chanted.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the great elephants from all the directions carried
big water jugs full of Ganges water and bathed the goddess of


--- Page 300 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
fortune, to the accompaniment of Vedic mantras chanted by
learned brahmanas. While thus being bathed, the goddess of for-
tune maintained her original style, with a lotus flower in her hand,
and she appeared very beautiful. The goddess of fortune is the
most chaste, for she does not know anyone but the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
‘4
PURPORT
The goddess of fortune, Laksmi, is described in this verse as sriyam,
which means that she has six opulences— wealth, strength, influence,
beauty, knowledge and renunciation. These opulences are received from
the goddess of fortune. Laksmi is addressed here as devi, the goddess, be-
cause in Vaikuntha she supplies all opulences to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and His devotees, who in this way enjoy natural life in the
Vaikuntha planets. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased with
His consort, the goddess of fortune, who carries a lotus flower in her
hand. Mother Laksmi is described in this verse as sati, the supremely
chaste, because she never diverts her attention from the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead to anyone else.
TEXT 15
सथुद्रः पीतकोरोयवाससी মধ্তদাহলে।
EY .
वरुणः खनं वेजयन्तीं मधुना मत्तषट्पदाम्‌ ॥ १५५॥
samudrah pita-kauseya-
vasasi samupaharat
varunah srajari vaijayantini
madhuna matta-satpadam
samudrah—the ocean; pita-kauseya—yellow silk; vdsasi—both the

upper and lower portions of a garment; samupaharat—presented;
varunah—the predominating deity of the water; srajam—garland; vai-
Jayantim —the most decorated and the biggest; madhuna—with honey;
matta—drunken; sat-padam—bumblebees, which have six legs.


--- Page 301 ---
Text 16] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 299
TRANSLATION

The ocean, which is the source of all valuable jewels, supplied
the upper and lower portions of a yellow silken garment. The pre-
dominating deity of the water, Varuna, presented flower garlands
surrounded by six-legged bumblebees, drunken with honey.

PURPORT

When bathing the Deity in the abhiseka ceremony with various li-
quids, such as milk, honey, yogurt, ghee, cow dung and cow urine, it is
customary to supply yellow garments. In this way the abhiseka ceremony
for the goddess of fortune was performed according to the regular Vedic
principles.

TEXT 16
भूषणानि विचित्राणि विश्वकर्मा प्रजापतिः |
हारं सरस्वती प्ममजो नागाश्च कुण्डले ॥१६॥
bhiisanani vicitrani
visvakarma prajapatih
haram sarasvati padmam
ajo nagas ca kundale

bhisanani—varieties of ornaments; vicitrani—all very nicely deco-
rated; viSvakarma prajapatih—Visvakarma, one of the prajapatis, the
sons of Lord Brahma who generate progeny; haram—garland or
necklace; sarasvati—the goddess of education; padmam —a lotus flower;
ajah—Lord Brahma; nagah ca—the inhabitants of Nagaloka; kundale-
—two earrings.

TRANSLATION

Vis§vakarma, one of the prajapatis, supplied varieties of deco-
rated ornaments. The goddess of learning, Sarasvati, supplied a
necklace, Lord Brahma supplied a lotus flower, and the inhabitants
of Nagaloka supplied earrings.


--- Page 302 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
TEXT 17
ततः कृतखस्त्ययनोर्पलसं
नददद्विरेफां परिगृह्य पाणिना |
चचाल वक्त्रं सुक्पोरङ्कण्डलं
सत्रीडहासं दधती GAREY ॥१७।।
tatah krta-svastyayanotpala-srajar
nadad-dvirephar parigrhya panina
cacala vaktram sukapola-kundalari
savrida-hasari dadhati susobhanam
tatah—thereafter; krta-svastyayand—being worshiped regularly by
all-auspicious ritualistic ceremonies; utpala-srajam—a garland 01
lotuses; nadat—humming; dvirepham—surrounded by bumblebees;
parigrhya—capturing; panina—by the hand; cacala—went on;
vaktram—face; su-kapola-kundalam—her cheeks decorated with ear-
rings; sa-vrida-hasam—smiling with shyness; dadhati—expanding; su-
Sobhanam—her natural beauty.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, mother Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, having
been properly celebrated with an auspicious ritualistic ceremony,
began moving about, holding in her hand a garland of lotus
flowers, which were surrounded by humming bumblebees. Smil-
ing with shyness, her cheeks decorated by her earrings, she looked
extremely beautiful.
PURPORT
The goddess of fortune, mother Laksmiji, accepted the ocean of milk
as her father, but she perpetually rests on the bosom of Narayana. She
offers benedictions even to Lord Brahma and other living entities in this
material world, yet she is transcendental to all material qualities. Al-
though she appeared to have been born of the ocean of milk, she im-
mediately resorted to her eternal place on the bosom of Narayana.


--- Page 303 ---
Text 19] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 301
TEXT 18
स्तनद्वयं चातिङृश्चोदरी समं
निरन्तरं चन्दनङ्कङकमोकषितम्‌ |
-
ततस्ततो ` नुपुरषल्गुशिज्जिते-
विसपती weds सा बभौ ॥१८॥
stana-dvayarn catikrsodari samariu
nirantaram candana-kurikumoksitam
tatas tato nipura-valgu Sifjitair
visarpati hema-lateva sa babhau
stana-dvayam—her two breasts; ca—also; ati-krsa-udari—the mid-
dle portion of her body being very thin; samam—equally; nirantaram—
constantly; candana-kunkuma—with sandalwood pulp and kurkuma, a
reddish powder; uksitam—smeared; tatah tatah—here and there;
nitpura—of ankle bells; valgu—very beautiful; sifjitaih—with the light
resounding; visarpati—walking; hema-lata—a golden creeper; iva—
exactly like; sa—the goddess of fortune; babhau—appeared.
TRANSLATION
Her two breasts, which were symmetrical and nicely situated,
were covered with sandalwood pulp and kunkuma powder, and
her waist was very thin. As she walked here and there, her ankle
bells jingling softly, she appeared like a creeper of gold.
TEXT 19
विलोकयन्ती निरदयमात्मनः
पदं धुवं चान्यभिचारिसद्गुणम्‌ |
(x
गन्धवेरिद्धासुरय्चचारण-
a
्ेपिष्पेयादिषु नान्वविन्दत ॥१९॥
vilokayanti niravadyam atmanah
[00007 dhruvam cavyabhicari-sad-gunam


--- Page 304 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
gandharva-siddhasura-yaksa-carana-
traipistapeyddisu nanvavindata
vilokayanti—observing, examining; niravadyam—without any fault;
atmanah—for herself; padam—position; dhruvam—eternal; ca—also;
avyabhicari-sat-gunam—without any change of qualities; gandharva—
among the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; siddha—the inhabitants of
Siddhaloka; asura—the demons; yaksa—the Yaksas; carana—the in-
habitants of Caranaloka; traipistapeya-adisu—and among the demigods;
na—not; anvavindata—could accept any one of them.
TRANSLATION
While walking among the Gandharvas, Yaksas, asuras, Siddhas,
Caranas and denizens of heaven, Laksmidevi, the goddess of for-
tune, was scrutinizingly examining them, but she could not find
anyone naturally endowed with all good qualities. None of them
was devoid of faults, and therefore she could not take shelter of
any of them.
PURPORT
The goddess of fortune, Laksmidevi, having been generated from the
ocean of milk, was the daughter of the ocean. Thus she was allowed to
select her own husband in a svayarwara ceremony. She examined every
one of the candidates, but she could not find anyone suitably qualified to
be her shelter. In other words, Narayana, the natural husband of Laksmi,
cannot be superseded by anyone in this material world.
TEXT 20
+ ९
TW तपो यस्थ न मन्युनिजंयो
ज्ञानं कचित्‌ तच न सङ्गवर्जितम्‌ |
+ ९.
कचिन्महास्तस्य न कामनिजेयः
स ईश्वरः किं परतोन्यपाश्रयः ॥२०॥
ninam tapo yasya na manyu-nirjayo
jranari kvacit tac ca na sariga-varjitam


--- Page 305 ---
Text 21] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 303
kasin 71010775 tasya na kama-nirjayah
sa Bvarah kim parato vyapasrayah

niinam—certainly; tapah—austerity; yasya—of someone; na—not;
manyu—anger; nirjayah—conquered; jiagnam—knowledge; kvacit—in
some saintly person; tat—that; ca—also; na—not; sanga-varjitam—
without the contamination of association; kascit—someone; mahdin—a
very great exalted person; tasya—his; na—not; kama —material
desires; nirjayah—conquered; sah—such a person; iSvarah—con-
troller; kim —how can he be; paratah—of others; vyapasrayah—under
the control.

TRANSLATION

The goddess of fortune, examining the assembly, thought in
this way: Someone who has undergone great austerity has not yet
conquered anger. Someone possesses knowledge, but he has not
conquered material desires. Someone is a very great personality,
but he cannot conquer lusty desires. Even a great personality
depends on something else. How, then, can he be the supreme
controller?

PURPORT

Here is an attempt to find the supreme controller, or vara. Everyone
may be accepted as an Svara, or controller, but still such controllers are
controlled by others. For example, one may have undergone severe
austerities but still be under the control of anger. By a scrutinizing
analysis, we find that everyone is controlled by something else. No one,
therefore, can be the true controller but the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Krsna. This is supported by the Sastras. Isvarah paramah krsnah:
the supreme controller is Krsna. Krsna is never controlled by anyone, for
He is the controller of everyone (sarva-karana-karanam).

TEXT 21
धर्मः कचित्‌ तत्र न भूतसौहदं
त्यागः क्रचित्‌ तत्र न gles)


--- Page 306 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
वीयं ন पुंसोऽस्त्यजवेगनिष्कृतं
न हि द्वितीयो गुणसङ्गवजितः nen
dharmah kvacit tatra na bhita-sauhrdam
tyagah kvacit tatra na mukti-karanam
viryam na puriso sty aja-vega-niskrtari
na hi dvitiyo guna-sanga-varjitah
dharmah—religion; kvacit—one may have full knowledge of; tatra—
therein; na—not; bhiita-sauhrdam —friendship with other living en-
tities; tyagah—renunciation; kvacit—one may possess; tatra—therein;
na—not; mukti-karanam—the cause of liberation; viryam—power;
na—not; purmsah—of any person; asti—there may be; aja-vega-
niskrtam—no release from the power of time; na—nor; hi—indeed;
dvittyah—the second one; guna-sariga-varjitah—completely freed from
the contamination of the modes of nature.
TRANSLATION
Someone may possess full knowledge of religion but still not be
kind to all living entities. In someone, whether human or
demigod, there may be renunciation, but that is not the cause of
liberation. Someone may possess great power and yet be unable to
check the power of eternal time. Someone else may have
renounced attachment to the material world, yet he cannot com-
pare to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, no one is
completely freed from the influence of the material modes of
nature.
PURPORT
The statement dharmah kvacit tatra na bhita-sauhrdam is very im-
portant in this verse. We actually see that there are many Hindus,
Muslims, Christians, Buddhists and religionists of other cults who adhere
to their religious principles very nicely but are not equal to all living en-
tities. Indeed, although they profess to be very religious, they kill poor
animals. Such religion has no meaning. Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.8)
says:


--- Page 307 ---
Text 22] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 305
dharmah svanusthitah [01871507712
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratim
Srama eva hi kevalam
One may be very expert in following the religious principles of his own
sect, but if he has no tendency to love the Supreme Personality of God-
head, his observance of religious principles is simply a waste of time.
One must develop a sense of loving Vasudeva (vasudevah sarvam iti sa
mahatma sudurlabhah). The sign of a devotee is that he is a friend to
everyone (suhrdar sarva-bhitanam). A devotee will never allow a poor
animal to be killed in the name of religion. This is the difference between
a superficially religious person and a devotee of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.

We find that there have been many great heroes in history, but they
could not escape from the cruel hands of death. Even the greatest hero
cannot escape from the ruling power of the Supreme Personality of God-
head when Krsna comes as death. That is described by Krsna Himself:
mrtyuh sarva-haras caham. The Lord, appearing as death, takes away a
hero’s so-called power. Even Hiranyakasipu could not be saved when
Nrsimmhadeva appeared before him as death. One’s material strength is
nothing before the strength of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 22
५ ~ .
कचिचिरायुने हि Neng
कचित्‌ तदप्यस्ि न वेद्यमायुषः |
यत्रोभयं त्र च SARS:
सुमङ्गलः कश्च न काते हि माम्‌ URN
kvacic cirayur na hi sila-marigalari
kvacit tad apy asti na vedyam ayusah
yatrobhayar kutra ca so py amangalah
sumarngalah kasca na kanksate hi mam
kvacit—someone; cira-ayuh—has a long duration of life; na—not;
hi—indeed; Sila-mangalam—good behavior or auspiciousness; kvacit—


--- Page 308 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
someone; tat api—although possessing good behavior; asti—is; na—
not; vedyam ayusah—aware of the duration of life; yatra ubhayam—if
there are both (behavior and auspiciousness); kutra—somewhere; ca—
also; sah—that person; api—although; amargalah—a little in-
auspicious in some other detail; su-mangalah—auspicious in every
respect; kasca—someone; na—not; kanksate—desires; hi—indeed;
mam—me.
TRANSLATION
Someone may have longevity but not have auspiciousness or
good behavior. Someone may have both auspiciousness and good
behavior, but the duration of his life is not fixed. Although such
demigods as Lord Siva have eternal life, they have inauspicious
habits like living in crematoriums. And even if others are well
qualified in all respects, they are not devotees of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TEXT 23
+ A
एवं विखश्यान्यभिचारिसद्गुणे-
+ EN
वैरं निजेकाश्रयतयागुणाश्रयम्‌ |
+ ९ .
वव्रे वरं स्वेगुणेरपेितं
रमा gE निरपेक्षमीप्सितम्‌ ॥२३॥
evar vimrSyavyabhicari-sad-gunair
varam nijaikasrayatayagunasrayam
vavre vara sarva-gunair apeksitar
rama mukundarm nirapeksam ipsitam
evam—in this way; vimriya—after full deliberation; avyabhicari-sat-
gunaih—with extraordinary transcendental qualities; varam —superior;
nija-eka-asrayataya—because of possessing all good qualities without
depending on others; aguna-asrayam—the reservoir of all transcenden-
tal qualities; vavre—accepted; varam—as a bridegroom; sarva-
gunaih—with all transcendental qualities; apeksitam—qualified;
rama—the goddess of fortune; mukundam—unto Mukunda;
nirapeksam —although He did not wait for her; ipsitam—the most
desirable.


--- Page 309 ---
Text 24] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 307
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: In this way, after full delibera-
tion, the goddess of fortune accepted Mukunda as her husband be-
cause although He is independent and not in want of her, He
possesses all transcendental qualities and mystic powers and is
therefore the most desirable.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mukunda, is self-sufficient.
Since He is fully independent, He was not in want of the support or asso-
ciation of Laksmidevi. Nonetheless, Laksmidevi, the goddess of fortune,
accepted Him as her husband.

TEXT 24
तस्यांसदेश ITA नवकञ्जमालां
मादयन्मधुव्रतवरूयगिरोपयुषश्शम्‌ |
तस्थौ निधाय निकटे तदुरः खधाम
सव्रीडदासविकसनयनेन याता ।२४॥
tasyamsa-desa uSatim nava-kainija-malam
madyan-madhuvrata-varitha-giropaghustam
tasthau nidhaya nikate tad-urah sva-dhama
savrida-hasa-vikasan-nayanena yata

tasya—of Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); arisa-dese —
on the shoulders; usatim—very beautiful; nava—new; kanja-malam—
garland of lotus flowers; madyat—maddened; madhuvrata-varitha—of
bumblebees; gira—with the vibrating; upaghustam—surrounded by
their humming; tasthau—remained; nidhaya—after placing the gar-
land; nikate—nearby; tat-urah—the bosom of the Lord; sva-dhama—
her real resort; sa-vrida-hasa—smiling with shyness; vikasat—glitter-
ing; nayanena—with the eyes; yata—so situated.

TRANSLATION

Approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the goddess

of fortune placed upon His shoulders the garland of newly grown


--- Page 310 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
lotus flowers, which was surrounded by humming bumblebees
searching for honey. Then, expecting to get a place on the bosom
of the Lord, she remained standing by His side, her face smiling in
shyness.
TEXT 25
तस्याः भियसिजगतो जनको जनन्या
वक्षोनिवासमकरोत्‌ परमं विभूतेः |
श्रीः खाः प्रजाः सकरुणेन निरीक्षणेन
a
यत्र स्थितेधयत साधिपतींखिलोकान्‌ ॥ २५॥
tasyah $riyas tri-jagato janako jananya
vakso nivasam akarot paramari vibhiiteh
srih svah prajah sakarunena niriksanena
yatra sthitaidhayata sadhipatims tri-lokan
tasyah—of her; Sriyah—the goddess of fortune; tri-jagatah—of the
three worlds; janakah —the father; jananyah—of the mother; vaksah—
bosom; nivasam—residence; akarot—made; paramam—supreme;
vibhiiteh—of the opulent; $rih—the goddess of fortune; svah—own;
prajah—descendants;  sa-karunena—with favorable mercy; nir-
thksanena—by glancing over; yatra—wherein; sthita—staying;
aidhayata—increased; sa-adhipatin—with the great directors and
leaders; tri-lokan—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the father of the three
worlds, and His bosom is the residence of mother Laksmi, the god-
dess of fortune, the proprietor of all opulences. The goddess of
fortune, by her favorable and merciful glance, can increase the
opulence of the three worlds, along with their inhabitants and
their directors, the demigods.
PURPORT
According to the desire of Laksmidevi, the goddess of fortune, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead made His bosom her residence so that


--- Page 311 ---
Text 27] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 309
by her glance she could favor everyone, including the demigods and or-
dinary human beings. In other words, since the goddess of fortune stays
on the bosom of Narayana, she naturally sees any devotee who worships
Narayana. When the goddess of fortune understands that a devotee is in
favor of devotional service to Narayana, she is naturally inclined to bless
the devotee with all opulences. The karmis try to receive the favor and
mercy of Laksmi, but because they are not devotees of Narayana, their
opulence is flickering. The opulence of devotees who are attached to the
service of Narayana is not like the opulence of karmis. The opulence of
devotees is as permanent as the opulence of Narayana Himself.
TEXT 26
TERE वादित्राणां पृथुः खनः ।
देवानुगानां awit नृत्यतां गायतामभूत्‌ ।।२६॥
sankha-tarya-mrdanganarm
vaditranam prthuh svanah
devanuganari sastrinan
nrtyatam gayatam abhi
Sarnikha —conchshells; tirya—bugles; mrdanganam—and of dif-
ferent types of drums; vaditranam—of the musical instruments;
prthuh—very great; svanah—sound; deva-anuganam—the inhabitants
of the upper planets like the Gandharvas and Caranas, who follow the
demigods; sa-strinam—as along with their own wives; nrtyatam—
engaged in dancing; gayatam—singing; abhiit—became.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka and Caranaloka then took the
opportunity to play their musical instruments, such as conch-
shells, bugles and drums. They began dancing and singing along
with their wives.
TEXT 27
बह्मरुदराङ्गिरोगुख्याः सर्वे frags fgg ।
AC EY
ईडिरेऽवितभैरमन्त्रस्तलिङ्गेः पुष्पवर्षिणः ॥२५७॥


--- Page 312 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
brahma-rudrarigiro-mukhyah
sarve visva-srjo vibhum
idire “vitathair mantrais
tal-lingaih puspa-varsinah
brahma—Lord Brahma; rudra—Lord Siva; angirah—the great sage
Angira Muni; mukhyah—headed by; sarve—all of them; visva-srjah—
the directors of universal management; vibhum—the very great per-
sonality; idire—worshiped; avitathaih—real; mantraih—Dby chanting;
tat-lingaih—worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puspa-
varsinah—throwing flowers like showers.
4 TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, the great sage Angira, and similar
directors of universal management showered flowers and chanted
mantras indicating the transcendental glories of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
ियावलोकिता देवाः सप्रजापतयः प्रजाः |
[५
शीलादिगुणसम्पनना FRR FER पराम्‌ ॥२८॥
Sriyavalokita devah
saprajapatayah prajah
siladi-guna-sampanna
lebhire nirvrtirn param
Sriya—by the goddess of fortune, Laksmi; avalokitah—being seen
favorably with mercy; devah—all the demigods; sa-prajapatayah—with
all the prajapatis; prajah—and their generations; sila-adi-guna-
sampannah—all blessed with good behavior and good characteristics;
lebhire—achieved; nirvrtim—satisfaction; param—the ultimate.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods, along with the prajapatis and their descen-
dants, being blessed by Laksmiji’s glance upon them, were im-


--- Page 313 ---
Text 30] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 311
mediately enriched with good behavior and transcendental
qualities. Thus they were very much satisfied.
TEXT 29
fra लोलुपा राजन्‌ निरुूयोगा गतत्रपाः |
=
यदा चोपेक्षिता लक्ष्म्या बभूवुदत्यदानवाः ॥२९॥
nihsattva lolupa rajan
nirudyoga gata-trapah
yada copeksita laksmya
babhuvur daitya-danavah
nihsattvah —without strength; lolupah—very greedy; rajan—O
King; nirudyogah—{frustrated; gata-trapah—shameless; yada —when;
ca—also; upeksitah—neglected; laksmya—Dby the goddess of fortune;
babhiuvuh—they became; daitya-danavah—the demons and Raksasas.
TRANSLATION
O King, because of being neglected by the goddess of fortune,
the demons and Raksasas were depressed, bewildered and frus-
trated, and thus they became shameless.
TEXT 30
अथासीद्‌ वारुणी देवी कन्या कमललोचना |
+` =
असुरा जगृहुस्तां ন हरेरचमतेन ते ॥२०॥
athasid varunt devi
kanya kamala-locana
asura jagrhus tam vai
harer anumatena te
atha—thereafter (after the appearance of the goddess of fortune);
asit—there was; varuni—Viruni; devi—the demigoddess who controls
drunkards; kanyd—a young girl; kamala-locana—Ilotus-eyed;
asurah—the demons; jagrhuh—accepted; tam—her; vai—indeed;


--- Page 314 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anumatena—by the
order; te—they (the demons).
TRANSLATION
Next appeared Varuni, the lotus-eyed goddess who controls
drunkards. With the permission of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, the demons, headed by Bali Maharaja, took
possession of this young girl.
TEXT 31
a न,
अथोदघेमेथ्यमानात्‌ कास्यपैरख्ताथिंमिः |
उदति्न्महाराज पुरषः परमाद्भुतः ॥३१॥
athodadher mathyamanat
kasyapair amrtarthibhih
udatisthan maharaja
purusah paramadbhutah
atha—thereafter; udadheh—from the ocean of milk;
mathyamanat—while being churned; kaSyapaith—by the sons of
Kasyapa, namely the demigods and the demons; amrta-arthibhih—
anxious to get nectar from the churning; udatisthat—there appeared;
maharaja—O King; purusah—a male person; parama—highly;
adbhutah—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
O King, thereafter, while the sons of Kasyapa, both demons and
demigods, were engaged in churning the ocean of milk, a very
wonderful male person appeared.
TEXT 32
दींपीवरदोदंण्डः कम्बुश्रीवोऽरुणेक्षणः |
इयामलस्तरुणः सखम्बी सर्वाभरणभूषितः 13:11


--- Page 315 ---
Text 33] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 313
dirgha-pivara-dor-dandah
kambu-grivo ‘runeksanah
§yamalas tarunah sragvi
sarvabharana-bhisitah
dirgha—long; pivara—stout and strong; doh-dandah—the arms;
kambu—Ilike a conchshell; grivah—the neck; aruna-tksanah—reddish
eyes; Syamalah—blackish complexion; tarunah—very young; sragvi—
wearing a flower garland; sarva—all; abharana—with ornaments;
bhiisitah—decorated.
TRANSLATION
He was strongly built; his arms were long, stout and strong; his
neck, which was marked with three lines, resembled a conchshell;
his eyes were reddish; and his complexion was blackish. He was
very young, he was garlanded with flowers, and his entire body was
fully decorated with various ornaments.
TEXT 33
पीतवासा महारस्कः सुमृ्टमणिङ्कण्डलः |
सिग्धङचितकेशान्त सुभगः सिंह विक्रमः |
[ष a
अग्रतापूणंकरसं बिभ्रद्‌ वल्यभूषितः।।२३॥
pita-vasa mahoraskah
sumrsta-mani-kundalah
snigdha-kuficita-kesanta-
subhagah sirmha-vikramah
amrtaparna-kalasarn
bibhrad valaya-bhusitah
pita-vasah—wearing yellow garments; maha-uraskah—his chest
very broad; su-mrsta-mani-kundalah—whose earrings were well
polished and made of pearls; snigdha— polished; kuiicita-kesa —curling
hair; anta—at the end; su-bhagah—separated and beautiful; sirmha-
vikramah —strong like a lion; amrta—with nectar; apirna —filled to the


--- Page 316 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
top; kalasam—a jar; bibhrat—moving; wvalaya—with bangles;
bhasitah—decorated.
TRANSLATION
He was dressed in yellow garments and wore brightly polished
earrings made of pearls. The tips of his hair were anointed with
oil, and his chest was very broad. His body had all good features,
he was stout and strong like a lion, and he was decorated with
bangles. In his hand he carried a jug filled to the top with nectar.
TEXT 34
स वै भगवतः साक्षादिष्णोरंशांशसम्मवः |
धन्वन्तरिरिति ख्यात आयुर्वेद दगिज्यमाक्‌ TERT
sa vai bhagavatah saksad
visnor amsamsa-sambhavah
dhanvantarir iti khyata
ayur-veda-drg ijya-bhak
sah—he; vai—indeed; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; saksat—directly; vispoh—of Lord Visnu; amsa-amsa-
sambhavah—incarnation of the plenary portion of a plenary portion;
dhanvantarih—Dhanvantari; iti—thus; khyatah—celebrated; ayuh-
veda-drk—fully conversant in the medical science; ijya-bhak—one of
the demigods eligible to share the benefits of sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
This person was Dhanvantari, a plenary portion of a plenary
portion of Lord Visnu. He was very conversant with the science of
medicine, and as one of the demigods he was permitted to take a
share in sacrifices.
PURPORT
Srila Madhvacarya remarks:
tesa satyac calanarthari
harir dhanvantarir vibhuh


--- Page 317 ---
Text 36] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 315
samartho ‘py asuranam tu
sva-hastad amucat sudham
Dhanvantari, who was carrying the jug containing nectar, was a plenary
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but although he was
very strong, the asuras were able to take the jug of nectar from his
hands.
TEXT 35
तमालोक्यासुराः सर्वे करसं चागताभतम्‌ |
(६ +
लिप्सन्तः सर्ववस्तूनि कलसं तरसाहरन्‌ ।२५॥
tam alokyasurah sarve
kalasari camrtabhrtam
lipsantah sarva-vastini
kalasar tarasaharan
tam—him; dalokya—seeing; asurah—the demons; sarve—all of
them; kalasam—the container of nectar; ca—also; amrta-abhrtam—
filled with nectar; lipsantah—desiring strongly; sarva-vastini—all ob-
jects; kalasam—the jug; tarasa—immediately; aharan —snatched away.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Dhanvantari carrying the jug of nectar, the
demons, desiring the jug and its contents, immediately snatched it
away by force. 1
TEXT 36
नीयमानेऽसरेस्तसिन्करसे ऽखतमाजने |
विषण्णमनसो देवा हरं शरणमाययुः ।।২৪।।
niyamdne ’surais tasmin
kalase ’mrta-bhajane
visanna-manaso deva
harirh saranam ayayuh
niyamane—being carried; asuraih—by the demons; tasmin—that;
kalase—jug; amrta-bhajane—containing nectar; visanna-manasah—


--- Page 318 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
aggrieved in mind; devah—all the demigods; harim —unto the Supreme
Lord; saranam—to take shelter; ayayuh—went.
TRANSLATION
When the jug of nectar was carried off by the demons, the
demigods were morose. Thus they sought shelter at the lotus feet
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari.
TEXT 37
3 [3
इति तदंन्यमालोक्य RUC (REACT ।
मा fara भिथोऽथं वः साधयिष्ये खमायया el
iti tad-dainyam alokya
bhagavan bhrtya-kama-krt
ma khidyata mitho 7170778 vah
sadhayisye sva-mayaya
iti—in this way; tat—of the demigods; dainyam—moroseness;
alokya—seeing; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhrtya-kama-krt—who is always ready to fulfill the desires of His ser-
vants; ma khidyata—do not be aggrieved; mithah—by a quarrel;
artham —to get nectar; vah—for all of you; sadhayisye—I shall exe-
cute; sva-mayaya—by My own energy.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who always desires
to fulfill the ambitions of His devotees, saw that the demigods were
morose, He said to them, ‘‘Do not be aggrieved. By My own energy
I shall bewilder the demons by creating a quarrel among them. In
this way I shall fulfill your desire to have the nectar.”
TEXT 38
मिथः ककिरभूत्तेषां तदर्थे तर्षचेतसाम्‌ |
अदं पूर्वमहं पूव न त्वं न स्वमिति प्रमो nen


--- Page 319 ---
Text 40] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 317
mithah kalir abhiit tesam
tad-arthe tarsa-cetasam
aha parvam aha parvam
na tvarm na tvam iti prabho

mithah—among themselves; kalih—disagreement and quarrel;
abhiit —there was; tesam—of all of them; tat-arthe—for the sake of
nectar; tarsa-cetasim —bewildered in heart and soul by the illusory en-
ergy of Visnu; aham—I; parvam—first; aham—I; parvam—first;
na—not; tvam—you; na—not; tvam—you; iti—thus; prabho—O0O King.

TRANSLATION

O King, a quarrel then arose among the demons over who would
get the nectar first. Each of them said, “You cannot drink it first. I
must drink it first. Me first, not you!”’

PURPORT

This is the symptom of demons. The first concern of a nondevotee is
how to enjoy his personal sense gratification at once, whereas the devo-
tee’s first concern is to satisfy the Lord. This is the distinction between
the nondevotee and the devotee. In this material world, since most people
are nondevotees, they regularly compete, fight, disagree and war among
themselves, for everyone wants to enjoy and satisfy his own senses.
Therefore, unless such demons become Krsna conscious and are trained
to satisfy the senses of the Lord, there can be no question of peace in
human society or any society, even that of the demigods. The demigods
and devotees, however, always surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord,
and thus the Lord is always anxious to satisfy their ambitions. While the
demons fight to satisfy their own senses, devotees engage in devotional
service to satisfy the senses of the Lord. The members of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement must be alert in regard to this point, and then their
preaching of the Krsna consciousness movement will be successful.

TEXTS 39-40
देवाः स्वं मागमदन्ति ये तुल्यायासहेतवः ।
ES
सत्रयाग इवैतसिन्नेष धमः सनातनः ।३९॥


--- Page 320 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
a
इति खान््रत्यपेधन्व दैतेया जातमत्सराः ।
TAT प्रबलान्‌ राजन्‌ गृहीतकलसाच्‌ हः ।।४०॥
devah svar bhagam arhanti
ye tulyayasa-hetavah
satra-yaga ivaitasminn
esa dharmah sandtanah
iti svan pratyasedhan vai
daiteya jata-matsarah
durbalah prabalan rajan
grhita-kalasan muhuh
devah—the demigods; svam bhagam—their own share; arhanti—
deserve to take; ye—all of them who; tulya-ayasa-hetavah—who made
an equal endeavor; satra-yage—in the performance of sacrifices;
iva—similarly; etasmin—in this matter; esah—this; dharmah—
religion; sanatanah—eternal; iti—thus; svan—among themselves;
pratyasedhan—forbade one another; vai—indeed; daiteyah—the sons
of Diti; jata-matsarah—envious; durbalah—weak; prabalan—by
force; rajan—O King; grhita—possessing; kalasan—the jug containing
nectar; muhuh—constantly.
TRANSLATION
Some of the demons said, ‘‘All the demigods have taken part in
churning the ocean of milk. Now, as everyone has an equal right to
partake in any public sacrifice, according to the eternal religious
system it is befitting that the demigods now have a share of the
nectar.” O King, in this way the weaker demons forbade the
stronger demons to take the nectar.
PURPORT
Desiring to take the nectar, those among the demons who were less
strong spoke in favor of the demigods. The weaker Daityas naturally
pleaded on behalf of the demigods to stop the stronger Daityas from


--- Page 321 ---
Text 46] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 319
drinking the nectar without sharing it. In this way, disagreement and
trouble arose as they forbade one another to drink the nectar.
TEXTS 41-46
fw विष्णुः सर्वो पायविदी्रः |
योषिदरूपमनिर्देश्यं दधार परमाद्भुतम्‌ ।॥४१॥
्क्षणीयोत्पलइयामं सर्वावयवसुन्दरम्‌ |
समानकणांमरणं सुकपोलोनसाननम्‌ ॥४२॥
AAACN TFT |
मुखामोदाुरक्तालिश्चङ्कारोद्धिग्रखोचनम्‌ 1931
शिश्रत्‌ सुकेशमारेण মাত্তাম্তংস্তন্তমন্তিকাদ |
सुग्रीवकण्ठामरणं ggasi ॥४७४॥
विरजाम्बरसंबीतनितम्बद्वीपशोमया ।
काञ्च्या प्रविलसद्वल्गु चलचरणनुपुरम्‌ JE]
सब्रीडसितविक्षिसप्रूविखासावरोकनेः ।
दैत्ययूथपचेतःसु FEET पहः ।७६॥
etasminn antare visnuh
sarvopaya-vid iSvarah
yosid-riipam anirdesSyam
dadhara paramadbhutam
preksantyotpala-Syamari
sarvavayava-sundaram
samana-karnabharanam
sukapolonnasananam
nava-yauvana-nirvrtta-
stana-bhara-krsodaram
mukhamodanuraktali-
Jharikarodvigna-locanam


--- Page 322 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 8
bibhrat sukesa-bharena
malam utphulla-mallikam
sugriva-kanthabharanarm
su-bhujarigada-bhisitam
virgjambara-sariwita-
nitamba-dvipa-sobhaya
kancya pravilasad-valgu-
calac-carana-nipuram
savrida-smita-viksipta-
bhri-vilasavalokanaih
daitya-yutha-pa-cetahsu
kamam uddipayan muhuh
etasmin antare—after this incident; visnuh—Lord Visnu; sarva-
upaya-vit—one who knows how to deal with different situations;
iSvarah—the supreme controller; yosit-riipam —the form of a beautiful
woman; anirdeSyam—no one could ascertain who She was; dadhara—
assumed; parama—supremely; adbhutam —wonderful; preksaniya—
pleasing to look at; utpala-§yamam—blackish like a newly grown lotus;
sarva—all; avayava—parts of the body; sundaram—very beautiful;
samana—equally adjusted; karna-abharanam—ornaments on the ears;
su-kapola—very beautiful cheeks; unnasa-ananam—a raised nose on
Her face; nava-yauvana—newly youthful; nirvrtta-stana—breasts not
agitated; bhara—weight; krSa—very lean and thin; udaram—waist;
mukha—face; amoda—creating pleasure; anurakta—attracted; ali—
bumblebees; jhankara—making a humming sound; udvigna—from
anxiety; locanam—Her eyes; bibhrat—moving; su-kesa-bharena—by
the weight of beautiful hair; malam—with a flower garland; utphulla-
mallikam—made of fully grown mallika flowers; su-griva—a nice neck;
kantha-abharanam—ornamented with beautiful jewelry; su-bhuja—
very beautiful arms; arngada-bhisitarmm—decorated with bangles; viraja-
ambara—very clean cloth; sarmvita—spread; nitamba—breast; dvipa—
appearing like an island; Sobhaya—by such beauty; karicya—the belt on
the waist; pravilasat—spreading over; valgu—very beautiful; calat-
carana-nipuram—moving ankle bells; sa-vrida-smita—smiling with


--- Page 323 ---
Text 46] The Churning of the Milk Ocean 321
shyness; viksipta—glancing; bhri-vilasa—activities of the eyebrows;
avalokanaih—glancing over; daitya-yiitha-pa—the leaders of the
demons; cetahsu—in the core of the heart; kamam—lusty desire;
uddipayat—awakening; muhuh—constantly.
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, who can coun-
teract any unfavorable situation, then assumed the form of an ex-
tremely beautiful woman. This incarnation as a woman, Mohini-
miirti, was most pleasing to the mind. Her complexion resembled
in color a newly grown blackish lotus, and every part of Her body
was beautifully situated. Her ears were equally decorated with ear-
rings, Her cheeks were very beautiful, Her nose was raised and
Her face full of youthful luster. Her large breasts made Her waist
seem very thin. Attracted by the aroma of Her face and body,
bumblebees hummed around Her, and thus Her eyes were restless.
Her hair, which was extremely beautiful, was garlanded with
mallika flowers. Her attractively constructed neck was decorated
with a necklace and other ornaments, Her arms were decorated
with bangles, Her body was covered with a clean sari, and Her
breasts seemed like islands in an ocean of beauty. Her legs were
decorated with ankle bells. Because of the movements of Her
eyebrows as She smiled with shyness and glanced over the demons,
all the demons were saturated with lusty desires, and every one of
them desired to possess Her.

PURPORT

Because of the Supreme Lord’s assuming the form of a beautiful
woman to arouse the lusty desires of the demons, a description of Her
complete beauty is given here.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eighth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Churning of the Milk
Ocean.”


--- Page 324 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 325 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhu-
pada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and strug-
gled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

325


--- Page 326 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large inter-
national center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authori-
tativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into eleven
languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 ex-
clusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and phi-
losophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. ,

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 327 ---
References
The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard

Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically

cited in this volume:

Bhagavad-gita, 5, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 63, 64, 66, 67, 71,
75, 80, 83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, 100, 102, 104-105, 113, 114,
115-116, 158, 158-159, 160-161, 163, 169, 170, 172, 174, 174-175,
178, 179, 191, 195, 197, 200, 209, 211, 213, 214, 215, 216, 219, 239,
245, 261, 269, 270, 274, 280, 281, 287, 292

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 104

Brahma-samhita, 18-19, 76, 93, 111, 184-185, 268-269, 288

Brahma-vaivarta Purana, 61-62

Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka, 28

Caitanya-caritamrta, 28

Gautamiya Tantra, 16, 108

Gopala-tapani Upanisad, 86

Isopanisad, 99, 169

Padma Purana, 165, 199

Siksastaka, 20, 218, 221

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 14, 21, 22, 22-23, 44, 46, 65, 87, 93, 95, 98, 101,
111,113-114, 116, 119, 131, 133, 134, 161, 162, 170-171, 172-173,
176, 198, 199, 215, 280, 304-305

327


--- Page 328 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Svetasvatara Upanisad, 17

Taittirtya Upanisad, 67

Visnu Purana, 82


--- Page 329 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.
Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps,
fans, flowers and incense.
Arcana—the devotional process of Deity worship.
Asrama—the four spiritual orders of life: celibate student, householder,
retired life and renounced life.
Asuras —atheistic demons.
Avatara—a descent of the Supreme Lord.
B
Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the
Lord Himself.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti-marga —the path of developing devotion to Krsna.
Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord by devotional service.
Brahmacarya—celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual
life.
Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.
Brahmana— one wise in the Vedas who can guide society; the first Vedic
social order.
C
Cakra—the wheel held by Lord Visnu.
D
Devas —demigods.
Dharma —eternal occupational duty; religious principles.
Dvijas — brahmanas.
E
Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which
comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.
329


--- Page 330 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam
G

Gada—the club held by Lord Visnu.

Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s
personal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.

Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends who are His most confidential
servitors.

Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic spiri-
tual life.

Guna-avataras—the three incarnations of Visnu who control the three
modes of material nature; Visnu controls goodness, Brahma passion
and Siva ignorance.

Guru —a spiritual master.

H

Hare Krsna mantra—See: Maha-mantra

J

Jiva-tattva—the living entities, atomic parts of the Lord.

Jivatma—the infinitesimal soul, the living entity.

Jiiana—knowledge of matter, spirit and the controller of both.

K

Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) —the present age, which is characterized by
quarrel. It is last in the cycle of four, and began five thousand years
ago.

Karatalas—hand cymbals used in kirtana.

Karma —fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.

Karmi—a person satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.

Kirtana —chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.

Krsnaloka— See: Goloka

Ksatriyas—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.

L

Lila-avataras—innumerable incarnations of the Lord who descend to

the material world to display spiritual pastimes.


--- Page 331 ---
Glossary 331
M
Mahajanas— great souls, spiritual authorities.
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Raima Rama, Hare Hare.

Mahat-tattva—the total material energy.

Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.

Manvantara-avataras—the Manu incarnations, administrators of the
universe.

Mathura— Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndavana
pastimes.

Maya— (ma —not; ya—this), illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relation-
ship with Krsna.

Mayavadis— impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have
a transcendental body.

Mrdanga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.

Muni—a great thinker.

N

Nirguna—transcendental to the modes of material nature; free from all
material contamination.

ए

Padma -- 1116 lotus flower held by Lord Visnu.

Paramaharnsa—the highest stage of the sannyasa order; a topmost de-
votee of the Lord.

Parampara—the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.

Prajapatis—the demigods in charge of populating the universe.

Prasada— the Lord’s mercy; anything first offered to the Lord and then
utilized by His devotees.

Purusa—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme enjoyer.

R

Rsis—great sages.


--- Page 332 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam
S
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is
9 eternal, full of knowledge and bliss.
Sakti-tattva—the various energies of the Lord.
Sampradaya—a chain of spiritual masters.
Sankha—the conchshell held by Lord Visnu.
Sankirtana— public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga
process for this age.
Sannyasa—renounced life; the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.
Sastras —revealed scriptures.
Sravanarn kirtanarn visnoh —the devotional processes of hearing and
त chanting about Lord Visnu.
Sruti-mantra—the hymns of the Vedas and Upanisads.
Stotra—a prayer.
Siidra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.
Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the
renounced order of life.
T
Tantras— Vedic literatures consisting mostly of dialogues between Lord
Siva and Durga.
Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a
higher purpose.
Tattvas—the Absolute Truth’s multifarious categories.
Tilaka—auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple
of the Lord.
Vv
Vaikuntha —the spiritual world.
Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, Krsna.
Vai$yas— farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.
Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of
Vedic spiritual life.
Varnasrama—the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.
Vedas —the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord Him-
self.


--- Page 333 ---
Glossary 333

Virat-riapa— the all-pervading universal form of the Lord.

Visnu, Lord —Krsna’s first expansion for the creation and maintenance
of the material universes.

Visnu-tattva— personal expansions of the Lord which are equal in
power to Him.

Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His
quality of sweetness.

Vyasadeva—Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for com-
piling the Vedas.

Y

Yajiia—sacrifice; work done for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu.

Yoga—the process of linking with the Supreme.

Yogamaya— internal spiritual potency of the Lord.

Yogi—a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for
union with the Supreme.

Yuga-avataras— the four incarnations of the Lord which appear in the
four yugas or millenniums to prescribe the appropriate method of
spiritual realization for that age.

Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occurring in a repeated cycle of
four.


--- Page 334 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
Ha A: इ; ई, Fu Fo Wr ऋः
=
J! Qe Q ai ओ ০ সী au
=~ 71 (anusvara) th (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: क्क ka I kha IT ga স্ব 603 $ na
Palatals: q ca & cha IH ja दख jha A fa
Cerebrals: eta ठ tha ड da হু dha OQ] na
Dentals: त ta थ tha दु १४ J dha na
Labials: q pa प्न 19 ब्‌ ba मृ bha H ma
Semivowels: H ya I ra la q va
Sibilants: शा ॐ q sa H sa
Aspirate: ह्‌ ha S ” (avagraha) - the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a — like the ain organ or the uin but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
1 — like the iin pin.
i - like the iin pique but held twice as long as short i.
u — like the win push.
a — like the win rule but held twice as long as short u.
335


--- Page 335 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the riin rim.
ह — like ree in reed.
] — like I followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
ai — like the aiin aisle.
০ — like the oin go.
au — like the ow in how.
m (anusvdra) — a resonant nasal like the nin the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah is pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — as in hedgehog
kh— asin Eckhart प — asin canyon
g — asin give t — asin tub
gh— asin dig-hard th — as in light-heart
7 — asinsing d — asin dove
০ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — asin staunch-heart n — asrna (prepare to say
j — asin joy the rand say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t - asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — asin light-heart but with tongue against teeth.
१ — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh — asin red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
1 — asin nut but with tongue between teeth.
p — asin pine 1 - asin light
ph— asin uphill (not f) v — asin vine
b — asin bird § (palatal) — as in the sin the German
bh — as in rub-hard word sprechen
m — asin mother s (cerebral) — as the shin shine
फ — asin yes ও — asin sun
r — asin run h — asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flow-
ing of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 336 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskrit poetry verses of this volume of Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English
alphabetical order. The first column gives the Sanskrit transliteration, and the second and
third columns, respectively, list the chapter-verse reference and page number for each
verse.
A anyais ca kakubhah sarva 2:3 42
anyatra ksudra harindh sasadayas 2.22 54
abhaksayan maha-devah 742 278 apannah kaunjarim yonim 4.12 130
abhigarjanti harayah 2.6 45 apdrayann atma-vimoksane cirar 2.31 63
abhinandya harer viryam 5.14 152 apdrayantas tar vodhuri 6.34 234
abhisecanika bhamir 811 295
abhramu-prabhrtayo १८०४ 8.5 289  arayo ‘pi hi sandheyah 6.20 224
arebhire sura yatta A 242
abhyabhasata tat sarvari 6.30 231 aristodumbara-plaksair 2.12 49
adyas te kathito yatra 1.4 6  aruhya prayaya vabdhim 6.38 237
agayata yaso-dhama 4.4 124  aripayoru-ripaya 3.9 82
agnir mukharn te 'khila-devatatma 7.26 264
agnir mukham yasya tu jata-veda 5.35 183  dsam cakdropasuparnam enam 5.29 175
asa prana-paripsinarh 7.38 275
aha bhavo yiyam atho ’suradayo 5.21 157  dasansva-pauruse naste 7.7 247
ahari giritras ca suradayo ye 6.15 220 ०७०८८ cchayayoktaya 3.14 90
ahari parvam ahari षाण 8.38 317 ৫50 girivaro rajars 2.1 41
ahi-musikavad deva 6.20 224
ahindra-sahasra-kathora-drii-mukha- = 7.14 254  dsinam adrav apavarga-hetos 7.20 259
astasiti-sahasrani 1:22 32
aho bata bhavany etat 7.37 275  asura jagrhus tam vai 8.30 311
airavanadayas tv astau 8.5 289  athasid varuni devi 830 311
ajasya cakram tv ajayeryamanam 5.28 173  atha tasmai bhagavate 6.27 229
ajdta-janma-sthiti-sarhyamaya- 6.8 208
(10.71... 1.1 5.24 164  athagre rsayah karmani 1.14 21
athodadher mathyamanat 831 312
ajito nama bhagavan 5.9 149  atindriyar saksmam ivatidiram 3.21 103
akhyasye bhagavan yajiio 1.6 7  atma-labhena pirnartho 115 24
akutyar devahityam ca 1.5 6
ambhas tu yad-reta udara-viryarm 5.33 181  atmatma-japta-grha-vitta-janesu saktair 3.18 99
amrtapiirna-kalasari 8.33 313  atmavasyam idam visvam 1.10 11
aty-adbhutar tac-caritari sumangalari = 3.20 102
amrtotpddane yatnah 6.21 225 avaropya girim skandhat 6.39 238
anor animne ‘pariganya-dhamne 6.8 208
antah-samudre 'nupacan sva-dhatin 5.35 183  aviddha-drk saksy ubhayar tad-iksate = 3.4 76
anvasiksan vrata tasya 1.22 32  avikriyam satyam anantam adyar 5.26 168
anvdsma samrajam ivanuga णठकवणे 5.37 185  ayam ca tasya sthiti-palana-ksanah 523 159
337


--- Page 337 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam
B devanuganan sastrindrit 8.26 309
badarayana etat te 1.31 37 deva-stri-majjanamoda 2.8 47
baddha-vairesu bhitesu 7.39 276 0৫6৮৫ vaidhrtayo nama 1.29 36
balan mahendras tri-dasah prasadan 5.39 187  dhanvantarir iti khyata 8.34 314
bali-vindhyadayas tasya 512 144 dharmah kvacit tatra na bhita-sauhrdarn 8.21 == 304
bhauman reniin sa vimame 5.6 147
dharma-jignopadesartharn 1.8 ॥
bhavas ca jagmatuh svar उण्णा 6.27 229  dharmasya sanrtayan tu 1.25 34
bhisanani vicitrani 8.16 299 dhatse yada sva-drg bhiiman 7.23 261
bibhrat sukesa-bharena 8.44 320 dhatte sya janmady-ajayatma-saktya = 1.13 19
bibhrat tad-avartanam adi-kacchapo 7.10 250 dhriyamano pi balibhir 76 247
bhitah praja dudruvur ariga sesvara 7.19 257
dhruvarh brahma-rsin sapta 4.23 139
छव prapannari paripati yad-bhayan 2.33 == 66  didrksavo yasya padari sumarigalari 3/7 80
bhramamano 'mbhasi dhrtah 5.10 150  digibhah pirna-kalasaih 8.14 297
bhruvor yamah paksma-bhavas tu kalah 5.42 189  dirgha-pivara-dor-dandah 982 = 913
bhita-druho bhita-ganams 1.26 34 disah khari rocayann dste 2.2 42
bilvaih kapitthair jambirair 2.14 50  drakseksu-rambha-jambubhir 2.13 49
brahmadayah kim uta 5050071९ 7.34 272  dravyarh vayah karma gunan viSesarn = 5.43 190
brahmanari naradam rir 4.20 138 drstva gata nirvrtam adya sarve 018, 1217
brahma-rudrangiro-mukhyah 8.27 310 करण्ठाः apy asarityattan 6.28 229
drstvasura yatudhana 1.17 28
Cc dura-bharodvaha-srantah 6.34 234
cacala vaktrar sukapola-kundalari 8.17 300 durbalahprabalan rajan 8.40 318
candomayena garudena samuhyamanas 3.31 117  dvarari ca mukter amrtarii ca mrtyuh 536 184
caranty aloka-vratam avranar vane 3.7 80  dyaur yasya sirsno ‘psaraso viharat 5.40 188
caturtha uttama-bhrata 1.27 35  dyumat-susena-rocismat 1.19 30
chandarsi saksat tava sapta dhatavas == 7.28 265
chayatapau yatra na grdhra-paksau 527 171 E
chaya tv adharmormisu yair visargo 7.30 267 eka evesvaras tasmin 6.17 222
citra-druma-surodyana 2.7 46  ekantino yasya na ৫7007৫11077 3.20 102
cirnayam ৫50৫ mahatd 6.35 235 etad bhagavatah karma 902; 191
cutaih piydlaih panasair 2.11 48 etan maha-rdja taverito maya 4.14 134
etasminn antare visnuh 8.41 319
D ^ = ~
etat parari prapasyamo 7.35 273
dadhara prsthena sa laksa-yojana- 79 249  etavan hi prabhor artho 7.38 275
daitya-yitha-pa-cetahsu 8.46 320 evam amantrya bhagavan 7.41 278
daksayanir dharma-patnih 4.22 138 evam 07৫01107078 visnoh 549 198
dantais caturbhih svetadrer 84 289 evar gajendram upavarnita-nirvisesarn = 3.30 114
dehinarn visaydartanarm 5.47 195 evar Saptvd gato ‘gastyo 4.11 130
deva-deva maha-deva 7.21 259 evam stutah sura-ganair 6.1 204
devah 50077 bhagam arhanti 8.39 318 evar vimoksya gaja-yitha-pam 4.13 132
devaris ca tac-chvdsa-sikha-hata- 7.15 254 evar vimrsyavyabhicari-sad-gunair 8.23 306


--- Page 338 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 339
evar virincadibhir iditas tad 6.16 222 ime vaya yat-priyayaiva (07:0৫ 5.31 178
evari vyavasito buddhya 3.1 71  indradyumna iti khyato 4.7 127
indradyumno pi rajarsir 4.11 130
G indro mantradrumas tatra 5.8 149
25० 110807৫1771 prajanah prajanan 5.34 182
gajendra-moksanar punyari 5.1 144
gajendro bhagavat-sparsad 4.6 126 iti devan samadisya 6.26 228
gandharva-siddhasura-yaksa-carana- 8.19 302 iti mantropanisadam 107 -20
gandharva-siddha-vibudhair 4.13 132 iti svan pratyasedhan vai 8.40 318
gangarh ৩0705004171 nandar 4.23 139 iti tad-dainyam alokya 8.37 316
gatdsavo nipatitd 5.15 153 iti tusnirh sthitan daityan 74 245
gatim na sitksmam rsayas ca vidmahe 5.31 178 ittham gajendrah sa yadapa sarikatam == 2.31 62
gavah 007८0 pavitrani 8.11 295 ity abhasya surdn vedhih 524 164
ghrni karenuh karabharis ca durmado == 2.26 57 ity adiSya hrsikesah 4.26 141
girim cdropya garude 6.38 237
girim garimna paritah prakampayan 2.23 55 J
giri-pdta-vinispistan 6.37 236 jagada jimita-gabhiraya gird 6.16 222
grahad vipatita-mukhad arina gajendrari 3.33 119 = jagur bhadrani gandharva 8.12 296
grahena pasena vidhatur कण्‌ 2.32 64 jaitrair dorbhir jagad-abhaya-dair 7.17 256
Jjajapa paraman japyari 3.1 71
grnanti kavayo brahmaris 1:2 4 jalakukkuta-koyasti 2.16 51
guna-mayya sva-Saktydsya 7.23 261
gunarani-cchanna-cid-usmapaya 3.16 94 jata-dharas tapasa apluto ‘cyutar 48 128
gunesu maya-racitesu vrttibhir 5.44 192 jijivise naham ihamuya kim 3.25 107
[yotih para yatra rajas tamas ca 7.31 268
H Jyotirdhamadayah sapta 1.28 35
harisa-karandavakirnam 2.16 51
hanta brakmann aho sambho 6.18 223 K
harar sarasvati padmam 8.16 299 kadamba-vetasa-nala- 217 51
harih purastdj jagrhe 7.2 243 kalah kratuh satyam [1078 ca dharmas == 7.25 263
harir ity ahrto yena 1.30 37 18078040786 ’khila-devatdtmano 7.26 264
kalenanugrhitais tair 6.19 224
harir yatha gaja-patira 131 37 = ०1670 [00100040047 itesu (57250 3.5 7
harsayan vibudhanikam 4.26 141
hary-arcandnubhivena 4.12 130  kalpate purusasyaiva 5.48 197
hiranyaroma vedasira 6६) 145  kamadhvara-tripura-kalagarady-aneka- 7.32 270
kancikalapa-valaya- 6.6 206
1 kancya pravilasad-valgu- 8.45 320
karma durvisaham yan no 5.46 194
icchami kalena na yasya viplavas 3.25 107
idam aha harih prito 4.16 137  karmany ananta-punyani 421 138
idire 'vitathair mantrais 8.27 310 karnabharana-nirbhdta- 6.5 206
thamano hi purusah 1.14 21 karoti Sydmalarm bhamim 24 43
thate bhagavan 60 1.15 24  kasinmahars tasya na kama-nirjayah = 8.20 303
tksaya jivayam ৫5৫ 6.37 236  katthanta ugra-parusam niratar 7.33 271


--- Page 339 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam
kaustubhabharanari laksmiri 6.6 207 mamanthur abdhimtarasa madotkata = 7.13 253
kaustubhakhyam abhiid ratnari 8.6 290 mamanthus tarasa sindhuri 8.1 286
khebhyas tu chandarasy rsayo 5.39 187 manavo 'sminvyatitah sa 1.4 6
kimi casiso raty api deham avyayar 3.19 100 mandaraih parijatais ca 2.10 48
णः va vidamesa prthag-vibhata 6.15 220  mano-grayanam vacasaniruktari 5.26 168
kinnarair apsarobhis ca 25 44 manthanar mandaram krtva 6.22 226
klesa-bhajo bhavisyanti 6.23 226  mathyamanat tatha sindhor 7.16 255
klesa-bhiry-alpa-sarani 5.47 195  mathyamane 'rmave so ‘drir 76 246
kramukair narikelais ca 21 48  matsya-kacchapa-saficara 2.17 51
प्रवण pura bhagavatah 1.6 7 matsya-kirma-varahadyair 4.21 138
krta-sthana-vibhagas ta 7.5 246  matta-sat-pada-nirghustar 2.15 50
krtavan kurute 070৫ 13) 5  manvantare harer janma 1.2 4
krtva vapuh kacchapam adbhutam 78 248  megha mrdariga-panava- 8.13 297
ksetra-jAidya namas tubhyarn 3.13 88  megha-syamah kanaka-paridhih karna- 7.17 256
ksiptva ksirodadhau 5017৫ 6.22 226  mithah kalir abhiit tesam 838 317
ksiroda-mathanodbhiutat 7.37 275  mrdanaya hi lokasya 7.35 273
ksirodari me priya dhama 4.18 138  mukhani paiicopanisadas tavesa 729 266
ksirodenavrtah sriman 2.1 42 = mubktatmabhih sva-hrdaye pari bhavitaya 3.18 99
kubjakaih svarna-yithibhir 2.18 51  mukto devala-sapena 43 124
kuksih samudra girayo ’sthi-sarighd 7.28 265  mumucuh kusumasararn 4.1 122
kumudotpala-kahlara 2.15 50  munayas tatra vai rajan 5.8 149
kundaih kurubakasokaih 2.18 51  mirtimatyah saric-chrestha 8.10 294
kvacic cirayur na hi ila-mangalarn 822 305 mukhamodanuraktali- 8.43 319
L N
lipsantah sarva-vastiini 8.35 315 na bhetavyar kalakitad 6.25 228
lobhah karyo na vo jatu 6.25 228  nabhir nabhas te svasanam nabhasvan == 7.27 = 264
lobho ‘dharat pritir upary abhid dyutir = 5.42 189  nadanta udadhir ninyuh 6.33 234
lokan amangala-prayan 5.19 155 nadhyagacchan svayar mantrair 9.17 -154
lokasya pasyato lokam 4.5 125 170 grhnimo ০৫) 0173 puccham 7.3 243
loka yato 'thakhila-loka-palah 5.33 181
naiskarmya-bhavena vivarjitagama- 3.16 94
M naite yadopasasrpur nikhilatmakatvat 3.30 114
nama dtma-pradipdya 3.10 84
madhukaih sala-talais ca 2.12 48  namah kaivalya-nathaya 3.11 85
madrk prapanna-pasu-pdsa- 3.17 96 namahsantdya ghoraya 3.12 86
maha-mani-kiritena 6.5 206
mahendrahslaksnayd vaca 6.30 23] na mam ime jadtaya dturar gajah 2.32 64
nama-riipa-vibhedena 3.22 105
mahoragas capi bhayad dravanti 2.21 54  namas tubhyam anantaya 5.50 200
ma khidyata mitho ’rtham vah 8.37 316 namogiram vidiraya 3.10 84
mallika-satapatrais ca 2.19 51 namo namas te *khila-kirandya 9.19) => 9॥
mamanthuh paramarh yatta 75 246 namo namas tubhyam asahya-vega- 3.28 112


--- Page 340 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 341
namo ’stu tasma upasanta-saktaye 5.44 192  paravaratmdsrayanar tavitma 7.27 265
ndnd-druma-lata-gulmair 2:3 42. pariksitaivan sa tu badarayanih 1438 39
ndndranya-pasu-vrata- 2.7 46  pariviya girau tasmin 7.1 242
nand-saktibhir abhatas 7.24 262  pasyanti yuktd manasa manisino 6.11 212
napasyan khara disah ksaunim 6.2 205  patnivikuntha subhrasya 54 145
na sarirambhena sidhyanti 6.24 227  pauloma-kaleya-balilvalddayo 7.14 254
nastah kilena yair veda 1.29 36 pavanahsrijayo yajia- 1.23 33
na te giri-trakhila-loka-pala- 7.31 268  payodhin yena nirmathya 5.10 150
natitrpyati me citar 5.13 151  picumardaih kovidaraih 2.13 49
navamah karma-kalpo ‘pi 5.48 197  pita-vasa mahoraskah 8.33 313
nava-yauvana-nirvrtta- 8.43 319  pite gare vrsarikena 8.1 286
na vidyate yasya ca janma karma va 38 82  praja daksayani brahma 745 282
nayarh gunah karma na san na 00507 == 3.24 = 106  pranad abhid yasya cardacaranan 5:87 #185
nayam veda svam ৫1710100778 3.29 113 pranaih svaih praninah pant 7.39 276
na yasya deva rsayah 00007: vidur 3.6 79  pranamya Siresadhisam 4.4 124
na yasyady-antau madhyan ca 1.12 18  pranavan satyam avyaktarn 4.22 138
na yasya kascatititarti mayan 5.30 177  pranendriyatmasu-Sarira-ketah 5.38 186
na yasya vadhyo na ca raksaniyo 5.22 158  prapanndndm didrksanari 5.45 193
nedur dundubhayo divya 42 123. prapanna-pilaya duranta-iaktaye 328 112
nihsattva lolupa rajan 829 311  prapto bhagavato rapa 4.6 126
nihsrikas cabhavarns tatra 5.16 153  prasanna-cdru-sarvirgim 6.4 206
nipatan sa giris tatra 6.35 235 praskannam pibatah paner 7.46 282
nirgundya gunesaya 5.50 200 preksaniyotpala-syamar 8.42 319
nirmathyamanad udadher abhid visarn = 7.18 257 [0706 harau bhagavati 7.40 277
nirvisesdya samydya 319 86  prthuh khyatir narah ketur 127 35
nisamyaitat sura-gand 5.17 154
purisah krpayato bhadre 740 277
nisamya karma tac chambhor 7.45 28]  pirayaty arthino yo 'rthaih 86 290
niyamane 'surais tasmin 8.36 315  piru-pirusa-sudyumna- 57 148
niyudhyator evam ibhendra-nakrayor = 2.29 = 60  purusdayadi-bijaya 32 73
nf Siksayantarh nija-vartma-sarhsthitarn 1.16 26  purusdydtma-milaya 3.13 88
nanari tapo yasya na manyu-nirjayo 8.20 302 parvam devas tato "bhavan 2 5 249
nyasedhad daitya-rat slokyah 6.28 230 R
0 rajann uditam etat te 5.1 144
ramanyah ऽण्याहटृष्केः valgu- 8.7 291
or namo bhagavate tasmai 32 73 ramaya prarthyamanena 55 146
raijayanti disah kantya 88 292
ए rsayah kalpayai cakrur 8.12 296
padau mahiyam sva-krtaive yasya 5.32 180 (रऽ caranah siddhas 4.2 123
[00710007710 raivato ndma 52 144 rses tu veda-Sirasas 1.21 31
papau 10101710772 nija-puskaroddhrtam 2.25 57 rapa tavaitat purusarsabhejyar 6.9 210
paramaradhanarh tad dhi 744 279  rapauddrya-vayo-varna- 89 293


--- Page 341 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam
S savrida-smita-viksiptd 8.46 320
(11.11.411 1 2.4 43  siddha-carana-gandharvair 2.5 44
sa ekadaradhana-kala atmavan 4.8 127  siladi-guna-sampanna 8.28 310
sa gharma-taptah karibhih karenubhir = 2.23 55  smaranti mama ripani 4.24 139
sahayena maya deva 6.23 226  smayamano visrjyagram 7.4 245
sakantakar kicaka-venu-vetravad 2.20 53
snigdha-kuiicita-kesanta- 8.33 313
samabhyavarsan bhagavad-vasa ghana 7.15 254  Sobhitam tira-jais canyair 2:19: «51
samagatas te bahir-antar-atman 6.14 218 so ham visva-srjar visvam 3.26 109
samdahitena manasa 5.20 155  somar mano yasya samam ananti 5.34 182
samah sahasran vyagaman mahi-pate = 2.29 60 so 'nrtavrata-duhsilan 1.26 34
samana-karnabharanari 8.42 319
so ‘ntah-sarasy urubalena grhita arto 332 118
sambaro 'ristanemis ca 6.31 232 $0 'nukampita [8670৫ 45 125
sambhranta-minonmakaréahi-kacchapat 7.18 257 $া0 svah prajah sakarunena niriksanena 8.25 308
samprsto bhagavan evar 5.14 152 rir vaksasah pitaras chayayasan 5.40 188
samudrah pita-kauseya- 8.15 298 $া880(507 kaustubharm malar 4.19 138
1.14... 1.1 8.26 309
11.11.111. 6.29 231
sarikhyatmanah sastra-krtas taveksa 7.30 267 sriyavalokita devah 8.28 310
sa puskarenoddhrta-sikarambubhir 2.26 57  $rnganimani dhisnyani 4.18 138
sarit-sarobhir acchodaih 2.8 47  smutavahitah sarve 6.18 223
saro ‘nila pankaja-renu-risitarn 2.24 55 अठ! sarva-bhitanarn 4.16 137
sarva-bhitta-suhrd deva 7.36 274
अणव diso yasya hrdas ca khani 5.38 186
sarvagamamnaya-maharnaviya 3.15 92 stana-dvayam catikrSodari samar 8.18 301
sarvamara-ganaih sakam 6.7 207  stutim abritta daivibhir 5.25 166
sarvar vijiapayarm cakruh 5.18 154  sucayah pratar utthaya 4.15 135
sarvato laiikrtar divyair 2.10 48  sudaranadibhih svastrair 6.7 207
sarvendriya-guna-drastre 3.14 90
00017807073 paiicajanyari 4.19 138
sasthas ca caksusah putras টন 148  sugriva-kanthabharanam 8.44 320
satraydga ivaitasminn 8.39 318 sunandayam varsa-satam 1.8 9
sattvena pratilabhyaya 3.11 85  surasurendrair bhuja-virya-vepitarn 7.10 250
sa tvarh no darSaydtmanam 5.45 193  svaccham marakata-§yamarn 6.3 206
sa (एवा vidhatsvakhila-loka-pé la 6.14 218
svadhyaya-$ruta-sampannih 7350.23
satyaka harayo vira 1.28 35 svamsena sarva-tanu-bhrn-manasi 3.17 96
satyasena iti khyato 1.25 34 svargyamyasasyamkali-kalmasd pahar 4.14 134
satya vedasruta bhadra 1.24 33 svarociso dvitiyas tu 1.19 30
sa vai bhagavatahsaksad 8.34 314 svayambhuvasyeha guro 161 3
sa vai mahd-pirusa atma-tantrah 5.32 180 Syamalas tarunah sragvi 8:32 313
sa vai na devdsura-martya-tiryari- 3.24 105 T
sa vai purvam abhiid raja 4.7 127
sa vilokyendra-vayv-adin 5.19 155 (003 devarsi-gandharva 4.1 122
sa visva-kayah puru-hita Sah 1.13 19 100 ugra-vegam disi disy upary adho 119, 2257
Sesarn ca mat-kalam 5049 71077 4.20 138 tad viksya vyasanam tasam 7.36 274


--- Page 342 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 343
tad ৮1507 jagdhum arebhe 7.41 278 100 karatali-krtya 7.42 278
tais taih sveccha-bhitai rapaih 5.46 194 tatah krta-svastyayanotpala-srajari 8.17 300
tam agni-hotrim rsayo 8.2 287 tatas capsaraso jata 0 -201
tam aksarari brahma parari paresam === 3.21 = 103 = tatas (८८०१८ saksac 88 292
tam alokyasurah sarve 8.35 315 10105 tato nipura-valgu Sijitair 8.18 301
tamas tadasid gahanari gabhirar 3.5 77 = (0405 te mandara-girim 6.33 234
tari bhiita-nilayarh devari 1.11 15 tata ucchaihsravi nama 83 288
(07 duratyaya-mahatmyari 3.29 113 tathapi lokapyaya-sambhavaya yah 38 82
tam thamdnar niraharikrtar budharn 1.16 26 tathapi sarga-sthiti-saryamarthar 522 158
tari nirjitdtmatma-gunarn paresari 5.30 177  tathasuranavisad asurena 001 231
(कऽ tatha bhagna-manaso 6.36 235  tathaturam yitha-patim karenavo 228 59
(कऽ tathavasitan viksya 1.18 29  tathd yato ’yar guna-sampraviho 3.23 105
tari tadvad artam upalabhya jagan- 3.31 117  tat-kathasu mahat punyarn 1.32 38
tari tatra kascin nrpa daiva-codito 2:27 58 = (०/० 'bhavat parijatah 8.6 290
tari tvam arcanti kusalah 7.22 260 (000 "bhisisicur devim 8.14 297
tar tvar vaya natha samwjihanam = 6.13 = 217 = tato brahma-sabhdri jagmur 5.18 154
tam utthitarh viksya 10010001078 punah == 7.9 249 = (०८० devdsurah krtva 6.32 233
(0 viksya piditam ajah sahasdvatirya == 3.33 119 (५८० gajendrasya mano-balaujasari 230 60
tar viksya tusnim akrtarhanadikam 4.9 128  tatradrsta-svarapaya 5.25 166
tan naicchan daitya-patayo 7.3 243 = tatraikada tad-giri-kanandsrayah 220 53
tapta-hemavadatena 6.4 206 (वकं devasambhityar 59 149
tapyamanas tapo ghoram 1.8 9  tatrapi jajiie bhagavin 1.30 37
tapyante loka-tapena 7.44 279  tatrendro rocanas tv dsid 1.20 31
tasmad 1007 87071 bhuiije 7.40 277 tat tasya te sad-asatoh paratah parasya = 7.34 272
tasmad vrajamah Saranam jagad-gurumm 5.23 = 159 tat tv arocata daityasya 6.31 232
tasma imari Sapam adad asadhur 4.10 129 = (कात vistrtah paryak 2.2 42
tasmai namah pareiaya 3.9 82  tayoh sva-kalaya jajiie 54 146
tasmin balih srhari cakre 8.3 228 te naga-rajam amantrya 71 242
tasmin manau sprham cakre 8.6 290  tenaiva sahasa 507৮6 6.2 205
tasmin sarah suvipularn 2.14 50 tena tyaktena bhuiijithd 1.10 11
tasthau divi brahma-bhavendra- 7.12 252  tesam antarda dhe rajan 6.26 228
tasthau nidhdaya nikate tad-urah sva- 8.24 307 195৫7 avirabhud rajan 6.1 205
tasyd asanam aninye 8.10 294 (सुला prandatyaye cahari 4.25 141
tasya dronyam bhagavato 29 48 te sunirvinna-manasah 70 247
tasyah 50/05 tri-jagato janako jananya = 8.25 308 te vairocanim कण्ठा) 6.29 231
tasyarn cakruh sprhar sarve 89 293 trahi nah sarandpanndrs 72 259
tasyar jajiie tato devo 1.21 31  tri-nabhi vidyuc-calam asta-nemi 5.28 173
tasyarsa-desa usatim nava-kaiija- 8.24 307  trtiya uttamo nama 1.23 32
tasyanubhdvah kathito 5.6 147  tustdva deva-pravarah 6.7 207
tasyapi 02750) 0771 ৫5৫ 7.43 279 = (षठा adir anto jagato ‘sya madhyari 6.10 212
tata air@vato nama 84 289 warm brahma paramarh guhyarn 7.24 262


--- Page 343 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam
tvam ekah sarva-jagata 7.22 260 visanna-manaso deva 8.36 315
tvarh mayayatmasrayaya svayedari 6.11 212 = ण्डु) rajyar tapase 17 8
1৮07 $abda-yonir jagad-adir dima 7.25 263  visvasyamini yad yasmad 11218
tvaya sarikathyamanena 5.13 151  wviSvatmanam ajar brahma 3.26 109
tvayy agra dsit tvayi madhya dsit 6.10 : 211
vrka varaha mahisarksa-salyd 2022) 54
vricikahi-visausadhyo 7.46 282
U vrtah sva-yiithena trsarditena tat 2.24 56
udatisthan maharaja 8.31 312  vyanddayan Sarkha-venu- 8.13 297
uddipayan deva-ganams ca visnur 7.11 251
udyamari paramarn cakrur 6.32 233 Y
udydnam rtuman ndéma 29 48
upary adhas catmani gotra-netrayoh 7.13 253 yac cakdra gale মোঃ 7.43 279
upary agendrar giri-rad ivanya 7.12 252  yac-caksur ৫58 taranir deva-yanari 5.36 184
yada copeksita laksmyd 829 311
irja-stambhadayah sapta 1.20 31  yadadurvasahsapena 610) +153
arvor vid ojo पद्या aveda-Siadrau 5.41 188  yad-artham va yatas cadrim 9:11.~ 150
utksipya sambuja-karar giram 2000 332 118
withayapara-ratrante 424 139 yada sudha na jayeta 110. 255
uvdca viprah pratinandya [00710010078 1.33 39 yada yuddhe 5017 deva 5.15 153
uvdcotphulla-vadano 5.20 155  yad-durvibhdvyari prabhudhdpabidhari 5.43 190
yad-gandha-matrad dharayo gajendré = 2.21 54
AY yadrcchayaivarh vyasanam gato gajo 227 => 458
vaikunthah kalpito yena 5.5 146  yadrcchaya tatra maha-yasa munih 49 128
vasistha-tanayah sapta 1.24 33 yad yasminn antare brahman 1.3 5
11/11/1111 8.15 298 ye eka-varnar tamasah param tad 529 175
vavre varar sarva-gunair apeksitari 8.23 306 yah kascaneso balino 'ntakoragat 2.33 66
vetra-kicaka-veninar 4.17 138 yah svatmanidarh nija-mayaydrpitarn 3.4 76
vibhur indrah sura-gana 5.3 145  yajiasya deva-yanasya 82 287
vicukrusur dina-dhiyo 0076 gajah 2.28 59  yamaih parivrto devair 1.18 29
vigahya tasminnamrtambu nirmalarhn. 2.25 = 57 yam dharma-kamartha-vimukti-kama = 3.19 100
vihartu kamas tan dha 6.17 222 yam pasyati na pasyantarn 1.11 15
vijadya bhagavdrns tatra 6.36 236  yasminn idarh yatas cedar 33 75
vikrsyamanasya jale "vasidato 230 60 yas tvanta-kila idam atma-krtari sva- = 7.32 270
vilokayanti niravadyam atmanah 8.19 301 yasya brahmadayo deva 3.22 105
vilokya tari deva-varan tri-lokya 720 258  yasya pitasya vai jantur 6.21 225
vilokya vighnesa-vidhir tadesvaro 7.8 248  yasyavatdrarsa-kala-visarjita 5:21 , 157
vipascitar prana-mano-dhiyatmanam == 5.27 171  yata danava-daiteyais 6.19 224
vipravamanta visatdrh tamisrar 4.10 129  yatha bhagavatd brahman 5.11 150
vipro mukhad brahma ca yasya guhyarn 5.41 == 188  yathagnim edhasy कमठः ca gosu 6.12 214
virajambara-sarvita- 845 320  yatha hi skandha-sakhanarm 5.49 198
viraktah kama-bhogesu 1:2 8  yatha natasyakrtibhir vicestato 3.6 79
virifico bhagavan drstva 6.3 206 yathamram suraih praptarm 5.12 150
viryam na purnso ‘sty aja-vega-niskrtarn 8.2] 304  yathanukirtayanty etac 4.15 135


--- Page 344 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 345
yatharciso ‘gneh savitur gabhastayo 3.23 105 ye ८४ dtma-rama-gurubhir hrdi 7.33 271
20470 samgita-sannadair 2.6 45  yogair manusya adhiyanti hi (णठ) 6.12 214
yatra visva-srjarh sargo 1.1 3 yoga-randhita-karmano 3.27 110
2270 yatrottamasioko 1.32 38  yogena dhatah saha nas tri-lokan 69 210
yatrobhayarh kutra ca so ‘py amargalah 8.22 305  yogino yar prapasyanti 327 110
yat tac chivikhyarh paramdtma-tattvarn 7.29 = 266 yo jagarti Saydne 'smin 159 10
yayau jalanta utsijya 6.39 238  yosid-ripam anirdeSyar 8.41 319
ye mar stuvanty anendnga 4.25 141 20 'smat parasmdc ca paras 33 75
ye कण्ठा (ठा ca 50708 cedar 4.17 138 yo 'saugrahah sa vai sadyah 43 124
267৫ cetayate visvar 1.9 10  yiyam tad anumodadhvarn 6.24 227


--- Page 345 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga
Agni

Abhiseka ceremony as fire, 264

for goddess of fortune, 299 as Lord’s mouth, 264

ingredients for, 299 as Svirociga Manu’s father, 30
Abhramu, 290 Agnih sarva-devatah
Abhyutthanam adharmasya quoted, 264

verse quoted, 87, 195, 209, 281 Agriculture. See: Cow protection; Food;
Abrahma-bhuvanal lokih Vaisyas

quoted, 163 Aham adir hi devanam
Absolute Truth quoted, 97

Lord as, 19, 20, 175 Ahan bija-pradah pita

as personal, 74 quoted, 89, 261

spiritual master sees, 211 Ahari sarvasya prabhavah

See also: Reality; Supreme Lord quoted, 97
Acarya. See: Spiritual master, all entries Abhari tvarh sarva-papebhyo
Acintya-bhedabheda, defined, 19 verse quoted, 160
Activities Air(s)

fruitive. See: Fruitive activities in body wheel, 174

of Krsna. See: Incarnations of the Supreme from God, 186

Lord; Pastimes of the Supreme Lord living entities sustained by, 186

in Krsna consciousness, 22 as Lord's breathing, 265

material vs. spiritual, 22, 85 Airavana, 290
Activities, material Airivata (elephant king), 289

bondage to, 22, 25 Ajamila, Nardyana’s name saved, 72, 83, 197

impersonalist falls to, 134 Ajo pi sann avyaydtma

spiritual activities vs., 22, 85 verse quoted, 209

by Visnu via Siva, 261 Akamah sarva-kamo va

See also: Fruitive activities; Karma _ verse quoted, 93, 101, 198
Adarsanan marma-hatari karotu va Akati, 7,8

quoted, 218 Alaksyan sarva-bhitanam
Adhikari yo "bhimanyeta quoted, 16
_ verse quoted, 14 Amara ajnaya guru had tara’ ei desa
Aditya-varnam tamasah parastat verse quoted, 28

quoted, 78 Anadir adir govindah
Advaita, Lord, as Caitanya’s associate, 173 verse quoted, 19, 76, 93
African devotee in Mayapura, 24 Anda-ja, defined, 180
Agastya Muni Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham

curse by, as benediction, 122-123, 130 quoted, 16, 97

Indradyumna neglected, 129, 130 Anejad ekarh manaso javiyo

quoted on Indradyumna, 129-130 verse quoted, 169

347


--- Page 346 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Anger as self-defeating, 227 Apes, 149
Angira, 310 radhananam sarvesam
Animals verse quoted, 199
on higher planets, 45 Arani wood, living entities compared to, 95
humans under bodily conception as, 98, Arcana. See: Deity worship of the Supreme
162 Lord
materialists as, 46 Arcanari vandanari dasyari
in milk ocean disturbed, 253, 257 verse quoted, 21
poisonous, drank poison, 282-283 Arcand-paddhati, defined, 126
of Trikita Mountain, 45, 47, 52-56 Arcira, 184
See also: names of specific animals Arciradi-vartma, defined, 184
Animal slaughter Arcye visnau Sila-dhih
devotees shun, 305 # quoted, 73
in Kali-yuga, 215 Arigtanemi, 232
natural reactions to, 296 Arjuna, 19
peace prevented by, 296 Krsna instructed, 27
by sectarian religionists, 304, 305 Krsna vs., 17
society ruined by, 296 Arjuna, son of Raivata Manu, 145
Annihilation of the universe Artist, Lord compared to, 79
as darkness, 78 Arto jijaasur artharthi
living entities at, 10, 11 verse quoted, 63
by Siva, 260, 270 Aruhya krechrena [00707 padari tatah
Ante narayana-smrtih quoted, 134
quoted, 197 Aruruksor muner yoga
Anukalyena krsnanu- verse quoted, 23
verse quoted, 104 Asamsayarm samagrari mar
Anyabhilasita-sunyam verse quoted, 105
quoted, 86, 126 jhe 3
verse quoted, 104 as battle positions, 61, 62
Apareyam itas tv anydri of Indradyumna, 128
verse quoted, 174 See also: Grhastha; Sannydsa
Appearance of the Supreme Lord (descent) Asuras. See: Atheists; Demons; Nondevotees;
at Dvépara-yuga’s end, 160 Rakgasas
in Kali-yuga as devotee, 172-173 Asvamedhari gavalambhari
by Lord’s will, 194, 195 verse quoted, 61-62
purposes of, 25, 66, 87, 159, 160, 195, Atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
210, 281 verse quoted, 22
as sunlike, 205 Athava bahunaitena
as transcendental, 83, 210 verse quoted, 97
See also: Avataras; Incarnations of the Atheist (8)
Supreme Lord Creator denied by, 110
4088758, 44 as demons, 244
in heavenly planets, 291 devotee’s worship misunderstood by, 74
from Lord’s universal form, 188 Hiranyakasipu as, 179
from milk ocean, 291 incarnations of God enlighten, 87


--- Page 347 ---
General Index 349
Atheist (s) Bali Maharaja |
Lord baffles, 112, 179 as demon king, 230-231, 312
in passion and ignorance, 179 Indra’s truce proposals accepted by, 232
i See also: Demons Uccaihérava claimed by, 288
Atma Battle of Kuruksetra, Bhagavad-gita spoken
defined, 116 at, 161
See also: Living entity; Soul Being, living. See: Living entities; Souls, con-
Ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair ditioned
quoted, 113-114 Bhadras, 33
Atom, Lord within, 16, 97 Bhagavad-gita
Attachment, material See also: Bhagavad-gita, cited; Bhagavad-
Lord free of, 192, 193 gitd, quotations from
as Lord's concealing energy, 112 as auspicious, 38-39
See also: Bodily conception of life; Desires, demons misinterpret, 245
material following, recommended, 25, 27
Austerity (Austerities) as Krgna's instructions, 25, 26-27, 27, 245
as essential, 287 88 Lord’s surrender request, 160
by Indradyumna, 128 value of, 164
by Svayambhuva Manu, 9 Bhagavad-gita, cited
Authority (Authorities) on Lord and living entities, 5, 113
Brahma as, 211 on material energy as insurmountable, 178
hearing about the Lord from, 167 on mdya energy, 213
Lord as, 66, 115 on seeing God, 16
Lord revealed via, 167, 170-171 Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
Vedas as, 36,167 on conditioned souls, 25
See also: Disciplic succession; Mahdjanas on cow protection, 215, 287
Avaisnavas. See: Atheists; Nondevotees on death, 67
Avajananti mar midhah on demigod worshipers, 274
quoted, 83, 100, 167 on demons, 245
Avatara(s) on devotee, 25, 67
guna-, 157, 262 on devotional service, 21, 85, 197
Saktyavesa-, 260 on fools mocking God, 100
types of, four listed, 4 on incarnations of God, 66
Vibhu as, 32 on karma-yoga, 23
See also: Appearance of the Supreme Lord; on knowing Krsna as liberation, 80
Incarnations of the Supreme Lord on Krsna as original god, 97
Avidya. See: Ignorance on Krgna conscious yoga, 105
on Krsna remembering everything, 17
B on living entities as Lord’s parts and par-
cels, 89
Balasya neha saranari pitarau nrsimha on living entities in body machines, 13
verse quoted, 65 on living entity under material energy, 175
Bali, son of Raivata Manu, 145 on Lord above modes of nature, 200
Bali Maharaja on Lord and nature as father and mother,
demigods approached, 229-231 89


--- Page 348 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavad-gitd, quotations from (continued) Bhaktir asya bhajan ari
on Lord as all-pervading, 97, 170, 214, 269 quoted, 86
on Lord as basis of everything, 75 Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, quoted on
on Lord as body’s knower, 12, 89 mind, 23
on Lord as death, 179 Bhaktivinoda Thakura
on Lord as equally disposed, 158 quoted on the creation, 45
on Lord as father of all, 261 songs of, 167
on Lord as source of all, 93 Bhakti-yoga. See: Devotional service to the
on Lord enlightening devotees, 95 Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness
on Lord in heart, 17,91, 102, 170, 172, Bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah
175 quoted, 104, 215
on Lord's activities as transcendental, 83 Bhaktya mam abhijanati
on Lord’s appearance (descent), 87, 195, quoted, 21, 85, 215
209 Bhavani
on Lord’s detachment, 270 as Daksa’s daughter, 282
on Lord’s mission in world, 159, 281 as Siva’s wife, 259, 275, 277, 278
on Lord supplying all needs, 281 Bhisasmad agnis candras ca
on Lord vs. living entities, 169, 219 verse quoted, 67
on Manu in disciplicsuccession, 12 Bhisasmad vatah pavate
on material world as miserable, 163 verse quoted, 67
on nature under Lord’s direction, 89, 91, Bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
170, 213, 239 quoted, 293
on peace formula, 292 Bhoktarar yajiia-tapasar
on pious people taking to devotional ser- quoted, 22
vice, 63, 216 verse quoted, 292
on preaching, 280 Bhramayan sarva-bhitani
on remembering Krsna, 71-72 verse quoted, 102, 174
on sacrifice, charity, austerity, 287 Bhitarayas, 145
on sages rejecting material world, 191 Bijarh mari sarva-bhiténam
on saintly kings in disciplic succession, 8 quoted, 89
on soul above bodily conception, 162 Birds, Garuda chief of, 238-239
on spiritual master, 211 Birds in tree, soul and Supersoul in body com-
on supreme controller, 67 pared to, 17
on surrender to Krsna, 160-161 Birth, types of, four listed, 157, 180
on transcendental realization, 114 Birth and death, repeated
on work for Vignu, 22, 24 surrender stops, 90
on world under Lord’s direction, 191 as wheellike, 174
on yogis in devotion as best, 100 Bliss
Bhagavan. See: Supreme Lord Lord as, 209
Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam pure devotees in, 103
Bhaktas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord, in sarikirtana, 104
all entries Bodily conception of life
Bhakti. See: Devotional service to the Supreme as animalistic, 98, 162
Lord; Krsna consciousness condemned, 162
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quoted on pure living entity in, 113
devotional service, 104 philosophers in, 162


--- Page 349 ---
General Index 351
Bodily conception of life Brahma, Lord
scientists in, 162 as Saktyavesa-avatara, 260
surrender dispels, 114 Siva beyond, 273
See also: Duality, material Siva praised by, 282
Body, material at Svetadvipa, 164, 166
as desire machine, 13 Vaikuntha seen by, 147
fire in, 183 Brahma-bhitah prasannatma
as incomprehensible, 191 verse quoted, 114
karma causes, 13, 23, 172, 210 Brahmacari, Vibhu as, 32
as mortal, 67 Brahmajyoti
proprietors of , two listed, 89, 219 defined, 268
as punishment, 25 impersonalists enter, 269
soul and Supersoulin, 12,13 See also: Brahman effulgence
soul vs., 116, 162-163 Brahmaloka
spiritualization of, 73, 80, 126 defined, 83
as wheel-like, 174 See also: Brahmajyoti; Brahman effulgence
Body of the Supreme Lord Brahman (impersonal Absolute)
beauty of, 208 beyond Brahma, 270
cosmos as, 20 defined, 270
demigods dazzled by, 205-206, 208 beyond Indra, 270
as eternal, 5-6 Krsna above, 23
purifying power of, 126 as Parabrahman’s effulgence, 262
as sunlike, 205 Vignu disinterested in, 270
as transcendental, 210 See also: Brahmajyoti; Brahman effulgence
See also: Form of the Supreme Lord; Uni- Brahman, Supreme
versal form of the Supreme Lord Lord as, 82
Brahmi, Lord, 299 transcendentalist realizes, 114
as authority, 211 See also: Supreme Lord
Brahman beyond, 270 Brahmanas (intellectuals)
as creator, 260 as dvijas, 220
as demigods’ chief, 122, 125, 142, 156 Gayatri mantra for, 220
demigods sought help of, 155, 156 from Lord's universal form, 189
disciplic succession from, 170-171, 194, mantra recitation for, 135-136
211 Brahman effulgence
as fallible, 306 impersonalists aspire to, 87, 134
as guna-avatdra, 157, 262 impersonalists fall from, 134
Lord above, 73, 74, 78, 103, 115, 157, as transcendental, 268
180, 201, 220 See also: Brahmajyoti; Brahman (imper-
Lord honored by, 208, 252 sonal Absolute); Liberation
from Lord’s universal form, 187 Brahman platform, devotee on, 114
Manus in day of, 5, 6 Brahma-sarithitd, quotations from
passion mode controlled by, 201 on bhakti-yogi seeing Krena, 111
as a post, 30 on Krsna as cause of all causes, 19, 76, 93
prayed to the Supreme Lord, 166-200, on Lord's effulgence, 269
209-214, 217, 219-220 on sun, 184-185
quoted on the Supreme Lord, 157, 209 on surabhi cows, 288


--- Page 350 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Brahma-sampradaya, 171 Caksur unmilitarh yena
Brahma satya jagan mithya verse quoted, 16,108
quoted, 134 Candra, 115
Brahma-vaivarta Purana, quoted on sannydsa Car accidents in Western countries, 65
in Kali-yuga, 62 Caranas, 44
Brahmayan sarva-bhitani as fallible, 302
verse quoted, 13 Laksmi-Narayana honored by,
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas 309
Buddha, Lord, as incarnation of God, 87 Caste system. See: Varnasrama-dharma
Buddhists as sectarian, 304 Catur-vidha bhajante mam
Building construction, material vs. spiritual, verse quoted, 63
13-14 Ceto-darpana-marjanari
Butter clarified. See: Ghee quoted, 162, 163
C “Chance” theory of creation as demoniac, 237,
239
Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka, quoted on Lord Chanting the Lord’s holy names
Caitanya, 28 Ajamila saved by, 72,197
Caitanya-caritamrta for Kali-yuga, 217
as auspicious, 38-39 by pure devotee, 103
cited on Krsna conscious song, 167 as sole shelter, 217, 221
quoted on preaching Krsna consciousness, See also: Hare Krsna mantra; Sankirtana
28 Chariot wheel
Caitanya Mahaprabhu birth and death compared to, 174
associates of, 173 body compared to, 174
as ecstasy’s example, 104 Charity as essential, 287
following, recommended, 27, 28 Chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga
as God, 173, 221 quoted, 91
Hare Krsna mantra delivered by, 221 Christians as sectarian, 304
Kali-yuga enlightened by, 28, 161, 162 Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu
as merciful to fallen souls, 104 quoted, 72
mission of, 67 Cintamani prayer recommended, 72
in pure devote role, 27 Civilization human
sankirtana started by, 161 cow vital for, 295
as sannyasi, 62 in illusion, 65
Sarvabhauma cautioned, 62 milk neglected by, 215
surrender taught by, 160 modern, shortens life, 215
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from See also: Society, human
on chanting the Lord’s holy names, 217, Clouds personified honored goddess of for-
221 tune, 297
on devotee’s pure vision, 218 Communism, spiritual vs. material, 12, 13
on God's names, 20 Conditioned souls. See: Souls, conditioned
on position and duty, 62 Construction, building, material vs. spiritual,
on preaching Krsna consciousness, 28 13-14
on sarkirtana, 162, 221 Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the; Ma-
Caksu, 148 terial world; Universe


--- Page 351 ---
General Index 353
Cow Daityas
in civilization vital, 295 as 30118087788 disciples, 224
demons misuse, 244 weak vs. strong, 318-319
ghee from, 286, 287 See also: Demons
products from, five listed, 295 Daivi hy 69৫ gunamayi
protection of. See: Cow protection quoted, 15
slaughter of. See: Animal slaughter Daksa, 31
surabhi. See: Surabhi cows daughter of, 282
Cow protection as prajapati, 220
as essential, 215 Daksa-yajiia, 271
Hare Krgna movement promotes, 244 Dattatreya, Lord, 87
Lord advocates, 295 Daya-bhak defined, 133
milk supply dependent on, 287 Death
scriptures recommend, 288 devotee surpasses, 67
as vaisya’s duty, 295 as fearsome, 67-68
in varnasrama-dharma, 295 as invincible, 165, 305
Creation, the Lord as, 67, 179, 305
rests on Lord’s lotus feet, 180 Lord feared by, 67
theories 01, two listed, 237 remembering Lord at, 197
as variegated, 45 salvation from, 67-68
from water, 181 Dehino ’smin yatha dehe
See also: Material world; Universe verse quoted, 163
Crocodile Deity worship of the Supreme Lord (arcana)
Gajendra attacked by, 58-61, 63, 64 abhiseka ceremony in, 299
Gajendra captured by, 118 atheists misunderstand, 74
Gajendra saved from, 37, 38 by devotee, 25
as Gandharva, 123, 124 spiritual power of, 126
as Haha, 124 as transcendental, 74
Lord killed, 118 Demigods
material life compared to, 98, 132 Bali approached by, 229-231
maya compared to, 61 Brahma heads, 122, 125, 142, 156
time compared to, 68 Brahma’s help sought by, 155, 156
water helped, 61 during Caksuga Manu, 149
Curse with demons in truce expedition, 233-238
by Agastya on Indradyumna, 129-130, demons vs., 153, 156, 201, 224,
131 226-227, 230-233, 237, 243,
by Devala on Haha, 124 245, 246, 248-249
by devotees as benediction, 122-123 devotees as, 165
by Durvasa on Indra, 154 Durvisi cursed, 153
by muni 680 on Pariksit, 165 function of, 115
by sages as benediction, 122-123, 124-125 Gajendrabypassed, 115,117
Gayatri mantra for, 220
D goddess of fortune blessed, 310-311
Daityas in goodness, 178, 179, 251
Jaya and Vijaya as, 147 human beings vs., 45, 47-48


--- Page 352 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Demigods (continued) Demons
lamented nectar theft, 316 demigods vs., 153, 156, 201, 224,
Lord above, 78, 79, 115, 157, 169, 178, 226-227, 230-233, 237, 243,
179, 201 245, 246, 248-249
Lord advised, in demon battle, 224-228 devotees vs., 83, 165, 249, 317
Lord consoled, 316 goddess of fortune frustrated, 311
Lord favors, 160, 232 Hare Krsna movement vs., 244
Lord honored by, 122, 123, 132-133, Lord baffles, 179, 232
252, 310 Lord denied by, 237, 239
Lord relieved, 255 Lord misunderstood by, 249
Lord revived, 236, 251 Lord pacified, 246
Lord's body dazzled, 205-206, 208 Lord revived, 236, 251
from Lord’s universal form, 187 Mandara Mountain smashed, 235-236
Mandara Mountain smashed, 235-236 milk ocean churned by, 242, 246, 253,
milk ocean as playground of, 45 255,286, 312
milk ocean churned by, 242, 246, 253, Mohini captivated, 321
255, 286, 312 nectar stolen by, 315,316
moon sustains, 182, 183 in passion, 251
prayed to the Lord, 117, 123 qualifications of , 245
prayed to Siva, 260-268, 270-273 quarreled over nectar, 317, 318-319
during Raivata Manu, 145 quoted on nectar, 317,318
Siva’s help sought by, 258-261, 271 suffering misunderstood by, 248
sun-god heads, 184 surabhi cow neglected by, 288
surrender to the Lord, 317 surrender shunned by, 67, 245
during Svarocisa Manu, 31 time initially favored, 224
at Svetadvipa, 164, 166, 167 Viruni claimed by, 312
during Tamasa Manu, 36 Vasuki weakened, 254
at Trikata Mountain, 44-45, 45, 47, Vedas rejected by, 238
47-48,49 weak vs. strong, 318-319
during Uttama Manu, 33 world disturbed by, 156
Vasuki disturbed, 255 See also: Atheists; Nondevotees
Vedas protected by, 36 Desires
as world welfare workers, 156 devotional service fulfills, 101,
worship toward, 274 198
worship toward, vs. Visnu worship, 199 Lord fulfills, 93, 101, 198
See also: names of specific demigods for opulences, 293
Democracy as failing, 9 parijata flower fulfills, 291
Demons Desires, material
Bali heads, 230-231, 312 body according to, 13
Bhagavad-gitamisinterpreted by, 245 demigod worship for, 274
“chance” theory by, 237, 239 Lord free of, 26
churning positions protested by, 243, 246 Siva above, 272
cows misused by, 244 See also: Attachment, material; Lust
with demigods in truce expedition, Detachment. See: Renunciation
233-238 Devahiti, 7, 8


--- Page 353 ---
General Index 355
Devala Rsi Devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord
curse by, as benediction, 122 nondevotees vs., 317
Hihi cursed by, 124 as preachers, 81
Devarena sutotpattim as propertyless, 15
verse quoted, 62 pure vision of, 218
Devas religionists vs., 305
defined, 165 salvation awaits, 119
See also: Demigods; Devotees of the sin avoided by, 136
Supreme Lord suffering counteracted by, 276
Devasambhiti, 149 suffering understood by, 249
Devata as surrendered souls, 112, 317
defined, 36 tolerates reverses, 131, 132
See also: Demigods as transcendental, 165
Devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord Vedas accepted by, 238
animal slaughter shunned by, 305 as world welfare workers, 156
on Brahman platform, 114 See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme
conditioned souls taught by, 276 Lord; names of specific devotees
curse by, as benediction, 122-123 Devotional service to the Supreme Lord
danger as mercy to, 119 (bhakti-yoga)
death surpassed by, 67 as chanting and dancing, 104
Deity worship by, 25 desires fulfilled by, 101, 198
as demigods, 165 as duty, 219
demons vs., 83, 165, 249, 317 fruitive activities vs., 22,110
depends on the Lord, 132 impersonalists neglect, 134
duty of, 25,276 in Kali-yuga avoided, 216
as equally disposed, 81 liberation by, 24
as fortunate, 293-294 Lord known by, 21, 85-86, 103-104, 215
goddess of fortune blesses, 309 Lord seen by, 215
Hare Krsna mantra for, 25 as Lord's mercy, 215
in Hare Krgna movement, 61 Mayavadis misunderstand, 95
impersonalists vs., 134 as necessity, 221
karma tolerated by, 133 pious people eligible for, 216
karmis vs., 196, 309 pure, 22, 104, 114
in knowledge, 132 purifying power of, 213
liberation for, 133-134 qualifications for, 216
Lord enlightens, 96 remembering Krena by, 72, 131
Lord favors, 158, 165, 232 via spiritual master, 215, 219
Lord played part of, 173 as transcendental, 86, 165
Lord protects, 67 value of, 197
Lord seen by, 211 as yoga's perfection, 100
Lord’sform enchants, 194, 195 Dhanvantari
at Lord’s lotus feet, 81 beauty of, 313, 314
Lord's mercy on, 131 demons stole nectar from, 315
Lord's will understood by, 237-238, 249 dress of, 313, 314
mantras vital for, 72 as medical scientist, 314


--- Page 354 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Dhanvantari (continued) Duty
from milk ocean, 312-314 devotional service as, 219
as nectar carrier, 315 of Hare Krsna movement, 162, 219
Dharma as religion demigod, 34 pleasing Krsna as, 22
Dharma. See: Religion, Varnasrama-dharma preaching as, 162
Dharmah svanusthitah purisari Dviépara-yuga, Lord appeared in, 160, 172
verse quoted, 305 19৮৫ suparna sayuja sakhaya samanari
Dharma-saristhapanarthaya vrksar parisasvajate
verse quoted, 159, 281 quoted, 17
Dhira defined, 176 Dvau bhita-sargau loke 'smin
Dhruva Maharaja verse quoted, 165
Lord blessed, 102, 126 19৮05 as brahmanas, 220
Lord seen by, 198, 218
Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti E
yarn yoginah
quoted, 79, 111 Earth planet
Dictatorship in near future, 9 food from, 216
Disciples. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord in universal perspective, 52
Disciplic succession (s) Earth to earthen pot, Lord to creation com-
from Brahma, 170-171, 194, 211 pared to, 75, 212
number of, 276 Economic development as needless, 14
saintly kings in, 8 Education, godless, as demoniac, 244
from Siva, 276 Effulgence, Brahman. See: Brahman
See also: Authority effulgence
Disease, cow killing causes, 296 Elements, material
Distress. See: Suffering in body wheel, 174
Dravida province, 127 Lord manufactures, 13-14
Dream(s) types of, five listed, 14, 180
bad, 136 See also: names of specific elements
material lifeas, 11, 177 Elephants
of Dhanvantari, 313, 314 goddess of fortune bathed by, 297-298
of the Lord, 208 Indradyumna as, 130, 131
Duality, material as less intelligent, 130
Lord free of, 18 from milk ocean, 289, 290
See also: Bodily conception of life Elephants, King of. See: Airdvata; Gajendra
Duhkhalayam asasvatam Enemies
quoted, 191 etiquette among, off battlefield, 230
Durga, goddess, 199 internal and external, 165
Durvasa Muni, Indra cursed by, 153-154 truce logic among, 225
Duskrti Energy, material
defined, 66 as insurmountable, 177
See also: Atheists; Demons See also: Elements, material; Maya;
Dusta mana! tumi kisera vaisnava ? Nature, material
quoted, 23 Energy (Energies) of the Supreme Lord
Duty 28 all-pervading, 269
of devotees, 25, 276 cosmos rests on, 75,77


--- Page 355 ---
General Index 357
Energy (Energies) of the Supreme Lord Form of the Supreme Lord
external, 213, 261, 292 as transcendental, 209
illusory, covers conditioned soul, 113 See also: Body of the Supreme Lord; Uni-
as limitless, 107,112 versal form of the Supreme Lord
Lord's work done by, 170, 193 Fortune, goddess of. See: Goddess of fortune
material vs. spiritual, 20, 21 Fruitive activities
See also: Maya; Yogamaya devotional service excels, 22
Enjoyment, material, objects of, three listed, freedom from, 110
293 See also: Activities, material
Entity, individual. See: Living entity Fruitive workers. See: Karmis; Materialists
Evari parampara-praptam Fruits of Trikata Mountain, 49-50, 52
quoted, 8
F G
Gadadhara as Caitanya’s associate, 173
Family Gajapati. See: Gajendra
of elephant king, 58 Gajendra (elephant King)
Indradyumna renounced, 128 chanting about, recommended, 135-136
See also: Grhastha crocodile attacked, 58-61, 63, 64
Fear crocodile captured, 118
of death, 68 demigods bypassed by, 115, 117
of elephant king by animals, 54 as fearsome, 54
Fire flower shower for, 122
Agni as, 264 Hari saved, 37, 38
in body, 183 hearing about, recommended, 135
Lord compared to, 220 humility of, 111
as Lord’s mouth, 183, 264 in illusion, 58
material life compared to, 276 as Indradyumna, 71, 72, 123, 127
in ocean, 183 as intoxicated, 56
for sacrifices, 95, 183, 264 in lake bath, 57-58
Flowers Lord liberated, 126, 132
pdrijata, 291 Lord rescued, 117, 118, 120
of Trikita Mountain, 49-50, 52, 56 Lord's shelter sought by, 63, 64
Flower shower in meditation on the supreme, 71, 72, 73
for Lakgmi-Narayana, 310 as merciful, 55
for the Lord, 252 past life of, 72, 123, 127
for the Lord and Gajendra, 122 prayed to the Lord, 73, 75, 77-79, 81,
Food 82, 84-86, 88, 90, 92, 94-96,
from earth, 216 99,101, 103, 106-107,
fire digests, 183 108-110,112,113,118
from milk, 216 quoted on Supreme Lord, 73
moonshine sustains, 182, 183 saripya-mukti attained by, 126, 132
Form of the Supreme Lord surrendered to Krena, 66, 75, 96-97,
devotees eager to see, 194, 195 102
impersonal vs. personal, 194 at Trikita Mountain, 53, 56
as lotuslike, 194 water weakened, 61


--- Page 356 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Gandharva(s), 44 Goddess of fortune
crocodile as, 123,124 as Lord’s consort, 298, 307-308,
as fallible, 302 308-309
goddess of fortune served by, 296 as Lord’s property, 292, 293, 294
Hahi reinstated as, 124, 125 from Lord’s universal form, 188
Laksmi-Narayana honored by, 309 materialists frustrated by, 294.
Lord honored by, 123, 132-133 from milk ocean, 292, 300, 302
Ganesa, 199 from Narayana, 293, 300, 302
Ganges River served goddess of fortune, 294 opulence from, 293, 298, 308
Gaitja as poisonous, 279 quoted on living entities as controlled, 303
Garbhodakasayi Visnu, Lord as, 97, 213 sages served, 296
Garuda svayarwara ceremony for, 302
as bird king, 238-239 as transcendental, 300
as Lord’s carrier, 117, 120, 133, 142, Vaikuntha pleased, 146
176, 236, 237 Yamuni served, 294
Lord sent away, 238 Goddess of learning, 299
Mandara Mountain carried by, 237-238 Godhead. See: Spiritual world; Supreme Lord
as snake eater, 239 God realization
as Vasuki's natural enemy, 239 above self-realization, 23
Gautamiya Tantra, quoted on spiritual See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
master, 16, 108 Lord; Krsna consciousness
Gayatri mantra “Gods.” See: Demigods
for brahmanas, 220 Gold
for demigods, 220 Mandara Mountain made of, 235
as Lord's bodily layers, 266 on Trikita Mountain, 43
Gems from milk ocean, 228, 291 Goodness, mode of
Ghee demigods in, 178, 179, 251
from cow, 286, 287 in Kali-yuga lacking, 162
defined, 286 as knowledge, 176
for sacrifices, 286-287, 287 as maintenance, 160
Goal of life. See: Life, goal of Visnu controls, 201
God. See: Supreme Lord Gopala-tapani Upanisad, quoted on
Goddess of fortune naiskarmya, 86
abhiseka ceremony for, 299 Gopis, beauty of, 48
as all-attractive, 293, 294 Government
beauty of, 293, 298, 300, 301 modern, doomed, 9
as chaste, 298 spiritual responsibility of, 36
demigods blessed by, 310-311 Govindam adi-purusari tam aha bhajami
demons frustrated by, 311 quoted, 92
devotees blessed by, 309 Greed
elephants bathed, 297-298 as Lord's concealing energy, 112
Gandharvas chanted for, 296 from Lord’s universal form, 190
Ganges served, 294 Grhastha
husband 01, 307 sex life for, 62
Indra served, 294 See also: Family


--- Page 357 ---
General Index 359
Grhe Satrum api praptari Hearing about the Supreme Lord
quoted, 230 sins absolved by, 144
Guna-avatdra, Brahma as, 157, 262 from Vedic authority, 166, 167
Gunams ca dosars ca mune vyatita Heaven, King of. See: Indra, King
quoted, 82 Heavenly planets
Gunas. See: Modes of material nature animals on, 45
Guru. See: Spiritual master Apsards in, 291
Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija elevation to, 287
quoted, 215 landscape 01, 45
from Lord’s universal form, 188
H residents of . See: Demigods
women beautiful in, 47-48
Happiness Hell, Yudhisthira saw, 136
fruitive activities lack, 22 Hetunanena kaunteya
via the Lord, 218 verse quoted, 170, 213
in material world absent, 108, 163 Hindus as sectarian, 304
See also: Bliss; Enjoyment, material Hiranyakasipu
Hare Krsna mantra as asura, 165
Caitanya delivered, 221 as atheist No. 1, 179
for devotees, 25 as educated demon, 244
as essential, 72 Nrsirmhadeva killed, 179, 305
for Kali-yuga, 161-162, 221 Hiranyaksa
liberation by, 83 Jaya as, 148
potency of, 20, 161-162 as Varaha's opponent, 148
$astras recommend, 20 Hiranyaroma, 145
as song in Hare Krsna movement, 167 Holy name of the Lord. See: Chanting the
See also: Chanting the Lord's holy names; Lord's holy names; Hare Krsna mantra;
Names of the Supreme Lord; Names of the Supreme Lord; Supreme
Sarikirtana movement Lord, appropriate entries
Hare Krsna movement. See: Krsna conscious- Householders. See: Family; Grhastha
ness movement Hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
Harer nama harer nama verse quoted, 133
verse quoted, 217, 221 Haha, King
Hari, Lord, Gajendra saved by, 37, 38 as crocodile, 124
Haridasa Thakura, imitating, condemned, 23, Devala cursed, 124
24 Gandharva status regained by, 124, 125
Harimedha, 37 Lord merciful to, 124, 125
Hariri vind naiva mrtiri taranti prayed to the Lord, 124
quoted, 115 Human being (s)
Harini, 37 animalistic, 98
Haris, 36 demigods vs., 45, 47
Havigman, 149 in Kali-yuga degraded, 216, 295-296
Hearing about the Supreme Lord opulences desired by, 293
by pure devotee, 103 pious, turn to God, 63, 216
seeing Lord vs., 167 types of, three listed, 101


--- Page 358 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Human being(s) (continued) Incarnation (8) of the Supreme Lord
types of, two listed, 165 nine listed, 195
See also: Living entites; Souls, conditioned as numberless, 87, 195, 210
Human society. See: Society, human purposes of, 66
Huxley, Thomas, in bodily conception of life, as Ramacandra, 67, 80, 82, 210
162 sastras verify, 4,195
1 seven sages as, 30
as transcendental, 100, 147
types of, four listed, 4
Ignorance by will of the Lord, 194, 195
living entity in, 108 as woman, 321
Lord dispels, 95 as wonderful, 194, 195
Lord free of, 172 See also: Appearance of the Supreme Lord;
spiritual master dispels, 108 Avataras; names of specific incarna-
world in, 108 tions
See also: Illusion Indra, King, 115
Ignorance, mode of Bali concurred with, 232
atheists under, 179 Brahman beyond, 270
as darkness, 176 Durvisa cursed, 153-154
as destruction, 160 goddess of fortune served by, 294
Lord incomprehensible via, 111 Lord honored by, 252
Siva controls, 201 from Lord’s universal form, 187
Visuki in, 251 Mantradruma as, 149
Ikgviku, King, 12 as a post, 30
Illusion Rocana as, 31
civilization in, 65 Satyajit as, 33, 34
conditioned soul in, 113, 292 Triéikha as, 36
elephant king in, 58 Vibhu as, 145
See also: Maya Vienu as, 30
Ilvala, 254 Indradyumna, King
Imari vivasvate yogar Agastya cursed, 129-130, 131
verse quoted, 12, 17 Agastya neglected by, 129,
Immortality, nectar for, 226 130
Impersonalists. See: Mayavadis austerities by, 128
Incarnation (৪) of the Supreme Lord curse as blessing to, 131
atheists enlightened by, 87 in ecstatic worship, 128, 129
as Caitanya, 67, 80, 221 as elephant, 130, 131
as eternal, 210 Gajendra as, 71, 72, 123,127
following, recommended, 27, 28 renounced family, 128
for Kali-yuga, 173 salvation attained by, 123
as Krsna, 67 Indriyarthan vimadhatma
Lord revealed by, 80 verse quoted, 23
Manus as, 30 Industry, big, condemned, 216
Marici as, 31 International Society for Krsna consciousness.
in modes of nature, 158, 159 See: Krsna consciousness movement
as Mohini, 321 Intoxication of elephant king, 56


--- Page 359 ---
General Index 361
Irreligion K
as Lord’s shadow, 267
from Lord’s universal form, 188 Kailasa as Siva’s abode, 259, 289
Isavasyam idarh sarvam Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
quoted, 13 verse quoted, 217, 221
ISKCON. See: Krsna consciousness movement Kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
Isopanisad verse quoted, 161, 162
quoted on Lord's purity, 99 Kaleya, 254
quoted on Lord’s supremacy, 169 Kali, goddess, 199
ILsvara defined, 260, 303 Kali-yuga (Age of Kali)
Isvarah paramah krsnah animal slaughter in, 215
quoted, 97, 303 Caitanya enlightened, 28, 161
verse quoted, 19, 76, 93 chanting the Lord’s names for, 217
Isvarah sarva-bhitanam as contaminated, 161
quoted, 79, 98 devotee incarnation for, 172-173
verse quoted, 13, 102, 174 devotional service avoided in, 216
100 nrsirmhah parato nrsimho duration of, 161
quoted, 72 Hare Krsna mantra for, 162, 221
people degraded in, 216, 295-296
J sankirtana saves, 161 o
sannydsa risky in, 62
Janmady asya yatah spiritual master merciful to, 136
quoted, 92, 180 surrender difficult in, 160
Janmady asya yato ‘nvayad itaratas carthesv symptom of, 215
abhijiah sva-rat Kama defined, 111
quoted, 172, 180 Kamais 1015 1017 hrta-jagnah
Janma karma ca me divyam quoted, 116, 274
quoted, 83 Karnsa as educated demon, 244
verse quoted, 80 Kapila, Lord
Jarayu-ja defined, 180 as Devahiiti’s son, 7, 8
Jaya and Vijaya, Kumaras cursed, 147-148 subjects taught by, 7
Jaya as Hiranyaksa, 148 Karma
Jayadeva Gosvami, quoted on Lord’s incarna- body according to, 13, 23, 172, 210
tions, 27 as destiny law, 280
Jiva. See: Living entity; Soul; Souls, condi- devotee tolerates, 133
tioned living entities under, 210
Jiva-bhitar maha-baho Lord above, 210
verse quoted, 174 See also: Activities, material; Fruitive ac-
Jiva-tattva defined, 106 tivities
Jaana. See: Knowledge Karma-bandhana defined, 23
Jiana-caksusah defined, 16 Karmana daiva-netrena
Janis quoted, 13,172
as impractical, 23 Karma-yoga, Bhagaved-gita recommends,
Vasudeva known by, ultimately, 88 23
See also: Mayavadis; Philosophers Karmendriyani 52770 27190
Jyotirdhama, 36 verse quoted, 23


--- Page 360 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Karmis (fruitive workers) Krsna, Lord
devotees vs., 196, 309 mission of, 66
Hare Krsna movement disliked by, 196 in Vrndivana, 288
See also: Materialists; Nondevotees See also: Supreme Lord, all entries
Kasyapa, 246, 312 Krsna consciousness
Kaustubha-mani, 291 as life’s purpose, 281
Kesava dhrta-buddha-sarira mantrassustain, 72
quoted, 27 as naiskarmya, 85
Kesava dhrta-kirma-sarira peace by, 317
quoted, 249 preaching. See: Preaching Krsna con-
Kesava dhrta-mina-sarira sciousness
quoted, 27, 195 society needs, 317
Kesava dhrta-nara-hari-ripa value 01, 72
quoted, 27 as welfare work, 280
Kesava! tuya jogat vicitra yogain, 105
quoted, 45 Krsna consciousness movement
Ketu, 35 books published by, 38
Khyati, 35 Caitanya’s blessing on, 104
Killing, animal. See: Animal slaughter cow protection promoted by, 244
King(s) demons vs., 244
in disciplic succession, 8 duty of, 162, 219
Lord compared to, 159 God known via, 21
saintly vs. sinful, 8-9 karmis dislike, 196
spiritual responsibility of, 36 leaders of, advised, 162
King of heaven. See: Indra, King mdyd vs., 61
King of the elephants. See: Airavata; Gajendra members of, advised, 61, 317
Kinnaras, 44 message of, 26-27, 292
Kirtana. See: Chanting the Lord's holy names; milk promoted by, 244
Sarikirtana movement as nonsectarian, 199
Kirtanad eva krsnasya opulence of, 196
quoted, 161, 162 progress of, 196
verse quoted, 161 purpose of, 85-86, 162
Knowledge sannyasis in, 39
in Bhagavatam complete, 52-53 songs in, 167
devotee in, 132 See also: Sankirtana movement
goodness as, 176 Krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
via the Lord, 211 verse quoted, 172
perfect and imperfect, 46 Ksatriyas
via spiritual master, 16 from Lord’s universal form,
of Vasudeva as perfection, 189
88 See also: Kings
Krishna. See: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord Ksetra-jiam capi mann viddhi
Krishna consciousness. See: Krsna conscious- quoted, 12, 89, 169, 219
ness Ksirodakasayi Visnu, Lord as, 97
Krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam Ksitir iti vipulatare tava tisthati prsthe
quoted, 287 quoted, 249


--- Page 361 ---
General Index 363
Kumiras, Jaya and Vijaya cursed by, 147-148 Living entities
Kuntidevi, quoted on Krsna within and with- in bodily conception, 113
out, 16 classes of , two listed, 237
Kuruksetra, Battle of, Bhagavad-gita spoken as controlled, 303, 304, 305
at, 161 as dependent, 180, 303
Kurus, Pandavas vs., 230 as eternal, 5, 6, 108
as fallible, 306
IL in ignorance, 108
karma above, 210
Laksmi, goddess. See: Goddess of fortune Lord as source of, 157, 180
Lamentation of demigods after nectar theft, Lord directs, 91, 101-102
316 as Lord’s parts and parcels, 25, 89-90, 108,
Land personified, served goddess of fortune, 113
295 Lord vs., 5-6,10,11,15,17, 169-170,
Laws of nature 172, 180, 210, 219, 221, 237, 304
society under, 15 in maya, 91
See also: Karma; Nature, material modes of nature above, 95, 304
Learning, goddess of, 299 nature above, 174
Liberation types of, four listed, 157, 180
by chanting Hare Krsna, 83 water sustains, 181, 182
by devotional service, 24 See also: Human beings; Soul; Souls, con-
by following Krsna's instructions, 25 ditioned
of Gajendra by the Lord, 126 Lobha
impersonal vs. personal, 134 defined, 111
by knowing Krsna, 25, 72, 80, 94, 98 See also: Greed
via the Lord, 261 Locana १888 Thikura, 167
via sun-god, 184 Lokiloka Mountain, 147
Life Lord Caitanya. See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
aim of, 177 Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord
goal of, 68, 216, 218 cosmos rests on, 180
milk prolongs, 215 devotees at, 81
in modern civilization short, 215 sages aspire to, 81
perfection of, 191 as shelter, 62, 63
species of . See: Species of life Love of God
success in, 27 religion as, 305
in Vaikuntha, 298 as sole satisfaction, 198
water sustains, 181, 182 Lust
Life, material as Lord’s concealing energy, 112
as crocodilelike, 98,132 from Lord’s universal form, 190 .
as dream, 11, 177 See also: Desire, material; Sex life
as firelike, 276
spiritual life vs., 163 M
Lions of Trikita Mountain, 45
Living entities Madhvacarya
air sustains, 186 quoted on Dhanvantari and demons,
at annihilation of universe, 10, 11 314-315


--- Page 362 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Madhvicarya (continued) Mankind. See: Human beings; Society, human
quoted on Vignu and Siva, 258 Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
Mahajana(s) quoted, 25
defined, 170 Mantra(s)
number of, 170 Bhagavad-gita as, 136
Sukadeva as, 46 Bhagavatam as, 136
See also: Authorities; Disciplic succession for brahmanas to recite, 135-136
Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah conditioned souls saved by, 220
quoted, 46 defined, 220
Maha-mantra. See: Chanting the Lord’s holy for devotees vital, 72
names; Hare Krsna mantra Gayatri. See: Gayatri mantra
Maharaja Pariksit. See: Pariksit Maharaja Hare Krsna. See: Hare Krsna mantra
Maharaja Yudhisthira. See: Yudhisthira Krsna consciousness survives on, 72
Maharaja in Lord’s universal form, 266-267
Mahat-padari punya-yaso-murareh rascals misinterpret, 136
quoted, 180 Siva chants, 267
Mahat-tattva defined, 180 for Siva worship, 38 listed, 269
Mahendra. See: Indra, King Vedas as, 136
Malaya Hills, 128 Mantradruma, 149
Mamaivamso jiva-loke Manu(s)
quoted, 89, 169 in Brahma's day, 5, 6
verse quoted, 25 Caksusa, 148, 149
Mama maya duratyaya as human society's forefather, 12
quoted, 21 life span of, 5
Mam upetya punar janma as Lord’s partial incarnations, 30
verse quoted, 191 Raivata, 145, 148
Man. See: Human beings as saintly kings, 8
Manah sasthanindriyani Svirocisa, 31
quoted, 90, 220 Svayambhuva. See: Svayambhuva Manu
verse quoted, 25 Tamasa, 35, 36, 145
Mandah sumanda-matayo Uttama, 33
quoted, 216 Vaivasvata, 12
Mandara Mountain Manu-sarihita
as churning rod, 226, 239, 242, 247, 256 as essential for government, 9
demons and demigods smashed by, for human society, 27
235-236 Manvantaram manur deva
demons and demigods struggled with, verse quoted, 30
234-235 Marici, 31
Garuda carried, 237-238 Material body. See: Body, material
as golden, 235 Material energy. See: Energy, material
Lord lifted, 237 Materialism. See: Life, material; Material
Lord steadied, 252 world
Lord Tortoise carried, 150, 151 Materialists
Lord Tortoise lifted, 248-249 as animals, 46
Lord Tortoise pleased by churning of, 250 goddess of fortune frustrates, 294
under milk ocean, 247 sages vs., 191


--- Page 363 ---
General Index 365
Materialists Maya
See also: Atheists; Karmis; Nondevotees; war on, 61
Souls, conditioned world created by, 213
Material life. See: Life, material See also: Illusion; Material world; Nature,
Material nature. See: Nature, material material
Material nature, modes of. See: Modes of ma- Mayadhyaksena prakrtih
terial nature quoted, 67, 89, 91, 191, 239
Material world verse quoted, 170, 213
as dangerous, 63, 64-65, 67-68 Mayari vyudasya cic-chaktya
demons disturb, 156 quoted, 21
directors of, 268 Mayipura, African devotee in, 24
happiness absent in, 108 Maya tatam idam sarvam
in ignorance, 108 quoted, 19, 75, 214, 269
impersonalists deny, 134 verse quoted, 170
as incomprehensible, 191 Maysvadis (impersonalists)
Lord directs, 191 brahmajyoti entered by, 269
Lord incarnates in, 159 brahmayjyoti dissatisfies, 134
mantras save, 220 devotees vs., 134
maydcreates, 213 devotional service misunderstood by, 95,
as miserable, 163, 191 134
modes of nature conduct, 160, 251 liberation for, 134
people in, three types listed, 101 Lord’s effulgence sought by, 87
sages reject, 191 ग misunderstood by, 74
as shadow reality, 90 quoted on material world, 134
spiritual planet in, 166 world denied by, 134
spiritual world vs., 11, 91 worship Siva, 269
as temporary, 10-11, 191 See also: Janis; Philosophers
yogamdya's creations in, 190 Mayayapehrta-jidna
See also: Annihilation of the universe; verse quoted, 245
Creation, the; Universe Mayy asakta-manah partha
Mat-sthani sarva-bhitani verse quoted, 104-105
quoted, 76, 214 Medicine, Dhanvantari expert in, 314
verse quoted, 170 Meditation (s)
Mattah parataram néanyat for absolving sins, 140
quoted, 97 by Gajendra on the Lord, 73
Mattah sarvari pravartate yogiin, 111
quoted, 93 Men. See: Human beings
Mattah smrtir jianam apohanari ca Mental speculators. See: Janis; Mayavadis;
quoted, 91, 172 Philosophers
Matter. See: Energy, material; Nature, ma- Mercy of the Supreme Lord
terial bhakti-yoga as, 215
Maya on devotee, 131
conditioned soul in, 113, 178 devotee sees danger as, 119
Hare Krsna movement vs., 61 on Haha, 124, 125
living entity in, 91 as limitless, 98, 101
Lord controls, 176,177, 178 pure devotee at, 104


--- Page 364 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Mercy of the Supreme Lord (continued) Modes of material nature
self-realization by, 96 Lord incarnates in, 158, 159, 201
Merging with the Supreme. See: Brahman as Lord's eyes, 267
effulgence, impersonalists aspire to; world conducted by, 160, 251
Liberation; Mayavadis See also: Nature, material; specific modes
Milk (goodness, passion, ignorance)
civilization neglects, 215 Moghasa mogha-karmano
cow protection supplies, 287 quoted, 216
food from, 216 Mohini-murti
Hare Krsna movement promotes, 244 beauty of, 321
life prolonged by, 215 demons desired, 321
as nectarean necessity, 216 dress of, 321
for sacrifices, 287, 288 Moksa. See: Liberation, all entries
society needs, 288 Monarchy
from surabhi cows unlimited, 288 as good government, 27
Milk, ocean of as lost in time, 9
Airavata from, 289 See also: Government; Kings
Ajita churned, 150 Money as Krsna's property, 15
animals in, disturbed, 253, 257 Monists. See: Jaanis; Mayavadis
Apsaras from, 291 Month
demigods play on, 45 of Caitra, 295
demons and demigods churned, 242, 246, of Vaisakha, 295
253, 255, 286, 312 Moon
Dhanvantari from, 312-314 demigods sustained by, 182, 183
elephants from, 289, 290 earth trips to, as failures, 53
gems from, 228, 291 food sustained by light of, 183
goddess of fortune from, 292, 300, 302 as Lord’s mind, 182, 265
Lord churned, 255-256 scientists misunderstand,
Mandara Mountain sank in, 247 183
nectar from, 150, 151, 227, 228 Mrtyuh sarva-haras caham
parijata flower from, 291 quoted, 67, 179, 305
poison from, 228, 257, 279 Midhas defined, 65
surabhi cow from, 286 Muk:tatma defined, 100
Svetadvipa in, 164 Muktamabhih sva-hrdaye paribhavitaya
Trikita Mountain in, 42, 43 quoted, 100
Uccaihérava from, 288 Mukti. See: Liberation, all entries
Varuni from, 312 Muktir hitvanyatha rapa
wealth from, 228 quoted, 24, 133
women from, 228 Muslims as sectarian, 304
Misery. See: Suffering Mysticism. See: Krsna consciousness; Medita-
Modes of material nature tion; Yogis
in body wheel, 174 Mystics. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord;
Brahman effulgence above, 268 Sages; Supreme Lord, as mystic master;
living entities under, 95, 304 Transcendentalists; Yogis
Lord above, 12, 16, 82-83, 99-100, 176, Mythology, demons brand God's omnipotence
200, 209 as, 237


--- Page 365 ---
General Index 367
N Na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate
quoted, 107, 193
Na cahari tesv avasthitah Na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
quoted, 214, 270 quoted, 107, 169
Na ca tasman manusyesu Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum
quoted, 280 quoted, 177, 216
Nagas, 299 Nature, material
Naimigaranya, 22 as inimitable, 44
Naiskarmya living entity under, 174
defined, 85 Lord above, 44, 89, 170, 193, 213, 239
as impractical without Krsna conscious- as mother, 89
ness, 23 See also: Body, material; Elements, ma-
Naiskarmyam apy acyuta-bhava-varjitar terial; Modes of material nature
quoted, 22, 85 Nectar
Na mari duskrtino midhah demons quarreled over, 317, 318-319
quoted, 65, 67 demons stole, 315,316
verse quoted, 245 Dhanvantari carried, 315
Names of the Supreme Lord for immortality, 226
for creation, maintenance, annihilation, milk compared to, 216
262 from milk ocean, 150, 151, 227, 228
as God Himself, 83 Nectar of Devotion as auspicious, 38-39
pastimes according to, 20 Nirguna defined, 83
potency of, 20 Nirguna guna-bhoktr ca
See also: Chanting the Lord's holy names; quoted, 200
Hare Krsna mantra; Supreme Lord, Nityananda, Lord, as Caitanya’s associate, 173
specific names Nityo nityanar cetanas cetananam
Namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktih quoted, 5, 10
quoted, 20 Nondevotees
Napnuvanti mahatmanah creator denied by, 110
verse quoted, 191 devotees vs., 317
Nara, 35 Lord disfavors, 112
Narada Muni sense gratification pursued by, 317
curse by, as benediction, 122-123 See also: Atheists; Demons; Materialists
quoted on proprietorship, 14 Notpadayed yadi ratim
Narayana, Lord verse quoted, 305
Ajamila saved by name of, 72, 83, 197 Nrsirmhadeva, Lord, Hiranyakasipu killed by,
Gajendra rescued by, 118 179, 305
as Lakgmi's lord, 293, 300, 302, 309 Nrsiriha prayer recommended, 72
as soul of universe, 116
See also: Supreme Lord
Narottama dasa Thakura, songs of, 0
167 Ocean (s)
Na safjahre samartho ‘pi fire in, 183
verse quoted, 258 goddess of fortune served by, 299
Nasayamy atma-bhava-stho in universe, 44
verse quoted, 95 Ocean of milk. See: Milk, ocean of


--- Page 366 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Offenses Paramesvara defined, 74
to Deity, 74 Parampara. See: Disciplic succession
by demigods during Gajendra’s plight, 118 Parari vijayate $ri-krsna-sarnkirtanam
to spiritual master, 74 quoted, 162, 221
Ori (kara) Parasya saktir vividhaiva Sriiyate
letters in, 263 quoted, 20, 77, 107, 193
Lord as, 175, 263 Parijata flower, 291
as Lord’s sound representation, 74 Pariksit Maharaja, enemies subdued by, 165
Mayavadis misunderstand, 74 Parikgit Maharaja, quotations from
Vedic mantras begun by, 74 on elephant king, 38
Orn ajiigna-timirandhasya on Lord Tortoise in milk ocean, 151
verse quoted, 16, 108 on Manus, 3
Ori namo bhagavate vasudevaya Paritranaya sadhinam
quoted, 73, 74 quoted, 66, 83
Om tat sad iti nirdeso verse quoted, 159, 281
quoted, 74 Passion, mode of
Oneness. See: Janis; Liberation; Mayavadis atheists in, 179
Opulence Brahma controls, 201
devotee’s vs. karmi’s, 309 as creation, 160
from goddess of fortune, 293, 298, 308 demons in, 251
as Lords property, 292 as knowledge and ignorance, 176
Opulence, material Lord incomprehensible via, 111
of demigods lost to demons, 154 Pastimes of the Supreme Lord
people desire, 293 hearing about. See: Hearing about the
as risky, 154 Supreme Lord
See also: Gold; Money; Wealth names of the Lord according to, 20
as transcendental, 83, 210
P Pasu defined, 98
Patiriv visvasyatmesvaram
Padma Purana quoted, 267
quoted on devas vs, asuras, 165 Pauloma, 254
quoted on worship, 199 Pavana, 33
Padmaraga-mani, 291 Peace
Pain. See: Suffering cow killing prevents, 296
Péiicajanya conchshell, 142 formula for, 292
Paiicaratras, 92 by Krena consciousness, 317
Pandavas, Kurus vs., 230 for society, 287
Panditah sama-darsinah Penance. See: Austerity
quoted, 81 Perception, sensory, hearing vs. seeing, 167
Pandya, 127 Persons. See: Human beings; Living entities;
Parabrahman Souls, conditioned
Lord as, 23, 262 Philosophers
See also: Brahman, Supreme in bodily conception, 162
Paramatma. See: Supersoul Lord baffles, 79
Parariv brahma param dhama See also: Jaanis; Mayavadis
quoted, 263 Pitas, 188


--- Page 367 ---
General Index 369
Planets. See: Earth planet; Heavenly planets; Prayers
Universe by Hihi for the Lord, 124
Pleasure. See: Bliss; Enjoyment, material; Preachers, Krsna conscious
Happiness common man’s challenge to, 109
Poison as dear to the Lord, 280
gaija as, 279 as paramaharasas, 81
from milk ocean, 228, 257,279 Preaching Krsna consciousness
meres animals drank, 282 benefit of, 280
iva drank, 278, 286 Caitanya quoted on, 28
Siva dropped, 283 as carefully done, 39
Siva marked by, 279 as duty, 162
spread everywhere, 258, 260, 271, 274, sannyasa for, 62
279 success formula for, 317
Politics as topmost welfare work, 162, 280
as universal, 232 Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
See also: Government quoted, 215
Prahlada Maharaja, quoted on Lord as sole verse quoted, 111
shelter, 65 Priyavrata, 30,33
Prahlado janako bhismo Proprietorship
verse quoted, 46, 171 subordinate vs. supreme, 89, 219
Prajapatis, 220 true and false, 12-17, 292
from Lord’s universal form, 187 Protection
quoted on Lord Mahadeva, 260 by $iva,275
Viévakarma as, 299 for Vedic authority, 36
Prakrti by Vignu via Siva, 260
defined, 89 Protection by the Supreme Lord
See also: Nature, material for devotees, 67-68
Prakrtim svam adhisthaya via Siva, 260
verse quoted, 209 as sole shelter, 64-65, 66-67
Prakrtirh yanti mamikam for surrendered souls, 112
quoted, 76 Prthu, 35
Pramada, 33 Punishment
Pranavah sarva-vedesu body as, 25
quoted, 74 by nature’s laws, 14, 15
Pranopaharac ca yathendriyanam Pure devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord
verse quoted, 116, 199 in bliss, 103
Prayers Caitanya in role of, 27
approved vs. concocted, 167 chant and dance in ecstasy, 104
by Brahmi for the Lord, 166-200, hear about the Lord, 104
209-214, 217, 219-220 Lord realized by, 85
by demigods for the Lord, 117, 123 Lord seen by, 111
by demigods for Siva, 260-268, 270-273 at Lord's mercy, 104
by Gajendra for the Lord, 73, 75, 77-79, as paramaharsa, 95
81, 82, 84-86, 88, 90, 92, pure vision of, 218
94-96, 99,101, 103, 106-110, sankirtana relished by, 104
112,113,118, 141 spiritual destination of, 126-127


--- Page 368 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Pure devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord (continued) Religion
surrender to the Lord, 103-104 demigod of, 34
as transcendental, 73-74 as following Krsna, 26
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord as Lord’s heart, 266
Purification from Lord’s universal form, 188
by bhakti-yoga, 110,213 as love of God, 305
by chanting Hare Krsna, 161 sectarian, condemned, 305
by Deity worship, 126 systems 01, two listed, 263
by sarikirtana, 161 Remembering the Supreme Lord
surrender as, 160-161 at death, 197
Pirnasya piirnam adaya by devotional service, 72,131
quoted, 92 Renounced order. See: Sannyasa
Piru, 148 Renunciation
Piirusa, 148 by Indradyumna, 128
Pirvabhyasena tenaiva of sense gratification, 8
quoted, 71 by Svayambhuva Manu, 8, 9
See also: Sannyasa
R Ritualistic ceremonies
cow products for, 295
Rajarsisdefined, 8 fire for, 183
Rajo-guna. See: Passion, mode of for marriage, 302
Raksasas svayarvara, 302
defined, 245 See also: Sacrifices
devatas vs., 36 Rivers, sacred. See: Ganges River; Yamuna
Lord killed, 29, 34-35 River
Svayambhuva Manu chased by, 29 Rocana, 31
Rama, goddess. See: Goddess of fortune Rsayo 'miavataras ca
Ramacandra, Lord verse quoted, 30
as cause of all causes, 76 Rtumat garden, 49-50, 52
as ideal king, 27 Rudrasya yasaso 'rathaya
as incarnation, 80, 82, 210 verse quoted, 258
mission of , 67 Riipa Gosvami as world welfare worker,
Sitd saved by, 294 156
taught by example, 27 5
Rama-rajya defined, 27
Ravana, 27
as asura, 165 Sa atma angany anya devatdh
as educated demon, 244 quoted, 116
Rima defeated, 294 Sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
Reality quoted 93
Lord as, 90-91 Sacrifice(s)
Supersoul as, 175 as essential, 287
See also: Absolute Truth fire for, 95, 264
Reincarnation. See: Birth and death, repeated ghee for, 286-287, 287
Religion for heavenly elevation, 287
bogus vs. bona fide, 304-305 milk for, 287, 288


--- Page 369 ---
General Index 371
Sacrifice(s) Sarnsiddhir hari-tosanam
as work for Vignu, 22, 24 quoted, 22
See also: Ritualistic ceremonies Sarvid yuddhe pratijidydm
Sadhus. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; verse quoted, 233
Sages; Saints Sarikirtana movement
Sages as blissful, 104
curse by, as benediction, 122-123, Caitanya quoted on, 221
124-125 Caitanya started, 161, 162
goddess of fortune served by, 296 Kali-yuga saved by, 161, 162
Lord baffles, 79 pure devotee relishes, 104
Lord's lotus feet sought by, 81 purifying power of, 161, 162
materialists vs., 191 worship by, 173
milk used by, 288 See also: Chanting the Lord’s holy names;
surabhi cow protected by, 287, 288 Hare Krgna mantra; Krsna con-
world rejected by, 191 sciousness movement
Sages, seven great Sannydsa (renounced life)
during Caksusa Manu, 149 Caitanya in, 62
as Lord’s partial incarnations, 30-31 in Kali-yuga risky, 62
during Raivata Manu, 145 for preaching, 62
during Svérociga Manu, 31 premature, condemned, 62
during Tamasa Manu, 36 sex forbidden in, 62
during Uttama Manu, 33 Sannyasis
Sa gundn samatityaitan in Hare Krgna movement, 39
quoted, 74 naiskarmya dissatisfied, 85
Saints Sarasvati, goddess, 299
from Lord's universal form, 187 Saripya-mukti
Siva worshiped by, 259 defined, 130, 133
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; Gajendra attained, 126, 132
| Sages Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
Saktydvesa-avatira Caitanya cautioned by, 62
Brahma as, 260 quoted on Caitanya, 27-28
Siva as, 260 Sarva-dharman parityajya
Salvation. See: Liberation quoted, 94, 98
Samah sarvesu bhiitesu verse quoted, 160
quoted, 114 Sarva-karana-kiranam
verse quoted, 114 quoted, 303
Samartho ‘py asurdnam tu Sarvarh khaly idarh brahma
verse quoted, 314-315 quoted, 76
Sambara, 232 Sarvasyacaharh hrdi sannivisto
Sambhasane kriyakare quoted, 17, 79, 91, 170
verse quoted, 233 Sarva-yonisu kaunteya
Sambhavamy atma-mayaya „ verse quoted, 89
quoted, 83 Sastras. See: Vedas; names of individual
Samo ham sarva-bhitesu Vedic scriptures
verse quoted, 158 Satariipa, 8
Sampradaya. See: Disciplic succession Sati, 274


--- Page 370 ---
372 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sattva-guna. See: Goodness, mode of Siksastaka, quotations from
Sattvari visuddharh vasudeva-sabditam on God’s names, 20
quoted, 176 on sarikirtana, 221
Satyajit, 33, 34 Sins
Satyakas, 36 of devotee minimized by the Lord, 131
Satyas, 33 disciple avoids, 136
Satyasena, Lord, 34 of disciple trouble spiritual master, 136
Satyavratas, 34 hearing Lord’s activities absolves, 144
Satya-yuga, Lord appeared in, 172 Indradyumna freed 01, 130
Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh meditations for absolution 01, 140
quoted, 95 . nightmares caused by, 136
Scientists, material surrender absolves, 161
in bodily conception, 162 Sita
as limited, 44, 45-46 as Rama's wife, 27
moon misunderstood by, 183 Rama saved, 294
universe misunderstood by, 45-46 Siva, Lord
water misunderstood by, 181 abode of, 289
Self. See: Soul; Souls, conditioned as annihilator, 260, 270
Self-realization Brahma praised, 282
God realization above, 23 Brahma puzzled by, 273
by Lord’s mercy, 96 as compassionate, 274, 276, 277-278
See also: Krsna consciousness consort of, 274
Sense gratification demigods prayed to, 260-268, 270-273
nondevotees pursue, 317 demigods sought help of, 258-261, 271
saintly king renounces, 8-9 disciplic succession from, 276
See also: Body, material; Desire, material; as fallible, 306
Enjoyment, material; Fruitive ac- ignorance mode controlled by, 201
tivities; Life, material imitating, condemned, 279
Senses as incomprehensible, 271-273
in body wheel, 174 Lord above, 73, 74, 78, 115, 157, 220
Lord perceivable by, 194 Lord honored by, 208, 252
Serpents. See: Snakes from Lord's universal form, 187
Servants of God. See: Devotees of the Supreme as Mahadeva, 260, 267
Lord mantras chanted by, 267
Service to God. See: Devotional service to the Mayavadis worship, 269
Supreme Lord name 01, meaning 0, 267
Sex life poison dropped by, 283
for grhastha, 62 poison drunk by, 278, 286
See also: Desire, material; Lust poison marked, 279
Shower of flowers. See: Flower shower as a post, 30
Siddhas as protector, 275
as fallible, 302 quoted on milk ocean poison, 275
Lord honored by, 123, 132-133 quoted on worship, 199
„ at Trikita Mountain, 44-45 as Rudra, 276
Siksastaka, quotations from as 580861५8, 258
on devotee’s pure vision, 218 saints worshiped, 250


--- Page 371 ---
General Index 373
Siva, Lord Sparks to fire, living entities to Lord compared
as Saktyavesa-avatara, 260 to, 220
shameless persons misunderstand, 272 Species of life
as topmost Vaignava, 272 number of, 13
as transcendental, 272-273 origin of, 89
Visnu glorified, 258, 282 Speculative philosophers. See: Jiidnis;
as Visnu’s representative, 260, 261, 263, Mayavadis; Philosophers
267 Spirit. See: Soul; Spiritual world; Supreme
wife of, 250, 277 Lord
Sky as Lord’s navel, 265 Spiritual life
Sleep, Lord free of, 172 material life vs., 163
Snake and mouse logic, 225 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
Snakes Lord; Krena consciousness
Garuda eats, 239 Spiritual master (guru)
Vasuki king of, 242 Absolute Truth seen by, 211
Society, human atheists misunderstand, 74
cow slaughter ruins, 296 bhakti-yoga via, 215
Krsna consciousness need by, 317 devotional service via, 219
Manu as forefather of, 12 disciples sins trouble, 136
milk necessary for, 288 ignorance dispelled by, 108
nature’s laws control, 15 knowledge via, 16
peace for, 287 as merciful to Kali-yuga’s victims,
Svayambhuva Manu as leader of, 27 136
Vedas vital for, 36 as necessary, 22
See also: Civilization, human nightmares endured by, 136
Soma, 182 as transcendental, 74
Songs in Hare Krsna movement, 167 Vedas recommend, 108
Soul Spiritual world
body vs., 116, 162-163 Brahma saw, 147
Lord enlightens, 84 life in, 298
Supersoul vs., 12,13 material world vs., 11,
See also: Living entity 91
Souls, conditioned women beautiful in, 48
devotees teach, 276 Spring personified served goddess of fortune,
as forgetful, 17 295
inillusion, 113, 292 Sraddhavan bhajate yo mar
Lord directs, 91 _ verse quoted, 100
Lord vs., 5-6 Sravanar kirtanar visnoh
mantras save, 220 quoted, 86, 215
in maya, 113, 177 verse quoted, 21
suffering of, 25, 281 $ri, goddess. See: Goddess of fortune
See also: Living entities Sri defined, 292
Souls, liberated, know Krgna, 100 Sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda
Sound, transcendental. See: Chanting the _ quoted, 167
Lord’s holy names; Mantras; Names of Sri-krsna-caitanya-sarira-dhari
the Supreme Lord verse quoted, 27


--- Page 372 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Srimad-Bhagavatam Sthane sthitdh sruti-gatari tanu-van-
See also: Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations manobhih
from quoted, 62
as auspicious, 38-39 Subhra, 146
cited on Lord’s incarnations, 87 Suddha-sattva defined, 85, 175
cited on oceans in universe, 44 Siidras from Lord’s universal form, 189
as eternal, 147 Sudyumna, 148
knowledge complete in, 52 Suffering
„ as mantras, 136 of conditioned souls, 281
Srimad-Bhagavatam quotations from demons misunderstand, 248
on animalistic human beings, 46, 98 devotees combat, 276
on desires fulfilled by worshiping Krsna, devotees understand, 249
93,101, 198 world as, 163, 191
on devotee seeing danger as Lord’s mercy, Suhrdari sarva-bhiitanam
119 quoted, 81, 305
on devotee’s good qualities, 95 verse quoted, 292
on devotee’s liberation, 133 Sukadeva Gosvami
on devotee’s perseverance, 131 cited on brahmanas reciting mantras, 136
on devotional service revealing God, 215 as mahdjana, 46
on God realization, 22 Sukadeva Gosvami, quotations from
on Hare Krsna mantra, 161, 162 on demigods vs. demons, 153
on impersonalists falling from on Gajendra, 71
brahmajyoti, 134 on Gajendra, demigods, and the Lord, 115,
on Kali-yuga, 161 122
on life’s purpose, 280 on Gajendra-moksana pastime, 144
on livingentity in bodily conception, on Hare Krsna mantra, 162
113-114 on Indradyumna, 131
on Lord as origin of all, 172 on Lord answering demigods, 222
on Lord as sole shelter, 65 on Lord appearing to demigods, 205
on Lord's energies, 21 on Lord disappearing from demigods, 229
on Lord’s incarnation for Kali-yuga, on Mukunda and goddess of fortune, 307
173 on Siva, 274, 278
on Lord’s supremacy, 170 on Supreme Lord, 142
on mahdjanas, 46, 170-171 on surabhi cow, 286
on sariipya-mukti, 133 on Svayambhuva Manu, 6
on sectarian religion, 304-305 on Svayambhuva Manu and Raksasas, 29
on Vasudeva consciousness, 176 on Trikiita Mountain, 42
on worshiping the Lord as satisfying every- on Vasuki churning milk ocean, 242
one, 116, 199 on wealth, 154
on yogi, 111 Sukrécarya, 224
Srivasa as Caitanya’s associate, 173 Sumeru Mountain, Brahma and demigods met
Sriljaya, 33 at, 155
Sruti-mantras. See: Vedas; names of in- Sun
dividual Vedic literatures Lord compared to, 17, 78, 84, 93, 106
Stambha, 31 Lord's appearance compared to, 205


--- Page 373 ---
General Index 375
Sun Supreme Lord
as Lord's eyes, 265 body of. See: Body of the Supreme Lord
vision sustained by, 185 Brahma awed by, 208
See also: Sun-god Brahman disinterests, 270
Sunandi River, 9 Brahma prayed to, 166-200, 209-214,
Sun-god 217, 219-220
as demigods’ chief, 184 Brahma under, 74, 78,97,103, 115, 157,
in disciplic succession, 12 180, 201, 220
liberation via, 184 Caitanya as, 173
as Lord’s eye, 184. as cause of all causes, 19, 76, 93, 103, 116,
Vedas known via, 184 168, 172, 180, 262-263
See also: Sun as complete whole, 92
Siinrta, 34 conditioned souls directed by, 91
Supersoul (Paramatma) conditioned souls vs., 5-6
as friendly witness, 13,16, 17 as controller, 74, 76, 78, 106-107, 191,
in heart of all, 16, 17 212, 213, 214, 248, 261, 303
Lord as, 12, 17, 84, 88, 96, 97, 98,109, cow protection advocated by, 295
110, 115, 137, 175, 179, 199, 267 as creator, 5, 10, 20, 24, 76, 77,
names 01, three listed, 267 106-107, 212, 213, 214, 262,
as reality, 175 263
soul vs., 12,13 crocodile killed by, 120
Supreme Brahman. See: Brahman, Supreme; as death, 67, 179, 305
Supreme Lord death fears, 67
Supreme Lord demigods advised by, in demon battle,
abode of, 164 224-228
as Absolute Truth, 19, 175 demigods consoled by, 316
as acintya-bhedabheda, 19 demigods favored by, 160, 232
as Ajita, 149, 150, 243, 255 demigods honored, 252, 310
as all-pervading, 11, 12, 16, 18, 19, 79, demigods prayed to, 117
88, 97-98, 168, 169, 170, 172, 176, demigods relieved by, 255
214, 219, 270 demigods revived by, 251
appearance of. See: Appearance of the demigods under, 78, 79, 115, 157, 169,
Supreme Lord 178, 179, 201
Arjuna instructed by, 27 demons and demigods revived by, 236
Arjuna vs., 17 demons thwarted by, 179, 232
as artist, 79 demons deny, 237, 239
atheists baffled by, 112, 179 demons misunderstand, 249
atheists deny, 110 demons pacified by, 246
in atom, 168 demons revived by, 251
authorities reveal, 167, 170-171 desires fulfilled by, 93, 101, 198
3৪ authority, 66, 115 as detached, 192, 193, 270
beauty of, 256 as Devaki-nandana, 20
Bhagavad-gita as instructions 01, 245 devotee depends on, 132
as birthless, 20, 83, 109, 209 devotee enlightened by, 96
as bliss, 209 devotee favored by, 158, 165, 232


--- Page 374 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Supreme Lord
in devotee role, 173 ignorance dispelled by, 95
devotee sees, 211 impersonal feature of. See: Brahman (im-
devotee understands, 237, 238, 249 personal Absolute); Brahman
devotional service reveals, 21, 85-86, effulgence
103-104, 215 incarnations of. See: Incarnations of the
Dhruva blessed by, 102, 126 Supreme Lord
Dhruva saw, 198, 218 as inconceivable, 168
dress of, 208 as independent, 180, 212-213, 307
duality absent in, 18 as invisible, 15, 17
duty toward, 22 as Kapila, 7
energy of. See: Energy of the Supreme karma under, 210
Lord as kinglike, 159
as enjoyer, 22, 294 knowledge via, 211
as equally disposed, 158 liberated soul knows, 100
as eternal, 5, 17, 169, 172, 200 liberation via, 25, 72, 80, 93-94, 261
as father of all, 89, 197, 261, 264, 308 as limitless, 18, 19, 20, 96, 103,
as firelike, 220 106-107, 147, 250
flower shower for, 122 living entities directed by, 91, 101
following, recommended, 25, 26, 27, 28 as living entities’ source, 157, 180
form of. See: Form of the Supreme Lord living entities vs., 5-6, 10, 11, 15, 17,
as friend of all, 292 169, 170, 172, 180, 210, 219, 221,
Gajendra liberated by, 126, 132 237, 304
Gajendra prayed to, 73, 75, 77-79, 81, lotus feet of. See: Lotus feet of the
82, 84-86, 88, 90, 92, 94-96, Supreme Lord
99,101, 103, 106-110, 112, Mandara Mountain lifted by, 237
113,118 Mandara Mountain steadied by, 252
Gajendra rescued by, 37, 38,117, 118, maya under, 177, 178
120 mercy of. See: Mercy of the Supreme Lord
Gajendra sought shelter of, 63, 64, 66 milk ocean churned by, 255-256
as Garbhodakasayi Visnu, 213 modes of nature under, 200, 210
Garuda sent away by, 238 as Mukunda, 307
gems worn by, 291 as mystic master, 110
as goddess of fortune’s master, 292, 293, names of. See: Names of the Supreme Lord
294, 298, 307, 307-308, 308, 309 as Narayana, 118
as Govinda, 19, 269 nature under, 44, 89, 170, 193, 213, 239
happiness via, 218 as nirguna, 83,214
Hare Krena movement reveals, 21 nondevotees deny, 110
as Hari, 37, 38 nondevotees disfavored by, 112
hearing about. See: Hearing about the as omnipotent, 237, 239
Supreme Lord as omniscient, 171-172, 201, 219, 236,
in heart of all, 13, 16, 29, 79, 84, 91, 95, 270
97,101, 116,170, 175 om represents, 74, 263
in human role, 26, 83, 100 as one and different, 19
ignorance absent in, 172 opulence of, 172, 180, 292


--- Page 375 ---
General Index 377
Supreme Lord Supreme Lord
as origin of species, 89 as Syamasundara, 111
as Parabrahman, 23, 262 teaches by example, 26, 27
as Paramatma. See: Supreme Lord, as time under, 200
Supersoul as transcendental, 20, 24, 25, 83, 84, 87,
parts and parcels of, 25, 106-107, 99-100, 103, 106-107, 109, 147,
116 148, 159, 168, 176, 177, 200, 210,
pastimes of. See: Pastimes of the Supreme 213,307
Lord transcendentalists seek, 93
philosophers baffled by, 79 transcendental touch of, 126
pious people seek, 63 as Tri-yuga, 172,173
pleasing, as life’s purpose, 281 truce advised by, in demon-demigod battle,
preacher dear to, 280 224-225
as proprietor, 12-17, 89, 292 universal form of. See: Universal form of
protection by. See: Protection by the the Supreme Lord
Supreme Lord universe from, 18, 109
pure devotees realize, 85 as Uttamaéloka, 38
pure devotees see, 111 as Vaikuntha, 146
Raksasas killed by, 29, 34-35 as Vasudeva, 73, 87, 176, 305
as reality, 90-91 Vasuki revived by, 251
remembering. See: Remembering the Vedas from,263,267-268
Supreme Lord Vedas reveal, 94
remembers everything, 17 visnu-tattvas from, 97
sages baffled by, 79 weapons of. See: Weapons of the Supreme
as Satyasena, 34 Lord
seeing, everywhere, 16 will of, 249
seeing, face to face, 211, 218 as witness, 219
senses can perceive, 194 worship of. See: Deity worship of the
Siva awed by, 208 Supreme Lord; Worship, of Lord
Siva glorified by, 258, 282 recommended
Siva represents, 260, 261,263, as Yadoda-nandana, 20
267 as Yogesvara, 239
Siva under, 74, 78, 115,157, 220 yogis baffled by, 79
as sole shelter, 64-65, 66-67, 92, 98, 116, See also: Brahman, Supreme; Krsna, Lord;
157,265 Narayana, Lord
soul enlightened by, 84 Supreme Lord, quotations from
as sunlike, 17, 78, 84, 93, 106 on demigods, 223
as Supersoul, 11, 12, 13, 16, 84, 88, 96, on demons’ bewilderment, 316
97,98,109, 110, 115, 137, 175, on devotee, 25
179,199, 267 on devotional service revealing God,
supplies all needs, 219, 281 215
as Supreme Brahman, 82 on meditations absolving sinful reactions,
as supreme person, 97 140
surrender to. See: Surrender to the on sages rejecting material world,
Supreme Lord 191


--- Page 376 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Personality of Godhead. See: Svayambhuva Manu
Supreme Lord austerities by, 9
Sura daughters of, 7
defined, 165 as first Manu, 6
See also: Demigods; Devotees of the as mankind’s leader, 27
Supreme Lord quoted on Supreme being, 10
Surabhi cows Raksasas chased, 29
Krsna tends, 288 as renunciant, 8, 9
from milk ocean, 286, 287 in trance, 29
milk unlimited from, 288 wife of, 8
Surrender to the Supreme Lord Svayarivaraceremony for goddess of fortune,
Bhagavad-gita instructs, 160 302
bodily conception dispelled by, 114 Sveda-ja defined, 180
Caitanya taught, 160 Svetadvipa
by demigods, 317 Brahma and demigods at, 164,
demons shun, 67, 245 166
by devotees, 317 location of, 164, 166
by Gajendra, 66, 75, 96, 101 as Lord’s abode, 164, 166
as intelligent, 66, 67 _ as transcendental, 166
in Kali-yuga difficult, 160 Svetasvatara Upanisad, quotations from
Lord rewards, 93-94 on Lord's energies, 170
Lord teaches, 67 on soul and Supersoul, 17
as protection, 112 on Supreme Lord, 169
by pure devotees, 103, 104 T
as purification, 160
as relief, 90
sins absolved by, 160-161 Tada rajas-tamo-bhavah
Survival principle, material vs. spiritual, 163 quoted, 111
Surya, 199 Tad brahma niskalam anantam asesa-bhiitarn
Siita Gosvami verse quoted, 269
quoted on Pariksit and Sukadeva, 39 Tad dhavato 'nyan atyeti tisthat
quoted on perfection of duty, 22 verse quoted, 169
Svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca Tad viddhi pranipatena
quoted, 107 verse quoted, 211
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya Taittiriya Upanisad, quoted on Lord’s
quoted, 197 supremacy, 67
Svamin krtartho smi varam na ydace Tamo-guna. See: Ignorance, mode of
quoted, 218 Tapasya. See: Austerity
Svanusthitasya dharmasya Taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihaijasestas
verse quoted, 22 verse quoted, 65
Svargaloka. See: Heavenly planets, all entries Tasari brahma mahad yonir
Sva-vid-varahostra-kharaih verse quoted, 89
quoted, 46 Tasmat paratarari devi
Svayambhir naradah sambhuh verse quoted, 199
quoted, 170, 211 Tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
verse quoted, 46 quoted, 280


--- Page 377 ---
General Index 379
Tatha dehantara-praptir Trees
verse quoted, 163 on higher planets, 45
Tatra tari buddhi-sarhyogar on Trikita Mountain, 47, 49-50, 52
verse quoted, 71 types of, number of, 52
Tat te 'nukamparn susamiksamanah Tretd-yuga, Lord appeared in, 172
quoted, 119,131, 248 Trikata Mountain
verse quoted, 133 animals 01, 45,47, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56
Tattvas, types of, three listed, 97 beauty of, 42, 43, 47, 49-50, 52
Teacher, spiritual. See: Brahmanas; Spiritual demigods at, 44, 45, 47, 47-48, 49
master elephant king at, 53, 56
Te dvandva-moha-nirmukta flowers 01, 49-50, 52, 56
verse quoted, 216 fruits of, 49-50, 52
Tejo-vari-mrdam yatha vinimayah location 01, 42
quoted, 13 sizeof , 42, 43
Tesam evanukampartham trees of, 47, 49-50, 52
verse quoted, 95 wealth of, 42, 43, 47
Tesarn nityabhiyuktanam Tripura, 232
quoted, 281 Tripurasura, 271
Tesam satyac calandrthar Triéikha, 36
verse quoted, 314-315 = Truce
Three worlds. See: Universe demons and demigods agreed to, 232-233
Time Lord advised, 224-225
demons initially favored by, 224 Truth. See: Absolute Truth
as fearsome, 66 Tusita, 31, 32
Lord above, 200 Tyaktva dehari punar janma
as Lord’s movement, 264 quoted, 27, 67
from Lord’s universal form, 190 verse quoted, 80
universe under, 78
Timingila fish defined, 257 U
Tivrena bhakti-yogena
verse quoted, 93, 101, 198 Uccaihérava, 288
Tortoise, Lord Udbhij-ja defined, 180
Mandara Mountain carried by, 150, 151 Uma, 272
Mandara Mountain lifted by, 248-249 Unhappiness. See: Suffering
Mandara Mountain's churning pleased, United Nations under God consciousness, 13
250 Universal form of the Supreme Lord, 181
size 01, 250 abdomen of, 266
Transcendentalists anger of, 187
Lord approachable by, 104 Apsaris from, 188
Lord sought by, 93 arms of, 189
Supreme Brahman realized by, 114 back of, 188
above Vedic injunctions, 94-95 bodily layers of, 266
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; bones of, 266
Jadnis; Mayavadis; Yogis bosom 01, 188
Transmigration of the soul. See:Birthand Brahma from, 187
death, repeated brahmanas from, 189


--- Page 378 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Universal form of the Supreme Lord (continued) = Universal form of the Supreme Lord
breathing 00, 265 vital force of, 186
chest of, 188 Yamarsja from, 190
demigods from, 187 See also: Body of the Supreme Lord; Form
ears of, 186, 264 of the Supreme Lord
eyebrows of, 190 Universe
eyelashes of, 190 annihilation of. See: Annihilation of the
eyes 01, 184, 185, 265, 267 universe
faces of, 266 Bhagavatam reveals, 52-53
feet of, 189, 264 controllers 01, three listed, 74
genitals of, 187 as covered, 147
goddess of fortune from, 188 as incomprehensible, 191
greed from, 190 Lord in, 11, 18, 20, 109, 116
hairs of, 266 oceans in, 44
head of, 188, 265 politics pervades, 232
heart of, 186, 266 scientists misunderstand, 45-46
heavenly planets from, 188 time destroys, 78
intelligence of, 187 Vaikuntha planetin, 147
irreligion from, 188 Vignu expansions in, 97
ksatriyas from, 189 See also: Material world
lips of, 190 Upadeksyanti te jana
lust from, 190 verse quoted, 211
Mahendra from, 187 Upanisads, 29
mercy of, 187 Urdhvabahu, 145
mind of, 182, 265 Urja, 31
mouth of, 183, 189, 264 Uttanapada, 30
movement of, 264
navel of, 186, 265 \4
nose of, 190
Pitas from, 188 Vaikuntha. See: Spiritual world
prajapatis from, 187 Vaikuntha planet in universe,
prowess of, 187 147
religion from, 188 Vairagya. See: Renunciation
saints from, 187 Vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga-
semen of, 181, 265 verse quoted, 27
sense enjoyment of, 188 Vairsja, 149
shadow of, 188,267 Vairaja-mirti defined, 181
Siva from, 187 Vaispavanam yatha sambhuh
sidras from, 189 quoted, 272, 276
thighs of, 189 Vaignavas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
time from, 190 Vaisnavera kriya-mudra vijiie na bujhaya
tongue of, 264 quoted, 272
touch sense of, 190 Vaisyas
vai$yas from, 189 cow protection by, 295
Vedas from, 187, 189 from Lord’s universal form, 189


--- Page 379 ---
General Index 381
Vaisyas Vedas
modern, condemned, 216 society needs, 36
Varihadeva, Lord, 87 spiritual master recommended in, 108
authorities debate over, 148 sun-god reveals, 184
Hiranyaksa fought, 148 transcendentalists surpass, 94
Varnasrama-dharma See also: names of specific Vedic literatures
cow protection in, 295 Vedaéira, 32, 145
divisions of, eight listed, 61 Vedaérutas, 33
See also: Brahmanas; Grhastha; Vedic culture
Ksatriyas; Sannydsa; Sudras; duty in, 22
Vaisyas; Vedic culture etiquette among enemies in, 230
Varuna Vedicrituals. See: Ritualistic ceremonies
goddess of fortune served by, 299 Vibhu
as Lord's tongue, 264 as brahmacari, 32
Viruni, 312 disciples of, 32
Vasigtha, 33 as Indra, 145
Vasudeva, 176 parents of, 32
Vasudevah sarvam iti Vibhu defined, 169
quoted, 88, 305 Vidhrti, 36
Vasudeva platform, 176 Vidya. See: Knowledge
Viasuki Vidyadharas, 44
as churning rope, 226, 228, 242, 256 Vikuntha, 146
demigods disturbed by, 255 Vindhya, 145
demons weakened by, 254 Viraka, 149
as Garuda’s natural prey, 239 Viraraghava Acirya, cited on Vaikuntha
in ignorance, 251 planet in universe, 147
Lord revived, 251 Viras, 36
as serpent king, 242 Virocana, 231
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah Vision, sunlight sustains, 185
quoted, 94 Vignu, Lord. See: Garbhodakasdyi Vignu;
Vedanta-sutra, quoted on Lord as source of Ksirodakaédyi Vignu; Narayana, Lord;
all, 180 Supersoul; Supreme Lord
Vedas Visnu-bhaktah smrto daiva
as authority, 167 verse quoted, 165
demigods protect, 36 Visnu Purana, quoted on Lord’s qualities,
demons reject, 238 82-83
devotees accept, 238 Visnu-tattva
four listed, 106 as all-pervading, 97
Krsna revealed by, 94 Krsna as origin of, 199-200
from the Lord, 263, 267-268 Vistabhyaham 1007 krtsnam
from Lord's universal form, 187, verse quoted, 97
189 Visuddha-sattva defined, 176
as mantras, 136 Viévakarma, 299
ori begins, 74 Viévanitha Cakravarti Thakura, cited
rascals misinterpret, 136 on cause and effect, 91


--- Page 380 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, cited (continued) Woman (Women)
on Gajendra, demigods, and the Lord, 117 of Vaikuntha, 48
on Svayambhuva Manu, 9 of Vrndavana, 48
on Vaikuntha and Bhagavatam, 146-147 Work. See: Activities; Fruitive activities;
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quotations Karma
from World. See: Earth planet; Material world
on Lord as limitless, 97 Worship
on ‘“‘sarwidam,” 233 toward demigods, 274
on Svetadvipa, 166 God vs. demigod, 116, 199
Vivasvan of the Lord recommended, 94, 116, 169,
in disciplic succession, 12 193, 198, 199, 211
See also: Sun-god, all entries by preaching as best, 280
Vivasvan manave praha by sasikirtana, 173
verse quoted, 12 of Siva by Mayavadis, 269
Vrndivana Vaignava vs. Vignu, 199
Krsna in, 288 of Visnu via Siva, 260, 261, 263
Ripa Gosvami in, 156 See also: Deity worship of the Supreme
surabhi cows in, 288 Lord
Y
w
War Yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahananm
cow killing causes, 296 verse quoted, 185
on maya, 61 Yada yada hi dharmasya
Water verse quoted, 87, 195, 209, 281
cosmos from, 181 Ya ida paramarh guhyar
elephant and crocodile in, 58, 60, 61 quoted, 280
life sustained by, 181, 182 Yajiia
as Lord’s semen, 181, 265 defined, 22
scientists misunderstand, 181 See also: Ritualistic ceremonies; Sacrifices;
Watering a tree’s root, worshiping the Lord names of specific yajiias
compared to, 116, 199 Yajiia, Lord
Wealth as Akiiti’s son, 7, 8
of Hare Krsna movement, 196 as Indra, 29
as Lord’s property, 292 subjects taught by, 7
from milk ocean, 228 YajAia-dana-tapah-karma
of Trikata Mountain, 42, 43, 47 quoted, 287
See also: Opulence; Opulence, material Yajiiahotra, 33
Weapon (s) of the Supreme Lord Yajraih sarikirtana-prayair
disc, 117, 120 verse quoted, 173
two listed, 208 Yajiarthat karmano ‘nyatra
Western countries as car crazy, 65 quoted, 22, 24
Woman (Women) Yaksas
of higher planets, 48 Satyasena killed, 34-35
Lord incarnated as, 321 as fallible, 302
from milk ocean, 228 Yamaraja from Lord’s universal form, 190


--- Page 381 ---
General Index 383
Yamas, 29 Ye bhajanti tu mari bhaktya
Yar §yamasundaram acintya-guna- quoted, 165
svardpar verse quoted, 158
verse quoted, 111 Yesari tv anta-gatar papa
Yamuna River served goddess of fortune, 294 verse quoted, 216
Yantraridhani mayaya Ye yatha mar prapadyante
quoted, 13 quoted, 93, 101
Yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa Yoga
verse quoted, 28 bogus vs. bona fide, 21, 111
Yasmin tuste jagat tustam of devotion best, 100
quoted, 116 in Krsna consciousness, 104
Yasmin vijiiate sarvam evam vijiatarn mystic, anomalous nowadays, 111
quoted, 211 as sense control, 176
Yasyajaaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
verse quoted, 185 Lord
Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti- Yoga indriya-sariyamah
verse quoted, 269 quoted, 176
Yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana Yogamaya, creations of, in material world,
quoted, 95 190
Yasydtma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke Yogariudhasya tasyaiva
verse quoted, 98 verse quoted, 23
Yatate ca tato bhizyah Yoginam api sarvesar
quoted, 72 verse quoted, 100
verse quoted, 71 Yogis
Yatha taror mila-nisecanena bogus, condemned, 111
verse quoted, 116, 199 in devotion best, 100
Yato va imani bhiitani jayante Lord baffles, 79
quoted, 76 in meditation, 111
Yat tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij Yudhisthira Maharéja, hell vision for, 136
verse quoted, 98 Yugas
Yavad bhriyeta jatharari Lord’sappearancesin, 172
verse quoted, 14 inManu’slife, 5

