
--- Page 1 ---
ও
Introduction

“HARE KRSNA" has become a household phrase in cities, towns and
villages throughout the world, fulfilling a prophecy made almost five hundred
years ago by Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu. From Los Angeles to London,
from Bombay to Buenos Aires, from Pittsburgh and Melbourne to Paris and
even Moscow, people of all ages, colors, creeds and faiths are feeling the bliss
of the dynamic yoga system called “Krsna consciousness.”

This Krsna consciousness movement began in full force some five hundred
years ago, when Lord ना Caitanya Mahaprabhu, an incarnation of Krsna
(God), flooded the subcontinent of India with the chanting of the mantra
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare'Hare. To reveal the secret of what real love is, Krsna came to earth
five hundred years ago in the guise of His own devotee—as Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. With His chief associates— Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara
and $rivasa—He taught how to develop love of Godhead simply by chanting
Hare Krsna and dancing in ecstasy.

Srl Caitanya-caritimrta, which was written by the great saint Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami shortly after Lord Caitanya’s disappearance, vividly de-
scribes Lord Caitanya’s blissful pastimes and probes deeply into His profound
spiritual philosophy.

The translations and purports, the explanations of the verses, are the work
of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It is; The Nectar of Devotion; Krsna, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead (first published in 1970 with the kind help of Mr. George
Harrison); and numerous other books about yoga and self-realization.

Although this is the fourth volume of Sr Caitanya-caritimrta, one need not
have read the previous volumes to understand and appreciate this book. যাও
Prabhupada remarks that such a spiritual work is like sugar, for wherever you
begin tasting it you will surely enjoy its sweetness.

vii


--- Page 2 ---
TEXT 1
অগত্যেকগতিং नद्ध) হীনার্থাধিকসাধকম্‌ |
Biter লিখ্যতেহস্ত প্রেমভক্তিবদান্তযতা ॥ > ॥
agaty-eka-gatirh natva
hinarthadhika-sadhakam
sri-caitanyar likhyate ’sya
prema-bhakti-vadanyata
SYNONYMS
agati—of the most fallen; eka—the only one; gatim-—destination; natva—after
offering obeisances; hina—inferior; artha—interest; adhika—greater than that;
sadhakam—who can render; $ri-caitanyam—unto Lord Sri Caitanya; /ikhyate— is
being written; asya—of the Lord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema—love; bhakti—
devotional service; vadanyata—magnanimity.
TRANSLATION
Let me first offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who is the ultimate goal of 'life for one bereft of all possessions in this ma-
terial world and is the only meaning for one advancing in spiritual life. Thus
let me write about His magnanimous contribution of devotional service
in love of God.
PURPORT
A person in the conditional stage of material existence is in an atmosphere of
helplessness, but the conditioned soul, under the illusion of maya, or the external
energy, thinks that he is completely protected by his country, society, friendship
and love, not knowing that at the time of death none of these can save him. The
laws of material nature are so strong that none of our material possessions can save
us from the cruel hands of death. In Bhagavad-gita (13.9) it is stated, janma-mrtyu-
Jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam: one who is actually advancing must always
consider the four principles of miserable life, namely, birth, death, old age and dis-
ease. One cannot be saved from all these miseries unless he takes shelter of the lotus
feet of the Lord. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is therefore the only shelter for


--- Page 3 ---
2 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
all conditioned souls. An intelligent person, therefore, does not put his faith
in any material possessions, but completely takes shelter of the lotus feet
of the Lord. Such a person is called akificana, or one who does not possess
anything in this material world. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is also known
as Akificana-gocara, for He can be achieved by a person who does not put his faith
in material possessions. Therefore, for the fully surrendered soul who has no ma-
terial possessions on which to depend, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the only
shelter. Everyone depends upon dharma (religiosity),artha (economic development),
kama (sense gratification) and ultimately moksa (salvation), but Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, due to His magnanimous character, can give more than salvation.
Therefore in this verse the words hinarthadhika-sadhakam indicate that although
by material estimation salvation is of a quality superior to the inferior interests of
religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, above salvation there is
the position of devotional service and transcendental love for the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the bestower of this great benediction.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, prema pumartho mahan: *‘Love of Godhead is the
ultimate benediction for all human beings.” Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the
author of Caitanya-caritamrta, therefore first offers his respectful obeisances unto
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu before describing His magnanimity in bestowing love
of Godhead.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় মহাপ্রভু Fe |
তাঁহার চরণাঞ্রিত, সেই বড় ধন্য ॥ ২ ॥
Jaya jaya mahaprabhu sri-Rrsna-caitanya
tanhara caranasrita, sei bada dhanya
SYNONYMS
Jjaya—all glories; jaya—all glories; mahaprabhu—unto the Supreme Lord; $ri-krsna-
caitanya—of the name Sri Krsna Caitanya; tanhara—of His; carapa-asrita—one who
has taken shelter of the lotus feet; sei—he; bada—is very; dhanya—glorified.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer glorification to the Supreme Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One
who has taken shelter of His lotus feet is the most glorifiéd person.
PURPORT
Prabhu means master. $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the supreme master of all mas-
ters; therefore He is called Mahaprabhu. Any person who takes shelter of SrT Krsna
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is most glorified because by the mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu he is able to get promotion to the platform of loving service to the
Lord, which is transcendental to salvation.


--- Page 4 ---
Adi-lifa, Chapter 7 3
TEXT 3
পুর্বে खर्वी ति ছয় SCY CTA নমস্কার |
গুরুতস্ব কহিয়াছি, এবে পঁচের বিচার ॥ ৩ ॥
purve gurv-adi chaya tattve kaila namaskara
guru-tattva kahiyachi, ebe pancera vicara
SYNONYMS
purve—in the beginning; guru-adi—the spiritual master and others; chaya—six;
tattve—in the subjects of; kaila—| have done; namaskara—obeisances; guru-tattva—
the truth in understanding the spiritual master; kahiyachi—| have already described;
ebe—now; paricera—of the five; vicara—consideration.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning | have discussed the truth about the spiritual master. Now 1 shall
try to explain the Pafica-tattva.
PURPORT
In the First Chapter of Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-lifa, the author, Srila Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami, has described the initiator spiritual master and the instructor
spiritual master in the verse beginning with the words vande gurun T$a-bhaktan sam
T$avatarakan. In that verse there are six transcendental subject matters, of which the
truth regarding the spiritual master has already been described. Now the author will
describe the other five tattvas (truths), namely, 7a-tattva (the Supreme Lord), His
expansion tattva, His incarnation tattva, His energy tattva and His devotee tattva.
TEXT 4
गकडड অবতীর্ণ চৈতন্যের সঙ্গে ।
PSY A] করেন সংকীর্তন রঙ্গে ॥ 8 ॥
parica-tattva avatirpa caitanyera sange
panca-tattva laha karena sankirtana range
SYNONYMS
paica-tattva—these five tattvas; avatirpa—advented; caitanyera—with Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; safige—in company with; pafica-tattva—the same five subjects; lang—
taking with Himself; karena—He does;sankirtana—the sankirtana movement; range—
in great pleasure.
TRANSLATION
These five tattvas incarnate with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and thus the Lord
executes His sankirtana movement with great pleasure.


--- Page 5 ---
4 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
PURPORT

In the Srimad-Bhagavatam there is the following statement regarding Sri Caitanya

Mahaprabhu:

krsna-varpar tvisakrsnam sangopangastra-parsadam
yajnaih sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah

“In the age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient intelligence will worship
the Lord, who is accompanied by His associates, by performance of safkirtana
yajna.” (Bhag. 11.5.32) Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always accompanied by His
plenary expansion Sri Nityananda Prabhu, His incarnation 311 Advaita Prabhu, His
internal potency Sri Gadadhara Prabhu and His marginal potency Srivasa Prabhu. He
is in the midst of them as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should know that
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always accompanied by these other tattvas. Therefore
our obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are complete when we say, $ri-krspa-
caitanya prabhu nityananda $ri-advaita gadadhara Srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. As
preachers of the Krsna consciousness movement, we first offer our obeisances to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu by chanting this Pafica-tattva mantra; then we say, Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare. There are ten offenses in the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra,
but these are not considered in the chanting of the Pafica-tattva mantra, namely, $ri-
krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda $ri-advaita gadadhara $rivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is known as maha-vadanyavatara, the most magnanimous
incarnation, for He does not consider the offenses of the fallen souls. Thus to derive
the full benefit of the chanting of the maha-mantra (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare), we must first
take shelter of Sri Caitanya 31730130170, learn the Parica-tattva maha-mantra, and
then chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. That will be very effective.

Taking advantage of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, there are many unscrupulous
devotees who manufacture a maha-mantra of their own. Sometimes they sing, bhaja
nitai gaura radhe $yama hare krsna hare rama or $ri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda
hare krspa hare rama Sri radhe govinda. Actually, however, one should chant the
names of the full Pafca-tattva ($ri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda $ri-advaita
gadadhara $rivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda) and then the sixteen words Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare, but these unscrupulous, less intelligent men confuse the entire process. Of
course, since they are also devotees they can express their feelings in that way, but
the method prescribed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s pure devotees is to chant first
the full Pafca-tattva mantra and then chant the maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXTS
পঞ্চতস্ব-_একবস্তু, নাহি কিছু ভেদ |
রস আস্বাদিতে তবু বিবিধ বিভেদ ॥ ৫ ॥


--- Page 6 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 5
panca-tattva—eka-vastu, nahi kichu bheda
rasa asvadite tabu vividha vibheda
SYNONYMS

panca-tattva—the five subjects; eka-vastu—they are one in five; nahi—there is not;
kichu—anything; bheda—difference; rasa—mellows; asvadite—to taste; tabu—vyet;
vividha—varieties; vibheda—differences.

TRANSLATION

Spiritually there are no differences between these five tattvas, for on the tran-
scendental platform everything is absolute. Yet there are also varieties in the
spiritual world, and in order to taste these spiritual varieties one should distinguish
between them.

PURPORT

In his Anubhasya commentary Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura describes
the Parica-tattva as follows. The supreme energetic, the Personality of Godhead,
manifesting in five kinds of pastimes, appears as the Pafica-tattva. Actually there is
no difference between them because they are situated on the absolute platform, but
they manifest different spiritual varieties as a challenge to impersonalists to taste
different kinds of spiritual humors (rasas). In the Vedas it is said, parasya Saktir
vividhaiva Sruyate: ‘The varieties of energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
are differently known.” From this statement of the Vedas one can understand that
there are eternal varieties of humors or tastes in the spiritual world. Sri Gaurahga,
Sri Nityananda, Sri Advaita, Sri Gadadhara and Srivasa are all on the same platform,
but in spiritually distinguishing between them one should understand that Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the form of a devotee, Nityananda Prabhu appears in the
form of a devotee’s spiritual master, Advaita Prabhu is the form of a bhakta (devo-
tee) incarnation, Gadadhara Prabhu is the energy of a bhakta, and Srivasa is a pure
devotee. Thus there are spiritual distinctions between them. The bhakta-rupa (Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu), the bhakta-svaripa (Sri Nityananda Prabhu) and the bhakta-
avatara (Sri Advaita Prabhu) are described as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself, His immediate manifestation and His plenary expansion, and They all
belong to the Visnu category. Although the spiritual and marginal energies of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are nondifferent from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Visnu, they are predominated subjects, whereas Lord Visnu is the pre-
dominator. As such, although they are on the same platform, they have appeared
differently in order to facilitate tasting of transcendental mellows. Actually, how-
ever, there is no possibility of one being different from the other, for the worshiper
and the worshipable cannot be separated at any stage. On the absolute platform, one
cannot be understood without the other.

TEXT 6
পঞ্চতত্বাত্মকং FL ভক্তরূপ-স্বরূপকম্‌ |
ভক্তাবতারং ভক্তাখ্যং নমামি ভক্তশক্তিকম্‌॥ ५ ॥


--- Page 7 ---
6 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
panca-tattvatmakarn krspari
bhaktarupa-svarupakam
bhaktavatararn bhaktakhyarn
namami bhakta-saktikam
SYNONYMS
panca-tattva-atmakam—comprehending the five transcendental subject matters;
krspam—unto Lord Krsna; bhakta-rupa—in the form of a devotee; svartpakam—in
the expansion of a devotee; bhakta-avataram—in the incarnation of a devotee;
bhakta-akhyam—known as a devotee; namami—| offer my obeisances; bhakta-
Saktikam—the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my obeisances unto Lord Sri Krsna, who has manifested Himself
in five as a devotee, expansion of a devotee, incarnation of a devotee, pure devotee
and devotional energy.
PURPORT
Sri Nityananda Prabhu is the immediate expansion of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
as His brother. He is the personified spiritual bliss of sac-cid-gnanda-vigraha. His
body is transcendental and full of ecstasy in devotional service. Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu is therefore called bhakta-ripa (the form of a devotee), and Sri Nityananda
Prabhu is called bhakta-svarupa (the expansion of a devotee). Sri Advaita Prabhu, the
incarnation of a devotee, is Visnu-tattva and belongs to the same category.There are
also different types of bhaktas or devotees on the platforms of neutrality, servitude,
friendship, paternity and conjugal love. Devotees like SfT Damodara, Sri Gadadhara
and Sri Ramananda are different energies. This confirms the Vedic sutra,
parasya saktir vividhaiva Sruyate. All these bhakta subjects taken together constitute
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krsna Himself.
TEXT 7
স্বয়ং ভগবান্‌ কৃষ্ণ একলে ঈশ্বর |
অদ্বিতীয়, नन्तो ज, রসিক-শেখর ॥ ৭ ॥
svayarh bhagavan krsna ekale TSvara
advitiya, nandatmaja, rasika-Sekhara
SYNONYMS
svayam—Himself; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krspa—Lord
Krsna; ekale—the only one; 7$vara—the supreme controller; advitiya—without a sec-
ond; nanda-atmaja—appeared as the son of Maharaja Nanda; rasika—the most mellow;
Sekhara—summit.


--- Page 8 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 7
TRANSLATION
Krsna, the reservoir of all pleasure, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Him-
self, the supreme controller. No one is greater than or equal to Sri Krsna, yet He
appears as the son of Maharaja Nanda.
PURPORT
In this verse Kaviraja Gosvami gives an accurate description of Lord Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by stating that although no one is equal to or
greater than Him, and He is the reservoir of all spiritual pleasure, He nevertheless
appears as the son of Maharaja Nanda and Yasodamayi.
TEXT 8
রাসাদি-বিলাসী, लकनलना-नां त्र |
আর षड जव দেখ,-_ তাঁর পরিকর ॥ ৮ ॥
rasadi-vilasi, vrajalalana-nagara
ara yata saba dekha,—tanra parikara
SYNONYMS
rasa-adi—the rasa dance; vilasi—the enjoyer; vraja-lalana—the damsels of Vrndavana;
nagara—the leader; ara—others; yata—all; saba—everyone; dekha— must know; tarnra—
His; parikara—associates.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the supreme enjoyer in
the rasa dance. He is the leader of the damsels of Vraja, and all others are simply
His associates.
PURPORT
The word rasadi-vifasi (‘‘the enjoyer of the rasa dance’) is very important. The
rasa dance can be enjoyed only by Sri Krsna because He is the supreme leader and
chief of the damsels of Vrndavana. All other devotees are His associates. Although
no one can compare with Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are
many unscrupulous rascals who imitate the rasa dance of Sri Krsna. They are
Mayavadis, and people should be wary of them. The rasa dance can be performed
only by Sri Krsna and no one else.
TEXT9
সেই কৃষ্ণ অবতীর্ণ প্রীকৃষ্ণচৈতদ্তা |
সেই পরিকরগণ সঙ্গে সব ধন্য ॥ > ॥


--- Page 9 ---
8 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
sei krsna avatirna Sri-krsna-caitanya
sei parikara-gana sange saba dhanya
SYNONYMS
sei krsna—that very Lord Krsna; avatirna—has advented; Sri-krsna-caitanya—in the
form of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sei—those; parikara-gagia—associates; sarige—
with Him; saba—all; dhanya—glorious.
TRANSLATION
The selfsame Lord Krsna advented Himself as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with all
His eternal associates, who are also equally glorious.
TEXT 10
একলে ঈশ্বর-তস্ব চৈতদ্ত-ঈশ্বর |
ভক্তভাবময় তীর শুদ্ধ কলেবর ॥ Se |
ekale i$vara-tattva caitanya-isvara
bhakta-bhavamaya tanra suddha kalevara
SYNONYMS
ekale—only one person; 7Svara—tattva—the supreme controller; caitanya—the
supreme living force; 7$vara—controller; bhakta-bhavamaya—in the ecstasy of a
devotee; tanra—His; Suddha—transcendental ; kalevara—body.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is the supreme controller, the one Personality of
Godhead, has ecstatically become a devotee, yet His body is transcendental and not
materially tinged.
PURPORT
There are different tattvas or truths, including iSa-tattva, jiva-tattva and Sakti-
tattva. ISa-tattva refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead Visnu, who is the
supreme living force. In the Katha Upanisad it is said, nityo nityanarn cetanas
cetananam: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme eternal and the
supreme living force. The living entities are also eternal and are also living forces,
but they are very minute in quantity, whereas the Supreme Lord is the supreme
living force and the supreme eternal. The supreme eternal never accepts a body of a
temporary material nature, whereas the living entities who are part and parcel of the
supreme eternal are prone to do so. Thus according to the Vedic mantras the
Supreme Lord is the supreme master of innumerable living entities. The Mayavadi
philosophers, however, try to equate the minute living entities with the supreme
living entity. Because they recognize no distinctions between them, their philosophy
is called advaita-vada, or monism. Factually, however, there is a distinction. This
verse is especially meant to impart to the Mayavadi philosopher the understanding


--- Page 10 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 9
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme controller. The supreme
controller, the Personality of Godhead, is Krsna Himself, but as a transcendental
pastime He has accepted the form of a devotee, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

As stated in Bhagavad-gita, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna
comes to this planet exactly like a human being, some rascals consider Him to be
one of the ordinary humans. One who thinks in that mistaken way is described as
midha, or foolish. Therefore one should not foolishly consider Caitanya Mahaprabhu
to be an ordinary human being. He has accepted the ecstasy of a devotee, but He is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since Caitanya Mahaprabhu, there have
been many imitation incarnations of Krsna who cannot understand that Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was Krsna Himself and not an ordinary human being. Less intelligent
men create their own Gods by advertising a human being as God. This is their
mistake. Therefore here the words tanra suddha kalevara warn that Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s body is not material but purely spiritual. One should not, therefore,
accept Caitanya Mahaprabhu as an ordinary devotee, although He has assumed the
form of a devotee. Yet one must certainly know that although Caitanya Mahaprabhu
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because He accepted the ecstasy of a devotee
one should not misunderstand His pastimes and place Him in exactly the same
position as Krsna. It is for this reason only that when Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was addressed as Krsna or Visnu He blocked His ears, not wanting to hear Himself
addressed as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is a class of devotees
called Gauranga-nagari who stage plays of Krsna’s pastimes using a vigraha or form
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is a mistake which is technically called rasabhasa.
While Caitanya Mahaprabhu is trying to enjoy as a devotee, one should not disturb
Him by addressing Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 11
কৃষ্ণমাধুর্যের এক অস্ক,ত छाव |
আপনা আস্বাদিতে কৃষ্ণ করে ভক্তভাব ॥ ১১ ॥
krsna-madhuryera eka adbhuta svabhava
apana asvadite krsna kare bhakta-bhava
SYNONYMS

krsna-madhuryera—the supreme pleasure potency of Krsna; eka—is one; adbhuta—
wonderful ;svabhava—nature; apana—Himself; asvadite—to taste; krsna—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kare—does; bhakta-bhava—accept the form of a devotee.

TRANSLATION

The transcendental mellow of conjugal love of Krsna is so wonderful that Krsna

Himself accepts the form of a devotee to relish and taste it fully.
PURPORT

Although Krsna is the reservoir of all pleasure, He has a special intention to taste

Himself by accepting the form of a devotee. It is to be concluded that although


--- Page 11 ---
10 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
Lord Caitanya is present in the form of a devotee, He is Krsna Himself. Therefore
Vaisnavas sing, sri-krsna-caitanya radha-krsna nahe anya: Radha and Krsna com-
bined together are Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Caitanyakhyarih prakatam
adhuna tad-dvayarn caikyam aptam. Sri Svartipa-daimodara Gosvami has said that
Radha and Krsna assumed oneness in the form of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 12
ইথে ভক্তভাব ধরে চৈতন্য গোসাঞ্চি।
“ভক্তস্বরূপ” তর নিত্যানম্ব-ভাই ॥ ১২ ॥
ithe bhakta-bhava dhare caitanya gosani
‘bhakta-svarupa’ tanra nityananda-bhai
SYNONYMS
ithe—for this reason; bhakta-bhava—the ecstasy of a devotee; dhare—accepts;
caitanya—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gosafi—the transcendental teacher; bhakta-
svarupa—exactly like a pure devotee; tarira—His; nityananda—Lord Nityananda;
bhai—brother.
TRANSLATION
For this reason Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the supreme teacher, accepts the form
of a devotee and accepts Lord Nityananda as His elder brother.
TEXT 13
“ভক্ত-অবতার'” তাঁর আচার্য-গোমাঞ্জি |
এই তিন oY সবে ভু করি” গাই ॥ ১৩ ॥
‘bhakta-avatara’ tanra acarya-gosani
ei tina tattva sabe prabhu kari’ gai
SYNONYMS
bhakta-avatara—incarnation as a devotee; tanra—His; acarya-gosafi—the supreme
teacher, Advaita Acarya Prabhu; ei—all these; tina—three; tattva—truths; sabe—all;
prabhu—the predominator; kari’—by such understanding; gai— we sing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Advaita Acarya is Lord Caitanya’s incarnation as a devotee. Therefore these
three tattvas [Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and Advaita Gosani] are
the predominators or masters.
PURPORT
Gosani means gosvami. A person who has full control over the senses and mind is
called a gosvami or gosafi. One who does not have such control is called godasa, or


--- Page 12 ---
20411712, Chapter 7 11
a servant of the senses, and cannot become a spiritual master. A spiritual master
who actually has control over the mind and senses is called gosvami. Although the
gosvami title has become a hereditary designation for unscrupulous men, actually
the title gosani or gosvami began from Sri Rapa Gosvami, who presented himself as
an ordinary grhastha and minister in government service but became gosvami when
he was actually elevated by the instruction of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Therefore
gosvami is not a hereditary title but refers to one’s qualifications. When one 15
highly elevated in spiritual advancement, regardless of wherefrom he comes, he
may be called gosvami. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri
Advaita Gosaii Prabhu are natural gosvamis because They belong to the Vispu-
tattva category. As such, all of Them are prabhus (‘‘predominators” or “‘masters”’),
and They are sometimes called Caitanya Gosaii, Nityananda Gosaii and Advaita
Gosaiii. Unfortunately Their so-called descendants who do not have the qualifica-
tions of gosvamis have accepted this title as a hereditary designation or a professional
degree. That is not in accord with the sastric injunctions.
TEXT 14
এক মহাপ্রভু, আর প্রভু দুইজন |
দুই প্রভু সেবে মহাপ্রভুর চরণ ॥ ১৪ ॥
eka mahaprabhu, ara prabhu duijana
dui prabhu sebe mahaprabhura carana
SYNONYMS
eka mahaprabhu—one Mahaprabhu, or the supreme predominator; ara prabhu
duijana—and the other two (Nityananda and Advaita) are two prabhus (masters);
dui prabhu—the two prabhus (Nityananda and Advaita Gosahi); sebe—serve;
mahaprabhura—of the supreme predominator, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carana—
the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
One of them is Mahaprabhu, and the other two are prabhus. These two prabhus
serve the lotus feet of Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Advaita
Prabhu all belong to the same Visnu category, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is neverthe-
less accepted as the Supreme, and the other two prabhus engage in His transcenden-
tal loving service to teach ordinary living entities that every one of us is subordinate
to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In another place in Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi.5.142) it
is said, ekala T$vara krsna, ara saba bhrtya: the only supreme master is Krsna, and all
others, both Vispu-tattva and jiva-tattva, engage in the service of the Lord. Both the
Vispu-tattva (25 Nityananda Prabhu and Advaita) and the jiva-tattva (Srivasadi-gaura-
bhakta-vrnda) engage in the service of the Lord, but one must distinguish between


--- Page 13 ---
12 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
the Vispu-tattva servitors and the jiva-tattva servitors. The jiva-tattva servitor, the
spiritual master, is actually the servitor God. As explained in previous verses, in the
absolute world there are no such differences, yet one must observe these differences
in order to distinguish the Supreme from His subordinates.
TEXT 15
এই তিন তত্ব, “সর্বারাধ্য' করি মানি।
চতুর্থ (य ভক্ততত্ব,-_“আরাধক' জানি se ॥
ei tina tattva,— ‘sarvaradhya’ kari mani
caturtha ye bhakta-tattva,— Gradhaka’ jani
SYNONYMS
ei tina tattva—all three of these truths; sarva-aradhya—worshipable by all living
entities; kari mani—accepting such; caturtha—fourth; ye—who is; bhakta-tattva—in
the category of devotees; aradhaka—worshiper;jani—| understand.
TRANSLATION
The three predominators [Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and Advaita
Prabhu] are worshipable by all living entities, and the fourth principle [Sri
Gadadhara Prabhu] is to be understood as Their worshiper.
PURPORT
In his Anubhasya, Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, describing the truth
about the Panca-tattva, explains that we can understand that Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is the supreme predominator, and Nityananda Prabhu and Advaita
Prabhu are His subordinates but are also predominators. Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu is the Supreme Lord, and Nityananda Prabhu and Advaita Prabhu are mani-
festations of the Supreme Lord. All of Them are Vispu-tattva, the Supreme, and are
therefore worshipable by the living entities. Although the other two tattvas within
the category of Pafica-tattva—namely, Sakti-tattva and jiva-tattva, represented by
Gadadhara and Srivasa—are worshipers of the Supreme Lord, they are in the same 216
gory because they eternally engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
TEXT 16
ল্রীবাসাদি যত (Ff কোটি ভক্তগণ |
“শুদ্ধভক্ত-তত্বমধ্যে তা-সবার গণন ॥ ১৬ |
Srivasadi yata koti koti bhakta-gana
Suddha-bhakta’-tattva-madhye tan-sabara gapana


--- Page 14 ---
Adi-Ina, Chapter 7 13
SYNONYMS
$rivasa-adi—devotees headed by Srivasa Thakura; yata—all others; koti koti—in-
numerable; bhakta-gana—devotees; Suddha-bhakta—pure devotees; tattva-madhye—
in the truth; tan-sabara—all of them; ganana—accounted.
TRANSLATION
There are innumerable pure devotees of the Lord, headed by Srivasa Thakura,
who are known as unalloyed devotees.
TEXT 17
গদাধর-পঞণ্ডিতাদি egw “শক্তি?-অবতার |
“অস্তরঙ্গ-ভক্ত? করি” গণন যাহার ॥ ১৭ ॥
gadadhara-panditadi prabhura ‘$akti’-avatara
‘antaranga-bhakta’ kari’ gapana yanhara
SYNONYMS
gadadhara—of the name Gadadhara; pandita—of the learned scholar; adi—headed
by; prabhura—of the Lord; Sakti—potency; avatara—incarnation; antarafnga—very
confidential; bhakta—devotee; kari’—accepting; gapana—counting; yanhara—of
whom.
TRANSLATION
The devotees headed by Gadadhara Pandita are to be considered incarnations of
the potency of the Lord. They are internal potential devotees engaged in the service
of the Lord.
PURPORT
In connection with verses sixteen and seventeen, Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura explains in his Anubhasya: “There are specific symptoms by which the
internal devotees and the unalloyed or pure devotees are to be known. All unalloyed
devotees are Sakti-tattvas, or potencies of the Lord. Some of them are situated in
conjugal love and others in filial affection, fraternity and servitude. Certainly all of
them are devotees, but by making a comparative study it is found that the devotees
or potencies who are engaged in conjugal love are better situated than the others.
Thus devotees who are in a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in conjugal love are considered to be the most confidential devotees of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Those who engage in the service of Lord Nityananda Prabhu
and Lord Advaita Prabhu generally have relationships of parental love, fraternity,
servitude and neutrality. When such devotees develop great attachment for Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they too become situated within the intimate circle of devo-


--- Page 15 ---
14 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
tees in conjugal love.” This gradual development of devotional service is described by
Sri Narottama dasa Thakura as follows:
gauranga balite habe pulaka Sarira
hari hari balite nayane ba’be nira
ara kabe nitaicanda karuna karibe
sarnsara-vasana mora Rabe tuccha habe
visaya chadiya kabe suddha habe mana
kabe hama heraba $ri-vrndavana
rupa-raghunatha-pade ha-ibe akuti
kabe hama bujhaba $ri-yugala-piriti
“When will there be eruptions on my body as soon 25 | chant the name of Lord
Caitanya, and when will there be incessant torrents of tears as soon as | chant the
holy names Hare Krsna? When will Lord Nityananda be merciful toward me and free
me from all desires for material enjoyment? When will my mind be completely freed
from all contamination of desires for material pleasure? Only at that time will it be
possible for me to understand Vrndavana. Only if | become attached to the instruc-
tions given by the six Gosvamis headed by Rupa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Go-
svami will it be possible for me to understand the conjugal love of Radha and Krsna.”
By attachment to the devotional service of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu one immedi-
ately comes to the ecstatic position. When he develops his love for Nityananda
Prabhu he is freed from all attachment to the material world, and at that time he
becomes eligible to understand the Lord’s pastimes in Vrndavana. In that condition,
when one develops his love for the six Gosvamis, he can understand the conjugal love
between Radha and Krsna. These are the different stages of a pure devotee’s pro-
motion to conjugal love in the service of Radha and Krsna in an intimate relation-
ship with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
सँ†-मव। লঞা প্রভুর নিত্য বিহার ।
যা-সবা লঞা প্রভুর কীর্তন-গপ্রচার ॥ ১৮ ॥
ষা-সবা৷ FR] করেন প্রেম আস্বাদন ।
যা-সবা नयम দান করে প্রেমধন ॥ ১৯ ॥
yan-saba 477 prabhura nitya vihara
yan-saba lana prabhura Kirtana-pracara
yan-saba lana karena prema asvadana
yan-saba lana dana kare prema-dhana
SYNONYMS
yan-saba—all; lafia—taking company; prabhura—of the Lord; nitya—eternal; vi-
hara—pastime; yan-saba—all those who are; /aniia—taking company; prabhura—of the


--- Page 16 ---
Adi-fila, Chapter 7 15
Lord; kirtana—sankirtana; pracara—movement; yarn-saba—persons with whom; /lana—
in accompaniment; karena—He does; prema—|ove of God; asvadana—taste; yan-saba—
those who are; /afig—in accompaniment; dana kare—gives in charity; prema-dhana—
love of Godhead.
TRANSLATION

The internal devotees or potencies are all eternal associates in the pastimes of the
Lord. Only with them does the Lord advent to propound the sarikirtana movement,
only with them does the Lord taste the mellow of conjugal love, and only with them
does He distribute this love of God to people in general.

PURPORT

Distinguishing between pure devotees and internal or confidential devotees, Sri
Ripa Gosvami, in his book Upadesamrta, traces the following gradual process of
development. Out of many thousands of karmis, one is better when he is situated
in perfect Vedic knowledge. Out of many such learned scholars and philosophers,
one who is actually liberated from material bondage is better, and out of many such
persons who are actually liberated, one who is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is considered to ৮০ the best. Among the manysuch transcendental lovers of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 40/75 are the best, and among the 40/75
Srimati Radhika is the best. Srimati Radhika is very dear to Lord Krsna, and similarly
Her ponds, namely, Syamakunda and Radhakunda, are also very much dear to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in his Anubhasya that among
the five tattvas, two are energies (Sakti-tattva) and the three others are energetic
($aktiman tattva). Unalloyed and internal devotees are both engaged in the favor-
ableculture of Krsna consciousness untinged by philosophical speculation or fruitive
activities. They are all understood to be pure devotees, and those among them who
simply engage in conjugal love are called madhurya-bhaktas or internal devotees. The
potential loving services in parental love, fraternity and servitude are included in
conjugal love of God. In conclusion, therefore, every confidential devotee is a pure
devotee of the Lord.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu enjoys His pastimes with His immediate expansion
Nityananda Prabhu. His pure devotees and His three purusa incarnations, namely,
Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu, always ac-
company the Supreme Lord to propound the sankirtana movement.

TEXTS 20-21
সেই পঞ্চতত্ব মিলি” পৃথিবী আসিয়া |
পূর্ব-প্রেমভাণ্ডারের JF উষাড়িয়। ॥ ২০ ॥
পাঁচে মিলি' লুটে প্রেম, করে আস্বাদন |
যত যত পিয়ে, তৃষ্ণা বাড়ে TW ॥ ২১ ॥


--- Page 17 ---
16 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
sei pafica-tattva mili’ prthivi asiya
purva-premabhandarera mudra ughadiya
parce mili’ lute prema, kare asvadana
yata yata piye, trsna badhe anuksana
SYNONYMS
sei—those; panca-tattva—five truths; mili’—combined together; prthivi—on this
earth; asiya—descending; purva—original; prema-bhandarera—the store of transcen-
dental love; mudra—seal; ughadiya—opening; pance mili’—mixing together all these
five; /ute—plunder; prema—love of Godhead; kare asvadana—taste; yata yata—as
much as; piye—drink; trspa—thirst; badhe—increases; anuksana—again and again.
TRANSLATION
The characteristics of Krsna are understood to be a storehouse of transcendental
love. Although that storehouse of love certainly came with Krsna when He was
present, it was sealed. But when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came with His other
associates of the Parica-tattva, they broke the seal and plundered the storehouse to
taste transcendental love of Krsna. The more they tasted it, the more their thirst for
it grew.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is called maha-vadanyavatara because although He is
Sri Krsna Himself, He is even more favorably disposed to the poor fallen souls than
Lord Sri Krsna. When Lord Sri Krsna Himself was personally present He demanded
that everyone surrender unto Him and promised that He would then give one all
protection, but when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to this earth with His associ-
ates, He simply distributed transcendental love of God without discrimination. Sri
Rupa Gosvami, therefore, could understand that Lord Caitanya was none other
than Sri Krsna Himself, for no one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
distribute confidential love of the Supreme Person.
পুনঃ পুনঃ PATI হয় মহামত্ত।
নাচে, HICH, হাসে, গায়, CTE মদমত্ত ॥ ২২ ॥
punah punah piyaiya haya mahamatta
nace, kande, hase, gaya, yaiche mada-matta
SYNONYMS
punah punah—again and again; piyaiya—causing to drink; haya—becomes; maha-
matta—highly ecstatic; nace—dances; kande—cries; hase—laughs; gaya—chants;
yaiche—as if; mada-matta—one is drunk.


--- Page 18 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 17
TRANSLATION
SH Pafica-tattva themselves danced again and again and thus made it easier to
drink nectarean love of Godhead. They danced, cried, laughed and chanted like
madmen, and in this way they distributed love of Godhead.
PURPORT
People generally cannot understand the actual meaning of chanting and dancing.
Describing the Gosvamis, Sf Srinivasa Acarya stated, krspotkirtana-gana-nartana-
parau: not only did Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates demonstrate this
chanting and dancing, but the six Gosvamis also followed in the next generation.
The present Krsna consciousness movement follows the same principle, and there-
fore simply by chanting and dancing we have received good responses all over the
world. It is to be understood, however, that this chanting and dancing do not belong
to this material world. They are actually transcendental activities, for the more one
engages in chanting and dancing, the more he can taste the nectar of transcendental
love of Godhead.
TEXT 23
পাত্রাপাত্র-বিচার নাহি, নাহি were
যেই যাহা পায়, ऊङ्‌] করে প্রেমদান ॥ ২৩ ॥
patrapatra-vicara nahi, nahi sthanasthana
vei yanha paya, tanha kare prema-dana
SYNONYMS
patra—recipient; apatra—not a recipient; vicara—consideration; nahi—there is
none; nahi—there is none; sthana—favorable place; asthana—unfavorable place; yei—
anyone; yanhd—wherever; paya—gets the opportunity; tanha—there only; kare—
does; prerma-dana—distribution of love of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
In distributing love of Godhead, Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates did not
consider who was a fit candidate and who was not, nor where such distribution
should or should not take place. They made no conditions. Wherever they got the
opportunity the members of the Parica-tattva distributed love of Godhead.
PURPORT
There are some rascals who dare to speak against the mission of Lord Caitanyaby
criticizing the Krsna consciousness movement for accepting Europeans and Ameri-
cans as brahmanpas and offering them sannyasa. But here is an authoritative state-
ment that in distributing love of Godhead one should not consider whether the
recipients are Europeans, Americans, Hindus, Muslims, etc. The Krsna consciousness


--- Page 19 ---
18 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
movement should be spread wherever possible, and one should accept those who thus
become Vaisnavas as being greater than brahmanas, Hindus or Indians. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu desired that His name be spread in each and every town and village on
the surface of the globe. Therefore, when the cult of CaitanyaMahaprabhu is spread
all over the world, should those who embrace it not be accepted as Vaisnavas,
brahmanas and sannyasis? These foolish arguments are sometimes raised by envious
rascals, but Krsna conscious devotees do not care about them. We strictly follow
the principles set down by the Parica-tattva.
TEXT 24
कुणि, খাইয়া, fai, ভাণ্ডার উজাড়ে।
আশ্চর্য ভাণ্ডার, প্রেম শতগুণ বাড়ে ॥ ২৪ ॥
lutiya, khaiya, diya, bhandara ujade
ascarya bhandara, prema sata-guna bade
SYNONYMS
lutiya—plundering; khaiya—eating; diya—distributing; bhandara—store; ujade—
emptied; ascarya— wonderful; bhapdara—store; prema—|love of Godhead; sata-guna—
one hundred times; bade—increases.
TRANSLATION
Although the members of the Paiica-tattva plundered the storehouse of love of
Godhead and ate and distributed its contents, there was no scarcity, for this wonder-
ful storehouse is so complete that as the love is distributed, the supply increases
hundreds of times.
PURPORT
A pseudo-incarnation of Krsna once told his disciple that he had emptied him-
self by giving him all knowledge and was thus spiritually bankrupt. Such bluffers
speak in this way to cheat the public, but actual spiritual consciousness is so perfect
that the more it is distributed, the more it increases. Bankruptcy isa term which
applies in the material world, but the storehouse of love of Godhead in the spiritual
world can never be depleted. Krsna is providing for millions and trillions of living
entities by supplying all their necessities, and even if all the innumerable living
entities wanted to become Krsna conscious, there would be no scarcity of love of
Godhead, nor would there be insufficiency in providing for their maintenance. Our
Krsna consciousness movement was started single-handedly, and no one provided
for our livelihood, but at present we are spending hundreds and thousands of
dollars all over the world, and the movement is increasing more and more. Thus
there is no question of scarcity. Although jealous persons may be envious, if we
stick to our principles and follow in the footsteps of the Pafica-tattva, this move-


--- Page 20 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 19
ment will go on unchecked by imitation svamis, sannyasis, religionists, philosophers
or scientists, for it is transcendental to all material considerations. Therefore those
who propagate the Krsna consciousness movement should not be afraid of such
rascals and fools.

TEXT 25
স্ব ५
উছলিল (थमवा চৌদিকে বেড়ায়।
স্ত্রী, বৃদ্ধ, বালক, যুবা, সবারে ডুবায় ॥ ২৫ ॥
uchalila prema-vanya caudike vedaya
stri, vrddha, balaka, yuva, sabare duvaya
SYNONYMS
uchalila—became agitated; prema-vanya—the inundation of love of Godhead;
caudike—in all directions; vedaya—surrounding; stri—woman; vrddha—old man;
balaka—child; yuva—young man; sabare—all of them; duvaya—merged into.
TRANSLATION
The flood of love of Godhead swelled in all directions, and thus young men, old
men, women and children were all immersed in that inundation.
PURPORT
When the contents of the storehouse of love of Godhead is thus distributed,
there is a powerful inundation which covers the entire land. In Sridhama Mayapura
there is sometimes a great flood after the rainy season. This is an indication that
from the birthplace of Lord Caitanya the inundation of love of Godhead should be
spread all over the world, for this will help everyone, including old men, young
men, women and children. The Krsna consciousness movement of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is so powerful that it can inundate the entire world and interest all
classes of men in the subject of love of Godhead.
TEXT 26
TOG, ए्जनि, পঙ্গু, জড়, অস্ধগণ |
প্রেমবল্যায় ডুবাইল জগতের कन ॥ ২৬ ॥
saj-jana, dur-jana, pangu, jada, andha-gana
prema-vanyaya duvaila jagatera jana
SYNONYMS
sat-jana—gentlemen; dur-jana—rogues; pangu—lame; jada—invalid; andha-gana—
blind men; prema-vanyaya—in the inundation of love of Godhead; duvaila—drowned;
Jagatera—all over the world; jana—people.


--- Page 21 ---
20 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
The Krsna consciousness movement will inundate the entire world and drown
everyone, whether one be a gentleman, a rogue or even lame, invalid or blind.
PURPORT
Here again it may be emphasized that although jealous rascals protest that
Europeans and Americans cannot be given the sacred thread or sannyasa, there is
no need even to consider whether one is a gentleman or a rogue because this is a
spiritual movement which is not concerned with the external body of skin and
bones. Because it is being properly conducted under the guidance of the Parica-
tattva, strictly following the regulative principles, it has nothing to do with external
impediments.
TEXT 27
wile, ডুবিল, জীবের হৈল বীজ नाग ।
তাহা দেখি” পাঁচ জনের পরম উল্লাস ॥ ২৭ ॥
Jagat duvila, jivera haila bija nasa
taha dekhi’ panca janera parama ullasa
SYNONYMS
Jjagat—the whole world; duvila—drowned; jivera—of the living entities; Aaila—it so
became; bijja—the seed; nasa—completely finished; taha—then; dekhi’—by seeing;
panca—five; janera—of the persons; parama— highest; u/lasa—happiness.
TRANSLATION
When the five members of the Parica-tattva saw the entire world drowned in love
of Godhead and the seed of material enjoyment in the living entities completely
destroyed, they all became exceedingly happy.
PURPORT
In this connection, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes in his Anu-
bhasya that since the living entities all belong to the marginal potency of the Lord,
each and every living entity has a natural tendency to become Krsna conscious, al-
though at the same time the seed of material enjoyment is undoubtedly within him.
The seed of material enjoyment, watered by the course of material nature, fructifies
to become a tree of material entanglement which endows the living entity with all
kinds of material enjoyment. To enjoy such material facilities is to be afflicted with
the three material miseries. However, when by nature's law there is a flood, the
seeds within the earth become inactive. Similarly, as the inundation of love of
Godhead spreads all over the world, the seeds of material enjoyment become impo-
tent. Thus the more the Krsna consciousness movement spreads, the more the


--- Page 22 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 21
desire for material enjoyment decreases. The seed of material enjoyment auto-
matically becomes impotent with the increase of the Krsna consciousness move-
ment. Instead of being envious that Krsna consciousness is spreading all over the
world by the grace of Lord Caitanya, those who are jealous should be happy, as
indicated here by the wordsparama ullasa. But because they are kanistha-adhikaris
or prakrta-bhaktas (materialistic devotees who are not advanced in spiritual knowl-
edge), they are envious instead of happy, and they try to find faults in Krsna con-
sciousness. Yet Srimat Prabodhananda Sarasvati writes in his Caitanya-candramrta
that when influenced by Lord Caitanya’s Krsna consciousness movement, material-
ists become averse to talking about their wives and children, supposedly learned
scholars give up their tedious studies of Vedic literature, yogis give up their imprac-
tical practices of mystic yoga, ascetics give up their austere activities of penance and
austerity, and sannyasis give up their study of Sankhya philosophy. Thus they are all
attracted by the bhakti-yoga practices of Lord Caitanya and cannot relish a mellow
taste superior to that of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 28
যত যত প্রেমবৃষ্টি করে পঞ্চজনে।
তত তত বাড়ে জল, ব্যাপে ত্রিভুবনে ॥ ২৮ ॥
yata yata prema-vrsti kare pafica-jane
tata tata badhe jala, vyape tri-bhuvane
SYNONYMS
yata—as many; yata—so many; prema-vrsti—showers of love of Godhead; kare—
causes; pafica-jane—the five members of the Parica-tattva; tata tata—as much as;
badhe—increases; jala— water; vyape—spreads; tri-bhuvane—all over the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The more the five members of the Pafica-tattva cause the rains of love of Godhead
to fall, the more the inundation increases and spreads all over the world.
PURPORT
The Krsna consciousness movement is not stereotyped or stagnant. It will spread
all over the world in spite of all objections by fools and rascals that European and
American mlecchas cannot be accepted as brahmanas or sannyasis. Here it is indi-
cated that this process will spread and inundate the entire world with Krsna con-
sciousness.
TEXTS 29-30
মায়াবাদী, কর্মলিষ্ঠ कुरोरकिंकशेम्‌ |
নিম্দক, পাষগ্তী, যত ग खम ॥ ২৯ ॥


--- Page 23 ---
22 $i-Caitanya-caritimrta
সেই जव মহাদক্ষ ধাঞ। পলাইল।
সেই वचा তা-সবারে | ALS নারিল ॥ ৩০ ॥
mayavadi, karma-nistha kutarkika-gana
nindaka, pasandi, yata paduya adhama
sei saba mahadaksa dhana palaila
sei vanya ta-sabare chunite narila
SYNONYMS
mayavadi—the impersonalist philosophers; karma-nistha—the fruitive workers;
kutarkika-gana—the false logicians; nindaka—the blasphemers; pasandi—nondevotees;
yata—all; paduya—students; adhama—the lowest class; se/ saba—all of them; maha-
daksa—they are very expert; dhafia—running; palaila—went away; sei vanya—that
inundation; ta-sabare—all of them; chunite—touching; narila—could not.
TRANSLATION
The impersonalists, fruitive workers, false logicians, blasphemers, nondevotees
and lowest among the student community are very expert in avoiding the Krsna
consciousness movement, and therefore the inundation of Krsna consciousness
cannot touch them.
PURPORT
Like Mayavadi philosophers in the past such as Prakasananda Sarasvati of
Benares, modern impersonalists are not interested in Lord Caitanya’s Krsna con-
sciousness movement. They do not know the value of this material world; they
consider it false and cannot understand how the Krsna consciousness movement
can utilize it. They are so absorbed in impersonal thought that they take it for
granted that all spiritual variety is material. Because they do not know anything be-
yond their misconception of the brahmajyoti, they cannot understand that Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is spiritual and therefore beyond the concep-
tion of material illusion. Whenever Krsna incarnates personally or as a devotee, these
Mayavadi philosophers accept Him as an ordinary human being. This is condemned
in Bhagavad-gita:
avajananti marn mugha
manusiri tanum asritam
parari bhavam ajananto
mama bhuta-mahesvaram
“Fools deride Me when | descend in the human form. They do not know My tra: -
scendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.” (Bg. 9.11)
There are also other unscrupulous persons who exploit the Lord’s appearance
by posing as incarnations to cheat the innocent public. An incarnation of God
should pass the tests of the statements of the $@stras and also perform uncommon


--- Page 24 ---
01413, Chapter 7 23
activities. One should not accept a rascal as an incarnation of God but should test
his ability to act as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For example, Krsna
taught Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita, and Arjuna also accepted Him as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but for our understanding Arjuna requested the Lord to
manifest His universal form, thus testing whether He was actually the Supreme
Lord. Similarly, one must test a so-called incarnation of Godhead according to the
standard criteria. To avoid being misled by an exhibition of mystic powers, it is
best to examine a so-called incarnation of God in the light of the statements of
sastras. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is described in the $@stras as an incarnation of Krsna;
therefore if one wants to imitate Lord Caitanya and claim to be an incarnation, he
must show evidence from the sastras about his appearance to substantiate his claim.

TEXTS 31-32
তাহা দেখি' মহাপ্রভু করেন एखन |
জগৎ ডুবাইতে আমি Bag. যতন ॥ ৩১ ॥
কেহ কেহ এড়াইল, প্রতিজ্ঞ! হইল ভঙ্গ |
তা-মবা ডুবাইতে পাতিব কিছু রঞ্জ ॥ ৩২ ॥
taha dekhi’ mahaprabhu karena cintana
Jagat duvaite ami karilun yatana
keha keha edaila, pratijia ha-ila bhanga
ta-saba duvaite patiba kichu ranga
SYNONYMS
taha dekhi’—observing this advancement; mahaprabhu—\Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu; karena—does; cintana— thinking; jagat—the whole world; duvaite—to drown;
ami—\; karilun—endeavored; yatana—attempts; keha keha—some of them; edaila—
escaped; pratijia—promise; ha-ila—became; bhanga—broken; ta-saba—all of them;
duvaite—to make them drown; patiba—shall devise; kichu—some; ranga—trick.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that the Mayavadis and others were fleeing, Lord Caitanya thought:
| wanted everyone to be immersed in this inundation of love of Godhead, but some
of them have escaped. Therefore | shall devise a trick to drown them also.
PURPORT
Here is an important point. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to invent a way
to capture the Mayavadis and others who did not take interest in the Krsna con-
sciousness movement. This is the symptom of an acarya. An acarya who comes for
the service of the Lord cannot be expected to conform to a stereotype, for he must
find the ways and means by which Krsna consciousness may be spread. Sometimes


--- Page 25 ---
24 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
jealous persons criticize the Krsna consciousness movement because it engages equally
both boys and girls in distributing love of Godhead. Not knowing that boys and
girls in countries like Europe and America mix very freely, these fools and rascals
criticize the boys and girls in Krsna consciousness for intermingling. But these rascals
should consider that one cannot suddenly change a community’s social customs.
However, since both the boys and girls are being trained to become preachers, those
girls are not ordinary girls but are as good as their brothers who are preaching Krsna
consciousness. Therefore, to engage both boys and girls in fully transcendental
activities is a policy intended to spread the Krsna consciousness movement. These
jealous fools who criticize the intermingling of boys and girls will simply have to be
satisfied with their own foolishness because they cannot think of how to spread
Krsna consciousness by adopting ways and means which are favorable for this pur-
pose. Their stereotyped methods will never help spread Krsna consciousness. There-
fore, what we are doing is perfect by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for
it is He who proposed to invent a way to capture those who strayed from Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 33
এত বলি” মনে কিছু করিয়৷ বিচার ।
সন্ন্যাস-আশ্রম প্রভু কৈল৷ অঙ্গীকার ॥ ৩৩ |
eta bali’ mane kichu kariya vicara
sannyasa-asrama prabhu kaila angikara
SYNONYMS

eta bali’—saying this; mane—within the mind; kichu—something; kariya—doing;
vicara—consideration; sannyasa-asrama—the renounced order of life; prabhu—the
Lord; kaila—-did; angikara—accept.

TRANSLATION
Thus the Lord accepted the sannyasa order of life after full consideration.
PURPORT

There was no need for Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to accept sannyasa, for He
is God Himself and therefore has nothing to do with the material bodily concept of
life. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not identify Himself with any of the eight varnas
and asramas, namely, brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, Sudra, brahmacari, grhastha,
vanaprastha and sannyasa. He identified Himself as the Supreme Spirit. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, or for that matter any pure devotee, never identifies with these social
and spiritual divisions of life, for a devotee is always transcendental to these different
gradations of society. Nevertheless, Lord Caitanya decided to accept sannyasa on
the grounds that when He became a sannyasi everyone would show Him respect and


--- Page 26 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 25
in that way be favored. Although there was actually no need for Him to accept
sannyasa, He did so for the benefit of those who might think Him an ordinary hu-
man being. The main purpose of His accepting sannyasa was to deliver the Mayavadi
sannyasis. This will be evident later in this chapter.

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura has explained the term “Mayavadi’’ as
follows: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental to the material
conception of life. A Mayavadi is one who considers the body of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead Krsna to be made of maya and who also considers the abode of
the Lord and the process of approaching Him, devotional service, to be maya. The
Mayavadi considers all the paraphernalia of devotional service to be maya.” Maya
refers to material existence, which is characterized by the reactions of fruitive ac-
tivities. Mayavadis consider devotional service to be among such fruitive activities.
According to them, when bhagavatas or devotees are purified by philosophical specu-
lation, they will come to the real point of liberation. Those who speculate in this
way regarding devotional service are called kutarkikas (false logicians), and those
who consider devotional service to be fruitive activity are also called karma-nisthas.
Those who criticize devotional service are called nindakas (blasphemers). Similarly,
nondevotees who consider devotional activities to be material are also called
pasandis, and scholars with a similar viewpoint are called adhama paduyas. The
kutdrkikas, nindakas, pasandis and adhama paguyas all avoided the benefit of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s movement of developing love of Godhead. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu felt compassion for them, and it is for this reason that He decided to
accept the sannyasa order, for by seeing Him as a sannyasi they would offer Him
respects. The sannyasa order is still respected in India. Indeed, the very dress of a
sannyasT still commands respect from the Indian public. Therefore Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa to facilitate preaching His devotional cult, although
otherwise He had no need to accept the fourth order of spiritual life.

TEXT 34
চবিবশ বঙসর ছিল। গৃহস্থ-আশ্রমে |
পঞ্চবিংশতি বর্ষে কৈল যতিধর্মে ॥ ৩৪ ॥
cabbisa vatsara chila grhastha-asrame
parica-vimsati varse kaila yati-dharme
SYNONYMS

cabbisa—twenty-four; vatsara—years; chila—He remained; grhastha—householder
life; asrame—the order of; pafica—five; virmsati—twenty; varse—in the year; kaila—
did; yati-dharme—accepted the sannyasa order.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained in householder life for twenty-four years, and

on the verge of His twenty-fifth year He accepted the sannyasa order.


--- Page 27 ---
26 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
PURPORT
There are four orders of spiritual life, namely, brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha
and sannyasa, and in each of these asramas there are four divisions. The divisions of
the brahmacaryasrama are savitrya, prajapatya, brahma and brhat, and the divisions
of the grhasthasrama are varta (professionals), saficaya (accumulators), $2/7/7 (those
who do not ask anything from anyone) and Silofichana (those who collect grains from
the paddy fields). Similarly, the divisions of the vanaprasthasrama are vaikhanasa,
balikhilya, audumbara and phenapa, and the divisions of sannyasa are kuticaka,
bahiadaka, harnsa ‘and niskriya. There are two kinds of sannyasis, who are called
dhiras and narottamas, as stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.13.26-27). At the end of
the month of January in the year 1432 sakabda, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted
the sannyasa order from Kesava Bharati, who belonged to the Sarikara-sampradaya.
TEXT 35
সন্ন্যাস করিয়া প্রভু কৈল৷ सां कर्वम्‌ |
যতেক পালাঞাছিল তাক্ষিকাদিগণ ॥ ৩৫ ॥
sannyasa kariya prabhu kaila akarsana
yateka palanachila tarkikadigana
SYNONYMS
sannyasa—the sannyasa order; kariya—accepting; prabhu—the Lord; kaila—did;
akarsana—attract; yateka—all; palanachila—fled; tarkika-adi-gana—all persons, be-
ginning with the logicians.
TRANSLATION
After accepting the sannyasa order, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu attracted the atten-
tion of all those who had evaded Him, beginning with the logicians.
TEXT 36
পড়ুয়া सो, কর্মী, নিন্দকাদি यङ |
তারা WH প্রভু-পায় হয় অবনত ॥ ৩৬ ॥
paduya, pasandi, karmi, nindakadi yata
tara asi’ prabhu-paya haya avanata
SYNONYMS
paguya—students; pasandi— material adjusters; karmi—fruitive actors; nindaka-adi—
critics; yata—all; tara—they; asi’—coming; prabhu—the Lord’s; paya—lotus feet;
haya—became; avanata—surrendered.


--- Page 28 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 27
TRANSLATION
Thus the students, infidels, fruitive workers and critics all came to surrender unto
the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 37
অপরাধ ক্ষমাইল, विन প্রেমজলে।
কেবা এড়াইবে প্রভুর প্রেম-মহাজালে ॥ ৩৭ ॥
aparadha ksamaila, dubila prema-jale
keba edaibe prabhura prema-mahajale
SYNONYMS
aparadha—offense; ksamaila—excused; dubila—merged into; prema-jale—in the
ocean of love of Godhead; keba—who else; edaibe—will go away; prabhura—the
Lord's; prema—|oving; maha-jale—network.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya excused them all, and they merged into the ocean of devo-
tional service, for no one can escape the unique loving network of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was an ideal acarya. An acarya is an ideal teacher who
knows the purpose of the revealed scriptures, behaves exactly according to their
injunctions and teaches his students to adopt these principles also. As an ideal
acarya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu devised ways to capture all kinds of atheists and
materialists. Every @carya has a specific means of propagating his spiritual move-
ment with the aim of bringing men to Krsna consciousness. Therefore, the method
of one acarya may be different from that of another, but the ultimate goal is never
neglected. Srila Ripa Gosvami recommends:
yena tena prakarepa manah Rrspe nivesayet
sarve vidhi-nisedha syur etayor eva kifikarah
An acarya should devise a means by which people may somehow or other come to
Krsna consciousness. First they should become Krsna conscious, and all the pre-
scribed rules and regulations may later gradually be introduced. In our Krsna con-
sciousness movement we follow this policy of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. For
example, since boys and girls in the Western countries freely intermingle, special
concessions regarding their customs and habits are necessary to bring them to Krsna
consciousness. The acarya must devise a means to bring them to devotional service.
Therefore, although | am a sannyasi | sometimes take part in getting boys and girls


--- Page 29 ---
28 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
married, although in the history of sannyasa no sannyasr has personally taken part
in marrying his disciples.
TEXT 38
সবা নিস্ত।রিতে প্রভু কৃপা-অবতার |
जव নিস্তারিতে করে চাতুরী অপার ॥ ৩৮ ॥
saba nistarite prabhu krpa-avatara
saba nistarite kare caturf apara
SYNONYMS
saba—all; nistarite—to deliver; prabhu—the Lord; krpa—mercy; avatara—incarna-
tion; saba—all; nistarite—to deliver; kare—did; caturi—devices; apara—unlimited.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared to deliver all the fallen souls. Therefore He
devised many methods to liberate them from the clutches of maya.
PURPORT
It is the concern of the acarya to show mercy to the fallen souls. In this connec-
tion, desa-kala-patra (the place, the time and the object) should be taken into con-
sideration. Since the European and American boys and girls in our Krsna conscious-
ness movement preach together, less intelligent men criticize that they are mingling
without restriction. In Europe and America boys and girls mingle unrestrictedly and
have equal rights; therefore it is not possible to completely separate the men from
the women. However, we are thoroughly instructing both men and women how to
preach, and actually they are preaching wonderfully. Of course, we very strictly
prohibit illicit sex. Boys and girls who are not married are not allowed to sleep
together or live together, and there are separate arrangements for boys and girls in
every temple. Grhasthas live outside the temple, for in the temple we do not allow
even husband and wife to live together. The results of this are wonderful. Both men
and women are preaching the gospel of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Krsna
with redoubled strength. In this verse the words saba nistarite kare caturi apara
indicate that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to deliver one and all. Therefore it is
a principle that a preacher must strictly follow the rules and regulations laid down
in the $astras yet at the same time devise a means by which the preaching work to
reclaim the fallen may go on with full force.
TEXT 39
তবে নিজ ভক্ত কৈল যত ম্লেচ্ছ আদি |
সবে এড়াইল মাত্র কাশীর মায়াবাদী ॥ ৩৯ ॥


--- Page 30 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 29
tabe nija bhakta kaila yata mleccha adi
sabe edaila matra kasira mayavadi
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter; nija—own; bhakta—devotee; kaila—converted; yata—all; mleccha—
one who does not follow the Vedic principles; adi—heading the list; sabe—all those;
edaila—escaped; matra—only; kasira—of Varanasi; mayavadi—impersonalists.
TRANSLATION

All were converted into devotees of Lord Caitanya, even the mlecchas and

yavanas. Only the impersonalist followers of Sarnkaracarya evaded Him.
PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that although Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu con-
verted Mohammedans and other m/ecchas into devotees, the impersonalist followers
of Sarikaracarya could not be converted. After accepting the renounced order of
life, Caitanya Mahaprabhu converted many karma-nisthas who were addicted to
fruitive activities, many great logicians like Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, nindakas
(blasphemers) like Prakasananda Sarasvati, pasandis (nondevotees) like Jagai and
Madhai, and adhama paduyas (degraded students) like Mukunda and his friends. All
of them gradually became devotees of the Lord, even the Pathans or Muslims, but
the worst offenders, the impersonalists, were extremely difficult to convert, for they
very tactfully escaped the devices of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

In describing the Kasira Mayavadis, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura has
explained that persons who are bewildered by empiric knowledge or direct sensual
perception, and who thus consider that even this limited material world can be
gauged by their material estimations, conclude that anything that one can discern
by direct sense perception is but maya or illusion. They maintain that although the
Absolute Truth is beyond the range of sense perception, it includes no spiritual
variety or enjoyment. According to the Kasira Mayavadis, the spiritual world is sim-
ply void. They do not believe in the Personality of the Absolute Truth nor in His
varieties of activities in the spiritual world. Although they have their own arguments
which are not very strong, they have no conception of the variegated activities of
the Absolute Truth. These impersonalists, who are followers of Sarikaracarya, are
generally known as Kasira Mayavadis.

Near Varanasi there is another group of impersonalists, who are known as
Saranatha Mayavadis. Outside the city of Varanasi is a place known as Saranatha
where there is a big Buddhist stupa. Many followers of Buddhist philosophy live
there, and they are known as Saranatha Mayavadis. The impersonalists of Saranatha
differ from those of Varanasi, for the Varanasi impersonalists propagate the idea
that the impersonal Brahman is truth whereas material varieties are false, but the
Saranatha impersonalists do not even believe that the Absolute Truth or Brahman
can be understood as the opposite of maya or illusion. According to their vision,
materialism is the only manifestation of the Absolute Truth.


--- Page 31 ---
30 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta.

Factually both the Kasira and Saranatha Mayavadrs, as well as any other philoso-
phers who have no knowledge of the spirit soul, are advocates of utter materialism.
None of them have clear knowledge regarding the Absolute or the spiritual world.
Philosophers like the Saranatha Mayavadis who do not believe in the spiritual exis-
tence of the Absolute Truth but consider material varieties to be everything do not
believe that there are two kinds of nature, inferior (material) and superior (spiritual),
as described in Bhagavad-gita. Actually, neither the Varanasi nor Saranatha Mayavadis
accept the principles of Bhagavad-gita, due to a poor fund of knowledge.’

Since these impersonalists who do not have perfect spiritual knowledge cannot
understand the principles of bhakti-yoga, they must be classified among the non-
devotees who are against the Krsna consciousness movement. We sometimes feel in-
convenienced by the hindrances offered by these impersonalists, but we do not care
about their so-called philosophy, for we are propagating our own philosophy as
presented in Bhagavad-gita As It Is and getting successful results. Theorizing as if
devotional service were subject to their mental speculation, both kinds of Mayavadi
impersonalists conclude that the subject matter of bhakti-yoga is a creation of maya
and that Krsna, devotional service and the devotee are also maya. Therefore, as
stated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, mayavadr krspe aparadhi: “All the Mayavadis
are offenders to Lord Krsna.” (Cc. Madhya 17.129) It is not possible for them to
understand the Krsna consciousness movement; therefore we do not value their
philosophical conclusions. However expert such quarrelsome impersonalists are in
putting forward their so-called logic, we defeat them in every respect and go forward
with our Krsna consciousness movement. Their imaginative mental speculation can-
not deter the progress of the Krsna consciousness movement, which is completely
spiritual and is never under the control of such Mayavadis.

TEXT 40
বৃন্দাবন যাইতে প্রভু রহিল৷ কাশীতে।
মায়াবাদিগণ তঁরে লাগিল নিন্দিতে ॥ ৪০ ॥
vrndavana yaite prabhu rahila kasite
mayavadi-gana tanre lagila nindite
SYNONYMS

vrndavana—the holy place called Vindavana; yaite—while going there; prabhu—
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rahila—remained; kasite—at Varanasi; mayavadi-
gana—the Mayavadi philosophers; tanre—unto Him; /agila—began; nindite—to speak
against Him.

TRANSLATION

While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was passing through Varanasi on His way to
Vrndavana, the Mayavadi sannyasi philosophers blasphemed against Him in many
ways.


--- Page 32 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 31
PURPORT

While preaching Krsna consciousness with full vigor, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
faced many Mayavadi philosophers. Similarly, we are also facing opposing svamis,
yogis, impersonalists, scientists, philosophers and other mental speculators, and by
the grace of Lord Krsna we successfully defeat all of them without difficulty.

TEXT 41
সন্ন্যাসী হইয়| করে গায়ন, AGA |
नां করে বেদাস্ত-পাঠ, করে সংকীর্তন ॥ ৪১ ॥
sannyasi ha-iya kare gayana, nacana
na Rare vedanta-patha, kare sankirtana
SYNONYMS

sannyasi—a person in the renounced order of life; ha-iya—accepting such a posi-
tion; kare—does; gayana—singing; nacana—dancing; na kare—does not practice;
vedanta-patha—study of the Vedanta philosophy; kare sankirtana—but simply en-
gages in sankirtana.

TRANSLATION

“Although a sannyasi, He does not take interest in the study of Vedanta but in-

stead always engages in chanting and dancing in sarikirtana,
PURPORT

Fortunately or unfortunately, we also meet such Mayavadis who criticize our
method of chanting and accuse us of not being interested in study. They do not
know that we have translated volumes and volumes of books into English and that
the students in our temples regularly study them in the morning, afternoon and
evening. We are writing and printing books, and our students study them and dis-
tribute them all over the world. No Mayavadi school can present as many books as
we have; nevertheless, they accuse us of not being fond of study. Such accusations
are completely false. But although we study, we do not study the nonsense of the
Mayavadis.

Mayavadi sannyasis neither chant nor dance. Their technical objection is that this
method of chanting and 03170117815 called tauryatrika, which indicates that a sannyasi
should completely avoid such activities and engage his time in the study of Vedanta.
Actually, such. men do not understand what is meant by Vedanta. In Bhagavad-gita
it is said: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham. ‘‘By all
the Vedas | am to be known; indeed | am the compiler of Vedanta, and | am the
knower of the Vedas.” (Bg. 15.15) Lord Krsna is the actual compiler of Vedanta,
and whatever He speaks is Vedanta philosophy. Although they are lacking the
knowledge of Vedanta presented by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the


--- Page 33 ---
32 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta

transcendental form of Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Mayavadis are very proud of their
study. Foreseeing the bad effects of their presenting Vedanta philosophy in a per-
verted way, Srila Vyasadeva compiled Srimad-Bhagavatam as a commentary on
Vedanta-siatra. Srimad-Bhagavatam 15 bhasyarn brahma-stitrapam; in other words, all
the Vedanta philosophy in the codes of the Brahma-sitras is thoroughly described in
the pages of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Thus the factual propounder of Vedanta philoso-
phy is a Krsna conscious person who always engages in reading and understanding
Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam and teaching the purport of these books to
the entire world. The Mayavadts are very proud of having monopolized the Vedanta
philosophy, but devotees have their own commentaries on Vedanta such as S¥imad-
Bhagavatam and others written by the acaryas. The commentary of the Gaudiya
Vaisnavas is the Govinda-bhasya.

The Mayavadis’ accusation that devotees do not study Vedanta is false. They do
not know that chanting, dancing and preaching the principles of S$rimad-Bhagavatam,
called Bhagavata-dharma, are the same as studying Vedanta. Since they think that
reading Vedanta philosophy is the only function of a sannyasi and they did not find
Caitanya Mahaprabhu engaged in such direct study, they criticized the Lord. Sripada
Sarikaracarya has given special stress to the study of Vedanta philosophy. Vedanta-
vakyesu sada ramantah kaupinavantah khalu bhagyavantah. ‘‘ A sannyasi, accepting
the renounced order very strictly and wearing nothing more than a 10106101, should
always enjoy the philosophical statements in the Vedanta-sutra. Such a person in
the renounced order is to be considered very fortunate.” The Mayavadis in Varanasi
blasphemed Lord Caitanya because His behavior did not follow these principles.
Lord Caitanya, however, bestowed His mercy upon these Mayavadi sannyasis and
delivered them by means of His Vedanta discourses with Prakasananda Sarasvati
and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.

TEXT 42
Tf FY নিজ-ধর্ম নাহি জানে ।
ভাবুক হইয়| ফেরে ভাবুকের সনে ॥ ৪২ ॥
murkha sannyasi nija-dharma nahi jane
bhavuka ha-iya phere bhavukera sane
SYNONYMS

murkha—illiterate; sannyasi—one in the renounced order of life; nija-dharma—
own duty; nahi—does not; jane—know; bhavuka—in ecstasy; ha-iya—becoming;
phere—wanders; bhavukera— with another ecstatic person; sane—with.

TRANSLATION

“This Caitanya Mahaprabhu is an illiterate sannyasi and therefore does not know
His real function. Guided only by His sentiments, He wanders about in the company
of other sentimentalists.”


--- Page 34 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 33
PURPORT
Foolish Mayavadis, not knowing that the Krsna consciousness movement is based
on a solid philosophy of transcendental science, superficially conclude that those
who dance and chant do not have philosophical knowledge. Those who are Krsna
conscious actually have full knowledge of the essence of Vedanta philosophy, for
they study the real commentary on the Vedanta philosophy, Srimad-Bhagavatam,
and follow the actual words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as found in
Bhagavad-gita As It Is. After understanding the Bhagavata philosophy or Bhagavata-
dharma, they become fully spiritually conscious or Krsna conscious, and therefore
their chanting and dancing is not material but is on the spiritual platform. Although
everyone admires the ecstatic chanting and dancing of the devotees, who are there-
fore popularly known as the “Hare Krsna people,” Mayavadis cannot appreciate
these activities because of their poor fund of knowledge.
TEXT 43
এ जव শুনিয়া প্রভু হাসে মনে बटन |
উপেক্ষা করিয়৷ কারে न কৈল সম্ভাষণে ॥ ৪৩ ॥
€ 5060 Suniya prabhu hase mane mane
upeksa kariya karo na kaila sambhasane
SYNONYMS
€ saba-all these; suniya—after hearing; prabhu—the Lord; hase—smiled; mane
mane—within His mind; upeksa—rejection; kariya—doing so; karo—with anyone;
na—did not; kaila—make; sambhasane—conversation.
TRANSLATION
Hearing all this blasphemy, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu merely smiled to Himself,
rejected all these accusations and did not talk with the Mayavadis.
PURPORT
As Krsna conscious devotees, we do not like to converse with Mayavadi philoso-
phers simply to waste valuable time, but whenever there is an opportunity we
impress our philosophy upon them with great vigor and success.
TEXT 44
উপেক্ষা করিয়| কৈল nga भमन |
agai দেখিয়া পুনঃ কৈল আগমন ॥ 88 ॥
upeksa kariya kaila mathura gamana
mathura dekhiya punah kaila agamana


--- Page 35 ---
34 $i-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
upeksa—neglecting them; kariya—doing so; kaila—did; mathura—the town named
Mathura; gamana—traveling; mathura—Mathura; dekhiya—after seeing it; punah—
again; Raila agamana—came back.
TRANSLATION
Thus neglecting the blasphemy of the Varanasi Mayavadis, Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu proceeded to Mathura, and after visiting Mathura He returned to
meet the situation.
PURPORT
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not talk with the Mayavadi philosophers when
He first visited Varanasi, but He returned there from Mathura to convince them of
the real purpose of Vedanta.
TEXT 45
FACS লেখক শুদ্র-শ্রীচন্দ্রশেথর।
তার ঘরে রহিল প্রভু স্বতন্ত্র ঈশ্বর ॥ 80 ॥
kasite lekhaka $000-5/100/700$6/২/30/0
tanra ghare rahila prabhu svatantra iSvara
SYNONYMS
kasite—in Varanasi; lekhaka— writer; sudra—born of a Sudra family; $ri~candra-
Sekhara—of the name Candrasekhara; tarira ghare—in his house; rahila—remained;
prabhu—the Lord; svatantra—independent; 1$৮/৫-- 006 supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
This time Lord Caitanya stayed at the house of Candrasekhara, although he was
regarded as a sudra or kayastha, for the Lord, as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is completely independent.
PURPORT
Lord Caitanya stayed at the house of Candrasekhara, a clerk, although a sannyasi’
is not supposed to reside in a Sudra’s house. Five hundred years ago, especially in
Bengal, it was the system that persons who were born in the families of brahmanas
were accepted as brahmanas, and all those who took birth in other families—even
the higher castes, namely, the ksatriyas and vai§yas—were considered Sidra
non-brahmanas. Therefore although Sri Candrasekhara was a clerk from a kayastha
family in upper India, he was considered a suudra. Similarly, vaiyas, especially those
of the suvarpa-vapik community, were accepted as $00/05 in Bengal, and even the
vaidyas, who were generally physicians, were also considered sudras. Lord Caitanya


--- Page 36 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 35
Mahaprabhu, however, did not accept this artificial principle, which was introduced
in society by self-interested men, and later the kayasthas, vaidyas and vaniks all
began to accept the sacred thread, despite objections from the so-called brahmanas.

Before the time of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the suvarna-vanik class was condemned
by Ballal Sen, who was then the King of Bengal, due to a personal grudge. In Bengal
the suvarna-vanik class are always very rich, for they are bankers and dealers in
gold and silver. Therefore, Ballal Sen used to borrow money from a suvarna-vanik
banker. Ballal Sen’s bankruptcy later obliged the suvarna-vanik banker to stop ad-
vancing money to him, and thus he became angry and condemned the entire
suvarna-vanik society as belonging to the si’dra community. Ballal Sen tried to in-
duce the brahmanas not to accept the suvarna-vaniks as followers of the instructions
of the Vedas under the brahminical directions, but although some brahmanas ap-
proved of Ballal Sen’s actions, others did not. Thus the brahmanas also became
divided amongst themselves, and those who supported the suvarna-vanik class were
rejected from the brahmanpa community. At the present day the same biases are
still being followed.

There are many Vaisnava families in Bengal whose members, although not actually
born brahmanas, act as acaryas by initiating disciples and offering the sacred thread
as enjoined in the Vaisnava tantras. For example, in the families of Thakura
Raghunanda, Acarya Thakura Krgnadasa, Navani Hoda and Rasikananda-deva (a
disciple of Syamananda Prabhu), the sacred thread ceremony is performed, as it is
for the caste Gosvamis, and this system has continued for the past three to four
hundred years. Accepting disciples born in brahmana families, they are bona fide
spiritual masters who have the facility to worship the Salagrama-sila which is wor-
shiped with the Deity. As of this writing, Salagrama-sila worship has not yet been
introduced in our Krsna consciousness movement, but soon it will be introduced
in all our temples as an essential function of arcana-marga (Deity worship).

TEXT 46
ङगन-मिटययैत्र ঘরে ভিক্ষা-নির্বাহুণ।
FINRA সঙ্গে নাহি মানে নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ৪৬ ॥
tapana-misrera ghare bhiksa-nirvahana
sannyasira sange nahi mane nimantrana
SYNONYMS

tapana-misrera—of Tapana Misra; ghare—in the house; bhiksa—accepting food;
nirvahana—regularly executed; sannyasira—with other Mayavadi sannyasis; sange—
in company with them; nahi—never; mane—accepted; nimantrapa—invitation.

TRANSLATION

As a matter of principle, Lord Caitanya regularly accepted His food at the house
of Tapana Misra. He never mixed with other sannyasis, nor did He accept invitations
from them.


--- Page 37 ---
36 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
PURPORT
This exemplary behavior of Lord Caitanya definitely proves that a Vaisnava
sannyasi cannot accept invitations from Mayavadi sannyasis nor intimately mix
with them.
TEXT 47
সনাতন গোসাঞ্চি আসি” তাহাই মিলিলা ৷
3,
তার শিক্ষা লাগি” প্রভু দু-মাস afew ৪৭ ॥
sanatana gosani asi’ tarihai milila
tanra $iksa lagi’ prabhu du-masa rahila
SYNONYMS
sanatana—of the name Sanatana; gosafii—a great devotee; asi’—coming there;
tanhai—there at Varanasi; milila—visited Him; tanra—His; siksa—instruction; lagi’'—
for the matter of; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; du-masa—two months;
rahila—remained there.
TRANSLATION
When Sanatana Gosvami came from Bengal, he met Lord Caitanya at the house
of Tapana Misra, where Lord Caitanya remained continuously for two months to
teach him devotional service.
PURPORT
Lord Caitanya taught Sanatana Gosvami in the line of disciplic succession.
Sanatana Gosvami was a very learned scholar in Sanskrit and other languages, but
until instructed by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu he did not write anything about
Vaispava behavior. His very famous book Hari-bhakti-vilasa, which gives directions
for Vaisnava candidates, was written completely in compliance with the instructions
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this Hari-bhakti-vilasa Sri Sanatana Gosvami gives
definite instructions that by proper initiation by a bona fide spiritual master one
can immediately become a brahmana. In this connection he says:
yatha kancanatarn yati karnsyarn rasa-vidhanatah
tatha diksa-vidhanena dvijatvarn jayate nrnam
"१5 bell metal is turned to gold when mixed with mercury in an alchemical process,
so one who is properly trained and initiated by a bona fide spiritual master immedi-
ately becomes a brahmana.” Sometimes those born in brahmana families protest
this, but they have no strong arguments against this principle. By the grace of Krsna
and His devotee, one’s life can change. This is confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam
by the words jahati bandham and suddhanti. Jahati bandham indicates that a living
entity is conditioned by a particular type of body. The body is certainly an impedi-
ment, but one who associates with a pure devotee and follows his instructions can
avoid this impediment and become a regular brahmana by initiation under his strict


--- Page 38 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 37
guidance. Srila Jiva Gosvami states how a non-brahmana can be turned into a
brahmana by the association of a pure devotee. Prabha visnave namah: Lord Visnu
is so powerful that He can do anything He likes. Therefore it is not difficult for
Visnu to change the body of a devotee who is under the guidance of a pure devotee
of the Lord.
TEXT 48
তারে শিখাইলা সব বৈষ্ণবের शर्व |
ভাগবত-আছদ্বি শাস্ত্রের যত গুড় মর্ম ॥ ৪৮ ॥
tanre Sikhaila 5000 vaispavera dharma
bhagavata-adi $astrera yata 00000 marma
SYNONYMS

tafre—unto him (Sanatana Gosvami); Sikhaila—the Lord taught him; saba—all;
vaispavera—of the devotees; dharma—regular activities; bhagavata—Srimad-
Bhagavatam; adi—beginning with; Sastrera— of the revealed scriptures; yata— all;
gudha— confidential; marma— purpose.

TRANSLATION

On the basis of scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam which reveal these confidential
directions, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed Sanatana Gosvami regarding all the
regular activities of a devotee.

PURPORT

In the parampara system, the instructions taken from the bona fide spiritual
master must also be based on revealed Vedic scriptures. One who is in the line of
disciplic succession cannot manufacture his own way of behavior. There are many
so-called followers of the Vaisnava cult in the line of Caitanya Mahaprabhu who do
not scrupulously follow the conclusions of the sastras, and therefore they are con-
sidered to be apa-sampradaya, which means ‘‘outside of the sampradaya.”’ Some of
these groups are known 25 awla, baula, karttabhaja, neda, daravesa, sani sahajiya,
sakhibheki, smarta, jata-gosani, ativadi, cudadhari and gauranga-nagari. In order to
follow strictly the disciplic succession of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, one should
not associate with these apa-sampradaya communities.

One who is not taught by a bona fide spiritual master cannot understand the
Vedic literature. To emphasize this point, Lord Krsna, while instructing Arjuna,
clearly said that it was because Arjuna was His devotee and confidential friend that
he could understand the mystery of Bhagavad-gita. It is to be concluded, therefore,
that one who wants to understand the mystery of revealed scriptures must approach
a bona fide spiritual master, hear from him very submissively and render service to


--- Page 39 ---
38 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
him. Then the import of the scriptures will be revealed. It is stated in the Vedas:
yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy artha prakasante mahatmanah
“The real import of the scriptures is revealed to one who has unflinching faith in
both the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the spiritual master.” Srila
Narottama dasa Thakura advises, sadhu-Sastra-guru-vakya, hrdaye kariya aikya. The
meaning of this instruction is that one must consider the instructions of the sadhu,
the revealed scriptures and the spiritual master in order to understand the real
purpose of spiritual life. Neither a sadhu (saintly person or Vaispava) nor a bona
fide spiritual master says anything that is beyond the scope of the sanction of the
revealed scriptures. Thus the statements of the revealed scriptures correspond to
those of the bona fide spiritual master and saintly persons. One must therefore act
with reference to these three important sources of understanding.
TEXT 49
ইতিমধ্যে চন্দ্রশেখর, মিশ্র-তপন।
দুঃখী হঞা প্রভু-পায় কৈল নিবেদন ॥ ৪৯ ॥
itimadhye candrasekhara, misra-tapana
duhkht hana prabhu-paya kaila nivedana
SYNONYMS
iti-madhye—in the meantime; candrasekhara—the clerk of the name Candra-
Sekhara; misra-tapana—as well as Tapana Misra; duhkhi hana—becoming very
unhappy; prabhu-paya—at the lotus feet of the Lord; kaila—made; nivedana—an
appeal.
TRANSLATION
While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was instructing Sanatana Gosvami, both Candra-
sekhara and Tapana Misra became very unhappy. Therefore they submitted an
appeal unto the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 50
কতেক শুনিব প্রভু তোমার निनन ।
না পারি সহিতে, এবে ছাড়িব জীবন ॥ ৫০ ॥
kateka Suniba prabhu tomara nindana
na pari sahite, ebe chadiba jivana


--- Page 40 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 39
SYNONYMS
kateka—how much; suniba—shall we hear; prabhu—O Lord; tomara—Your;
nindana—blasphemy; na pari—we are not able; sahite—to tolerate; ebe—now;
chadiba—give up; jivana—life.
TRANSLATION
“How long can we tolerate the blasphemy of Your critics against Your conduct?
We should give up our lives rather than hear such blasphemy.
PURPORT
One of the most important instructions by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regarding
regular Vaisnava behavior is that a Vaisnava should be tolerant like a tree and sub-
missive like grass.
trnad api sunicena
taror api sahispuna
amanina manadena
Kirtaniyah sada harih
“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking
oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree,
devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be ready to offer all respect to others.
In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.”
Nevertheless, the author of these instructions, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, did not
tolerate the misbehavior of Jagai and Madhai. When they harmed Lord Nityananda
Prabhu, He immediately became angry and wanted to kill them, and it was only by
the mercy of Lord Nityananda Prabhu that they were saved. One should be very
meek and humble in his personal transactions, and if insulted a Vaisnava should be
tolerant and not angry. But if there is blasphemy against one’s guru or another
Vaisnava, one should be as angry as fire. This was exhibited by Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. One should not tolerate blasphemy against a Vaisnava but should
immediately take one of three actions. If someone blasphemes a Vaisnava, one
should stop him with arguments and higher reason. If one is not expert enough to
do this he should give up his life on the spot, and if he cannot do this, he must go
away. While Caitanya Mahaprabhu was in Benares or Kasi, the Mayavadi sannyasis
blasphemed Him in many ways because although He was a sannyasi He was indulg-
ing in chanting and dancing. Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara heard this criticism,
and it was intolerable for them because they were great devotees of Lord Caitanya.
They could not stop it, however, and therefore they appealed to Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu because this blasphemy was so intolerable that they had decided to
give up their lives.
TEXT 51
তোযারে निन्कदग्र যত FFF नेमे |
শুনিতে না পারি, ফাটে হুৃদয়-শ্রবণ ॥ ৫১ ॥


--- Page 41 ---
40 S$ri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
tomare nindaye yata sannyasira gana
Sunite na pari, phate hrdaya-Sravana
SYNONYMS

tomare—unto You; nindaye—blasphemes; yata—all; sannyasira gapa—the Mayavadi
sannyasis; sunite—to hear; nG—cannot; pari—tolerate; phate—it breaks; Ardaya—our
hearts; sravapa—while hearing such blasphemy.

TRANSLATION

“The Mayavadi sannyasis are all criticizing Your Holiness. We cannot tolerate

hearing such criticism, for this blasphemy breaks our hearts.”
PURPORT

This is a manifestation of real love for Krsna and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
There are three categories of Vaisnavas: kanistha-adhikaris, madhyama-adhikaris and
uttama-adhikaris. The kanistha-adhikari, or the devotee in the lowest stage of Vaisnava
life, has firm faith but is not familiar with the conclusions of the $astras. The devotee
in the second stage, the madhyama-adhikari, is completely aware of the sastric con-
clusion and has firm faith in his guru and the Lord. He, therefore, avoiding
non-devotees, preaches to the innocent. However, the maha-bhagavata or uttama-
adhikari, the devotee in the highest stage of devotional life, does not see anyone as
being against the Vaisnava principles, for he regards everyone as a Vaispava buthim-
self. This is the essence of Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s instruction that one be more tol-
erantthana tree and think oneself lower than the straw in the street(trpadapi sunicena
taror api sahisnuna). However, even if a devotee is in the uttama-bhagavata status he
must come down to the second status of life, madhyama-adhikari, to be a preacher,
for a preacher should not tolerate blasphemy against another Vaisnava. Although a
kanistha-adhikarf also cannot tolerate such blasphemy, he is not competent to stop
it by citing 5251116 evidences. Therefore Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara are
understood to be kanistha-adhikaris because they could not refute the arguments of
the sannyasis in Benares. They appealed to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to take
action, for they felt that they could not tolerate such criticism although they also
could not stop it.

TEXT 52
ইহা শুনি রহে প্রভু ঈষৎ হাসিয়া ।
সেই কালে এক বিপ্র মিলিল আলিয়া ॥ ৫২ ॥
iha Suni rahe prabhu 1501 ha-iya
sei kale eka vipra milila asiya


--- Page 42 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 41
SYNONYMS
iha—this; suni—hearing; rahe—remained; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
isat—slightly; hasiya—smiling; sei kale—at that time; eka—one; vipra—brahmana;
milila—met; asiya—coming there.
TRANSLATION
While Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara were thus talking with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, He only smiled slightly and remained silent. At that time a brahmana
came there to meet the Lord.
PURPORT
Because the blasphemy was cast against Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself, He
did not feel sorry, and therefore He was smiling. This is ideal Vaisnava behavior.
One should not become angry upon hearing criticism of himself, but if other
Vaisnavas are criticized one must be prepared to act as previously suggested. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very compassionate for His pure devotees Tapana Misra
and Candrasekhara; therefore by His grace this brahmana immediately came to
Him. By His omnipotency the Lord created this situation for the happiness of His
devotees.
TEXT 53
wife নিবেদন করে চরণে ধরিয়া ।
এক বস্ত মারে, দেহ প্রসন্ন হইয়া ॥ ৫৩ ॥
asi’ nivedana kare carane dhariya
eka vastu magon, deha prasanna ha-iya
SYNONYMS
asi’—coming there; nivedana—submissive statement; kare—made; carane—unto the
lotus feet; dhariya—capturing; eka—one; vastu—thing; magon—beg from You; deha—
kindly give it to me; prasanna—being pleased; ha-iya—becoming so.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana immediately fell at the lotus feet of Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
requested Him to accept his proposal in a joyful mood.
PURPORT
The Vedic injunctions state, tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya: one must
approach a superior authority in humbleness (Bg. 4.34). One cannot challenge a
superior authority, but with great submission one can submit his proposal for
acceptance by the spiritual master or spiritual authorities. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
is an ideal teacher by His personal behavior, and so also are all His disciples. Thus


--- Page 43 ---
42 Sri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
this brahmana, being purified in association with Caitanya Mahaprabhu, followed
these principles in submitting his request to the higher authority. He fell down at
the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and then spoke as follows.
TEXT 54
সকল সন্ন্যাসী बू কৈন্দু निमज्ञन |
তুমি যদি আইস, পূর্ত হয় মোর মন ॥ ৫৪ ॥
sakala sannyasi mufii kainu nimantrana
tumi yadi aisa, parna haya mora mana
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; sannyasi—renouncers; muni—|; kainu—made; nimantraga—invited;
tumi—Your good self; yadi—if; aisa—come; purpa—fulfillment; haya—becomes;
mora—my; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Lord, 1 have invited all the sannyasis of Benares to my home. My
desires will be fulfilled if You also accept my invitation.
PURPORT
This brahmapa knew that Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the only Vaisnava sannyasi
in Benares at that time and all the others were Mayavadis. It is the duty of 2 grhastha
to sometimes invite sannyasis to take food at his home. This grhastha-brahmana
wanted to invite all the sannyasis to his house, but he also knew that it would be
very difficult to induce Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to accept such an invitation
because the Mayavadi sannyasis would be present. Therefore he fell down at His
feet and fervently appealed to the Lord to be compassionate and grant his request.
Thus he humbly submitted his desire.
TEXT 55
না যাহ সন্ন্যাসি-গোষ্টী, ইহ। আমি खानि :
মোরে অনুগ্রহ কর নিমন্জণ মানি” ॥ een
na yaha sannyasi-gosthi, iha ami jani
more anugraha kara nimantrana mani’
SYNONYMS
na—not; yaha—Yon go; sannyasi-gosthi—the association of Mayavadi sannyasis;
iha—this; ami—\; jani—know; more—unto me; anugraha—merciful; kara—become;
nimantrapa—invitation; mani’—accepting.


--- Page 44 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 43
TRANSLATION
“My dear Lord, | know that You never mix with other sannyasis, but please be
merciful unto me and accept my invitation.”
PURPORT
An acarya or great personality of the Vaisnava school is very strict in his prin-
ciples, but although he is as hard as a thunderbolt, sometimes he is as soft as a rose.
Thus actually he is independent. He follows all the rules and regulations strictly,
but sometimes he slackens this policy. It was known that Lord Caitanya never
mixed with the Mayavadi sannyasis, yet He conceded to the request of the
brahmana, as stated in the next verse.
TEXT 56
প্রভু হাসি” নিমগঞ্জণ কৈল অঙ্গীকার |
সন্ন্যাসীরে কৃপা লাগি” এ ভঙ্গী তাঁহার ॥ ৫৬ ॥
prabhu hasi’ nimantrana Raila arigikara
sannyasire krpa lagi’ € bhangi tanhara
SYNONYMS
prabhu—the Lord; hasi’—smiling; nimantrapa—invitation; kaila—made; angikara—
acceptance; sannyasire—unto the Mayavadi sannyasis; krpa—to show them mercy;
lagi’—for the matter of; e—this; bhangi—gesture; tanhara—His.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya smiled and accepted the invitation of the brahmana. He made this
gesture to show His mercy to the Mayavadi sannyasis.
PURPORT
Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara appealed to the lotus feet of the Lord regarding
their grief at the criticism of Him by the sannyasis in Benares. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
merely smiled, yet He wanted to fulfill the desires of His devotees, and the oppor-
tunity came when the brahmana came to request Him to accept his invitation to be
present in the midst of the other sannyasis. This coincidence was made possible by
the omnipotency of the Lord.
TEXT 57
সে विशे জানেন প্রভু না| a कोत्र ঘরে।
তাহার প্রেরণায় তারে অত্যাগ্রহ করে ॥ ৫৭ ॥


--- Page 45 ---
44 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
se vipra janena prabhu na ya’na ka'ra ghare
tanhara preranaya tanre atyagraha kare
SYNONYMS
se—that; vipra—brahmana; janena—knew it; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
na—never; ya'na—goes; ka’ra—anyone’s; ghare—house; tanhara—His; preranaya—by
inspiration; tanre—unto Him; atyagraha kare—strongly urging to accept the invitation.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana knew that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu never went to anyone else’s
house, yet due to inspiration from the Lord he earnestly requested Him to accept
this invitation.
TEXT 58
আর দিনে গেল। প্রভু সে বিপ্র-ভবনে।
দেখিলেন, বসিয়াছেন সন্ন্যাসীর গণে ॥ ৫৮ ॥
ara dine gela prabhu se vipra-bhavane
dekhilena, vasiyachena sannyasira gane
SYNONYMS
ara—next; dine—day; gela—went; prabhu—the Lord; se—that; vipra—brahmana;
bhavane—in the house of; dekhilena—He saw; vasiyachena—there were sitting;
sannyasira—all the sannyasis; gane—in a group.
TRANSLATION
The next day, when Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the house of that
brahmana, he saw all the sannyasis of Benares sitting there.
TEXT 59
সবা নমস্করি” গেল৷ পাদ-প্রচ্ষালনে।
পাদ প্রক্ষালন করি I সেই স্থানে ॥ ৫৯ ॥
saba namaskari’ gela pada-praksalane
pada praksalana kari vasila sei sthane
SYNONYMS
saba—to all, namaskari’—offering obeisances; gela—went; pada—foot; praksalane—
for washing; pada—fuot; praksalana— washing; kari—finishing; vasila—sat down; sei—
in that; sthane—place.


--- Page 46 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 45
TRANSLATION
As soon as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the sannyasis He immediately offered
obeisances, and then He went to wash His feet. After washing His feet, He sat down
by the place where He had done so.
PURPORT
By offering His obeisances to the Mayavadi sannyasis Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
very clearly exhibited Hishumbleness to everyone. Vaisnavas must not be disrespect-
ful to anyone, to say nothing of a sannyasi. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches,
amanina manadena: one should always be respectful to others but should not de-
mand respect for himself. A sannyasi should always walk barefoot, and therefore
when he enters a temple or a society of devotees he should first wash his feet and
then sit down in a proper place. In India it is still the prevalent custom that one put
his shoes in a specified place and then enter the temple barefoot after washing his
feet. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is an ideal acarya, and those who follow in His
footsteps should practice the methods of devotional life that He teaches us.
TEXT 60
বসিয়া कत्रिन। কিছু এঁশ্বর্য প্রকাশ |
মহাতেজোময় বপু কোটিস্থর্যাভাস ॥ vo ॥
vasiya Rarila kichu aisvarya prakasa
mahatejomaya vapu koti-suryabhasa
SYNONYMS
vasiya—after sitting; karila—exhibited; kichu—some; aisvarya—mystic power;
prakasa—manifested; mahatejomaya—very brilliantly; vapu—body; koti—millions;
surya—sun; abhasa—reflection.
TRANSLATION
After sitting on the ground, Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His mystic power by
manifesting an effulgence as brilliant as the illumination of millions of suns.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, is full
of all potencies. Therefore it is not remarkable for Him to manifest the illumination
of millions of suns. Lord Sri Krsna is known as Yogesvara, the master of all mystic
powers. Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Lord Krsna Himself; therefore He can
exhibit any mystic power.


--- Page 47 ---
46 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 61
जरोटव खोकर्सिन जव সন্ন্যাসীর यन |
উঠিল সন্ন্যাসী जव ছাড়িয়৷ আসন ॥ ৬১ ॥
prabhave akarsila saba sannyasira mana
uthila sannyasi saba chadiya asana
SYNONYMS
prabhave—by such illumination; akarsila—He attracted; saba—all; sannyasira—the
Mayavadi sannyasis; mana—mind; uthila—stood up; sannyasi—all the Mayavadi
sannyasis; saba—all; chadiya—giving up; asana—sitting places.
TRANSLATION
When the sannyasis saw the brilliant illumination of the body of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, their minds were attracted, and they all immediately gave up their
sitting places and stood in respect.
PURPORT
To draw the attention of common men, sometimes saintly persons, acaryas and
teachers exhibit extraordinary opulences. This is necessary to attract the attention
of fools, but a saintly person should not misuse such power for personal sense grati-
fication like false saints who declare themselves to be God. Even a magician can
exhibit extraordinary feats which are not understandable to common men, but this
does not mean that the magician is God. It is a most sinful activity to attract
attention by exhibiting mystic powers and utilizing this opportunity to declare one-
self to be God. A real saintly person never declares himself to be God but always
places himself in the position of a servant of God. For a servant of God there is no
need to exhibit mystic powers, and he does not like to do so, but on behalf of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead a humble servant of God performs his activities in
such a wonderful way that no common man can dare try to act like him. Yet a
saintly person never takes credit for such actions because he knows very well that
when wonderful things are done on his behalf by the grace of the Supreme Lord,
all credit goes to the master and not to the servant.
TEXT 62
প্রকাশানন্দ-নামে সর্ব সন্ল্যাসি-প্রধান ।
প্রভুকে কহিল কিছু করিয়া! সম্মান ॥ ৬২. ॥
prakasananda-name sarva sannyasi-pradhana
prabhuke kahila kichu kariya sammana


--- Page 48 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 47
SYNONYMS
prakasananda—Prakasananda; name—of the name; sarva—all; sannyasi-pradhana—
chief of the Mayavadi sannyasis; prabhuke—unto the Lord; kahila—said; kichu—
something; kariya—showing Him; sammana—respect.
TRANSLATION
The leader of all the Mayavadi sannyasis present was named Prakasananda
Sarasvati, and after standing up he addressed Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu as follows
with great respect.
PURPORT
As Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed respect to all the Mayavadi sannyas’s,
similarly the leader of the Mayavadi sannyasis, Prakasananda, also showed his
respects to the Lord.
TEXT 63
ইহ আইস, ইই। আইস, শুনহ ANY |
অপবিত্র স্থানে বৈস, किव। অবসাদ ॥ ve ॥
ihan aisa, ihan aisa, $070/70 sripada
apavitra sthane vaisa, Riba avasada
SYNONYMS
ihan aisa—come here; ihan aisa—come here; sunaha—kindly hear; Sripada—Y our
Holiness; apavitra—unholy; sthane—place; vaisa—You are sitting; kiba—what is that;
avasada—lamentation.
TRANSLATION
“Please come here. Please come here, Your Holiness. Why do You sit in that
unclean place? What has caused Your lamentation?”
PURPORT
Here is the distinction between Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Prakasananda
Sarasvati. In the material world everyone wants to introduce himself as very im-
portant and great, but Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced Himself very humbly and
meekly. The Mayavadis were sitting in an exalted position, and Caitanya Mahaprabhu
sat in a place which was not even clean. Therefore the Mayavadi sannyasis thought
that He must have been aggrieved for some reason, and Prakasananda Sarasvati
inquired about the cause for His lamentation.


--- Page 49 ---
48 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 64
প্রভু কহে,_আমি হই হীন-সং্প্রদায়।
তোমা-সবার সভায় বলিতে না যুয়ায় ॥ ৬৪ ॥
prabhu kahe,—ami ha-i hina-sampradaya
toma-sabara sabhaya vasite na yuyaya
SYNONYMS

prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; ami—|; ha-i—am; hina-sampradaya—belonging to a
lower spiritual school; toma-sabara—of all of you; sabhaya—in the assembly; vasite—
to sit down; na—never; yuyaya—| can dare.

TRANSLATION

The Lord replied: “1 belong to a lower order of sannyasis. Therefore ॥ do not

deserve to sit with you.”
PURPORT

Mayavadi sannyasis are always very puffed up because of their knowledge of
Sanskrit and because they belong to the Sankara-sampradaya. They are always
under the impression that unless one is a brahmanpa and a very good Sanskrit
scholar, especially in grammar, one cannot accept the renounced order of life nor
become a preacher. Mayavadi sannyasis always misinterpret all the $stras with
their word jugglery and grammatical compositions, yet Sripada Sarnkaracarya him-
self condemned such jugglery of words in the verse, prapte sannihite khalu marane
nahi nahi raksati dukrn-karape. Dukrn refers to suffixes and prefixes in Sanskrit
grammar. Sankaracarya warned his disciples that if they concerned themselves only
with the principles of grammar, not worshiping Govinda, they were fools who would
never be saved. Yet in spite of Sripada Sankaracarya’s instructions, foolish Mayavadi
sannyasis are always busy juggling words on the basis of strict Sanskrit grammar.

Mayavadi sannyasis are very puffed up if they hold the elevated sannyasa titles
tirtha, asrama, and sarasvati. Even among Mayavadis, those who belong to other
sampraddyas and hold other titles such as Vana, Aranya, Bharat, etc., are con-
sidered to be lower-grade sannyasis. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa
from the Bharati-sampradaya, and thus He considered Himself a lower sannyasi
than Prakasananda Sarasvati. To remain distinct from Vaispava sannyasis, the
sannyasis of the Mayavadi-sampradaya always think themselves to be situated in a
very elevated spiritual order, but Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in order to teach
them how to become humble and meek, accepted Himself as belonging to a lower
sampradaya of sannyasis. Thus He wanted to point out clearly that a sannyasi is
one who is advanced in spiritual knowledge. One who is advanced in spiritual
knowledge should be accepted as occupying a better position than those who lack
such knowledge.


--- Page 50 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 49

The Mayavadi-sampradaya sannyasis are generally known as Vedantis, as if
Vedanta were their monopoly. Actually, however, Vedanti refers to a person who
perfectly knows Krsna. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, vedai$ ca sarvair aham eva
vedyo: ‘By all the Vedas it is Krsna who is to be known.” (Bg. 15.15) The so-called
Mayavadi Vedantis do not know who Krsna is; therefore their title of Vedanti, or
knower of Vedanta philosophy, is simply a pretension. Mayavadisannyasis always
think of themselves as real sannyasis and consider sannyasis of the Vaisnava order to
be brahmacaris. A brahmacari is supposed to engage in the service of a sannyasi and
accept him as his guru. Mayavadi sannyasis therefore declare themselves to be not
only gurus but jagad-gurus, or the spiritual masters of the entire world, although,
of course, they cannot see the entire world. Sometimes they dress gorgeous-
ly and travel on the backs of elephants in processions, and thus they are always
puffed up, accepting themselves as jagad-gurus. Srila Ripa Gosvami, however,
has explained that jagadguru properly refers to one who is the controller
of his tongue, mind, words, belly, genitals and anger. Prthivirh sa Sisyat: such
a jagad-guru is completely fit to make disciples all over the world. Due to
false prestige, Mayavadi sannyasis who do not have these qualifications some-
times harass and blaspheme a Vaisnava sannyasi who humbly engages in the
service of the Lord.

TEXT 65
আপনে প্রকাশানন্দ হাতেতে त्रिभी |
বসাইলা সভামধ্যে সন্মান FF ॥ ৬৫ ॥
apane prakasananda hatete dhariya
vasaila sabha-madhye sammana kariya
SYNONYMS

apane—personally; prakasananda—Prakasananda; hatete—by His hand; dhariya—
capturing; vasaila—made Him sit; sabha-madhye—in the assembly of ; sammana—with
great respect; kariya—offering Him.

TRANSLATION

Prakagananda Sarasvafi, however, caught Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally by

the hand and seated Him with great respect in the midst of the assembly.
PURPORT

The respectful behavior of Prakasananda Sarasvati toward Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu is very much to be appreciated. Such behavior is calculated to be gjfiata-
sukrti, or pious activities that one executes without his knowledge. Thus Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu very tactfully gave Prakasananda Sarasvafi an opportunity to ad-


--- Page 51 ---
50 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
vance in agjaata-sukrti so that in the future he might actually become a Vaisnava
sannyasi.
TEXT 66
পুছিল, তোমার নাম “শ্রীকৃষ্ণচৈতন্ত” |
কেশব-ভারতীর শিষ্য, তাতে তুমি शच ॥ ৬৬ |
puchila, tomara nama ‘$ri-krspa-caitanya’
kesava-bharatira Sisya, tate tumi dhanya
SYNONYMS
puchila—inquired; tomara—Y our; nama—name; Sri-kRrsna-caitanya—the name Sei
Krsna Caitanya; kesava-bharatira sSisya—You are a disciple of Kesava Bharati; tate—
in that connection; tumi—Y ou are; dhanya—glorious.
TRANSLATION
Praka$ananda Sarasvati then said: ‘I understand that Your name is Sri Krsna
Caitanya. You are a disciple of Sri Kesava Bharati, and therefore You are glorious.
TEXT 67
সাম্প্রদায়িক ATA ভুমি, রহ এই গ্রামে |
কি কারণে আমা-সবার ন৷ কর দর্শনে ॥ ৬৭ ॥
sampradayika sannyasi tumi, raha ei grame
ki karane ama-sabara na kara darsane
SYNONYMS
sampradayika—of the community; sannyasi—Mayavadi sannyasi; tumi—You are;
raha—live; ei—this; grame—in Varanasi; ki karape—for what reason; ama-sabara—
with us; na—do not; kara—endeavor; darsane—to mix.
TRANSLATION
“You belong to our Sankara-sampradaya and live in our village, Varanasi. Why
then do You not associate with us? Why is it that You avoid even seeing us?
PURPORT
A Vaisnava sannyasi or a Vaispava in the second stage of advancement in spiri-
tual knowledge can understand four principles—namely, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the devotees, the innocent and the jealous—and he behaves differently
with each. He tries to increase his love for Godhead, make friendship with devotees


--- Page 52 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 51
and preach Krsna consciousness among the innocent, but he avoids the jealous who
are envious of the Krsna consciousness movement. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Himself exemplified such behavior, and this is why Prakasananda Sarasvati inquired
why He did not associate or even talk with them. Caitanya Mahaprabhu confirmed
by example that a preacher of the Krsna consciousness movement generally should
not waste his time talking with Mayavadi sannyasis, but when there are arguments
on the basis of s@stra, a Vaisnava must come forward to talk and defeat them in
philosophy.

According to Mayavadi sannyasis, only one who takes sannyasa in the disciplic
succession from Sarikaracarya is a Vedic sannyasi. Sometimes it is challenged that
the sannyasis who are preaching in the Krspa consciousness movement are not
genuine because they do not belong to brahmana families, for Mayavadis do not
offer sannyasa to one who does not belong to a brahmanpa family by birth. Un-
fortunately, however, they do not know that at present everyone is born a sudra
(kalau sudra sambhava). It is to be understood that there are no brahmanas in this
age because those who claim to be brahmanas simply on the basis of birthright do
not have the brahminical qualifications. However, even if one is born in a non-
brahmana family, if he has the brahminical qualifications he should be accepted as
a brahmana, as confirmed by Srila Narada Muni and the great saint Sridhara Svami.
This is also stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Both Narada and Sridhara Svami com-
pletely agree that one cannot be a brahmana by birthright but must possess the
qualities of a brahmana. Thus in our Krsna consciousness movement we never offer
the sannyasa order to a person whom we do not find to be qualified in terms of the
prescribed brahminical principles. Although it is a fact that unless one is a brahmana
he cannot become a sannyasi, it is not a valid principle that an unqualified man
who is born in a brahmana family is a brahmana whereas a brahminically qualified
personborn in a non-brahmana family cannot be accepted. The Krsna consciousness
movement strictly follows the injunctions of Srimad-Bhagavatam, avoiding mis-
leading heresy and manufactured conclusions.

TEXT 68
সন্্যাসী হইয়া কর নর্ভন-গায়ন |
ভাবুক সব সঙ্গে লঞ। কর সংকীর্তন ॥ ৬৮ |
sannyasi ha-iya kara nartana-gayana
bhavuka saba sange lana kara sankirtana
SYNONYMS

sannyasi—the renounced order of life; ha-iya—accepting; kara—You do; nartana-
gayana—dancing and chanting; bhavuka—fanatics;saba—all; sange—in Your company;
lafiia—accepting them; kara—You do; sankirtana—chanting of the holy name of
the Lord.


--- Page 53 ---
52 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
“You are a sannyasi. Why then do You indulge in chanting and dancing, engaging
in Your sankirtana movement in the company of fanatics?
PURPORT
This is a challenge by Prakasananda Sarasvati to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes in his Anubhasya that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is the object of Vedanta philosophical research, has very kindly
determined who is an appropriate candidate for study of Vedanta philosophy. The
first qualification of such a candidate is expressed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in
His Siksastaka:
trnad api sunicena taror api sahispnuna
amanina manadena Rirtaniyah sada harih
This statement indicates that one can hear or speak about Vedanta philosophy
through the disciplic succession. One must be very humble and meek, more tolerant
than a tree and more humble than the grass. One should not claim respect for him-
self but should be prepared to give all respect to others. One must have these quali-
fications to be eligible to understand Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 69
বেদাস্ত-পঠন, ধ্যান, -সন্ন্যাসীর ধর্ম।
রা
তাহা ছাড়ি” কর কেনে ভাবুকের কর্ম ॥ ৬৯ ॥
vedanta-pathana, dhyana,—sannyasira dharma
taha chadi’ kara kene bhavukera karma
SYNONYMS
vedanta-pathana—studying Vedanta philosophy; dhyana—meditation; sannyasira—
of a sannyasi; dharma—duties; taha chadi’—giving them up; kara—You do; kene—
why; bhavukera—of the fanatics; karma—activities.
TRANSLATION
‘“Meditation and the study of Vedanta are the sole duties of a sannyasi. Why do
You abandon these to dance with fanatics?
PURPORT
As explained in regard to verse 41, Mayavadi sannyasis do not approve of chant-
ing and dancing. Prakasananda Sarasvati, like Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, misunder-
stood Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be a misled young sannyasi, and therefore he


--- Page 54 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 53
asked Him why He indulged in the association of fanatics instead of executing the
duty of a sannyasi.

TEXT 70
প্রভাবে দেখিয়ে তোমা সাক্ষাৎ AAT |
হীনাচার কর কেনে; ইথে কি কারণ ॥ ৭০ ॥
prabhave dekhiye toma saksat narayana
hinacara kara kene, ithe ki karana
SYNONYMS
prabhave—in Your opulence; dekhiye—| see; toma—You; saksat—directly;
narayana—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hina-acara—lower-class behavior;
kara—You do; kene—why; ithe—in this; ki—what is; karapa—reason.
TRANSLATION
“You look as brilliant as if You were Narayana Himself. Will You kindly explain
the reason that You have adopted the behavior of lower-class people?”
PURPORT
Due to renunciation, Vedanta study, meditation and the strict regulative
principles of their daily routine, Mayavadi sannyasis are certainly in a position to
execute pious activities. Thus Prakasananda Sarasvafi, on account of his piety,
could understand that Caitanya Mahaprabhu was not an ordinary person but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Saksat narayana: he considered Him to be
Narayana Himself. Mayavadi sannyasis address each other as Narayana because they
think that they are all going to be Narayana or merge with Narayana in the next
life. Prakasananda Sarasvati appreciated that Caitanya Mahaprabhu had already
directly become Narayana and did not need to wait until His next life. One difference
between the Vaisnava and Mayavadi philosophies is that Mayavadi philosophers
think that after giving up their bodies they are going to become Narayana by
merging with His body, whereas Vaispava philosophers understand that after the
body dies they are going to have a transcendental, spiritual body in which to
associate with Narayana.
TEXT 71
প্রভু কহে -শুন, Aig, ইহার কারণ।
ওরু মোরে মুূর্থ দেখি' করিল শাসন ॥ ৭১ ॥
prabhu kahe—suna, sripada, ihara karapa
guru more murkha dekhi’ karila sasana


--- Page 55 ---
54 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; suna—kindly hear; sripada—Y our Holiness; ihara—
of this; karana—reason; guru—My spiritual mastef; rmore—Me; murkha—fool; dekhi’—
understanding; Rarila—he did; sagsana—chastisement.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied to Prakasananda Sarasvati: “My dear sir, kindly
hear the reason. My spiritual master considered Me a fool, and therefore he
chastised Me.
PURPORT
When Prakasananda Sarasvati inquired from Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu why He
neither studied Vedanta nor performed meditation, Lord Caitanya presented Himself
as a number one fool in order to indicate that the present age, Kali-yuga, is an age
of fools and rascals in which it is not possible to obtain perfection simply by reading
Vedanta philosophy and meditating. The sastras strongly recommend:
harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is the chanting
of the holy names of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There
is no other way.” People in general in Kali-yuga are so fallen that it is not possible
for them to obtain perfection simply by studying Vedanta-sutra. One should there-
fore seriously take to the constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord.
TEXT 72
মুখ তুমি, তোমার নাহিক বেদাস্তাধিকার।
‘FRAG’ Fo সদা, - এই THAT ॥ ৭২ ॥
murkha tumi, tomara nahika vedantadhikara
‘krsna-mantra’ japa sada,—ei mantra-sara
SYNONYMS
mdarkha tumi—You are a fool; tomara—Y our; nahika—there is not; vedanta—
Vedanta philosophy; adhikara—qualification to study; krsna-mantra—the hymn of
Krsna (Hare Krsna); japa—chant; sada—always; ei—this; mantra—hymn; sara—essence
of all Vedic knowledge.
TRANSLATION
““You are a fool,’ he said. ‘You are not qualified to study Vedanta philosophy,
and therefore You must always chant the holy name of Krsna. This is the essence of
all mantras or Vedic hymns.


--- Page 56 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 55
PURPORT

Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja comments in this connection,
“One can become perfectly successful in the mission of his life if he acts exactly
according to the words he hears from the mouth of his spiritual master.” This
acceptance of the words of the spiritual master is called srauta-vakya, which indi-
cates that the disciple must carry out the spiritual master’s instructions without
deviation. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks in this connection that a
disciple must accept the words of his spiritual master as his life and soul. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu here confirms this by saying that since His spiritual master ordered Him
only to chant the holy name of Krsna, He always chanted the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra according to this direction (‘krspa-mantra’ japa sada—ei mantra-sara).

Krsna is the origin of everything. Therefore when a person is fully Krsna con-
scious it is to be understood that his relationship with Krsna has been fully con-
firmed. Lacking Krsna consciousness, one is only partially related with Krsna and
is therefore not in his constitutional position. Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, the spiritual master of the entire
universe, He nevertheless took the position of a disciple in order to teach by example
how a devotee should strictly follow the orders of a spiritual master in executing
the duty of always chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. One who is very much
attracted to the study of Vedanta philosophy must take lessons from Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In this age, no one is actually competent to study Vedanta, and
therefore it is better that one chant the holy name of the Lord, which is the essence
of all Vedic knowledge, as Krsna Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita:

vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham
“By all the Vedas am | to be known; indeed | am the compiler of Vedanta, and |
am the knower of the Vedas.” (Bg. 15.15)

Only fools give up the service of the spiritual master and think themselves ad-
vanced in spiritual knowledge. In order to check such fools, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Himself presented the perfect example of how to be a disciple. A spiritual master
knows very well how to engage each disciple in a particular duty, but if a disciple,
thinking himself more advanced than his spiritual master, gives up his orders and
acts independently, he checks his own spiritual progress. Every disciple must con-
sider himself completely unaware of the science of Krsna and must always be ready
to carry out the orders of the spiritual master to become competent in Krsna con-
sciousness. A disciple should always remain a fool before his spiritual master. There-
fore sometimes pseudo-spiritualists accept a spiritual master who is not even fit to
become a disciple because they want to keep him under their control. This is useless
for spiritual realization.

One who imperfectly knows Krsna consciousness cannot know Vedanta
philosophy. A showy display of Vedanta study without Krsna consciousness is a
feature of the external energy, maya, and as long as one is attracted by the inebrieties


--- Page 57 ---
56 $ri-Caitanya-caritaimrta

of this ever changing material energy, he deviates from devotion to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. An actual follower of Vedanta philosophy is a devotee of
Lord Visnu, who is the greatest of the great and the maintainer of the entire universe.
Unless one surpasses the field of activities in service to the limited, one cannot reach
the unlimited. Knowledge of the unlimited is actual brahma jfiana, or knowledge of
the Supreme. Those who are addicted to fruitive activities and speculative knowledge
cannot understand the value of the holy name of the Lord, Krsna, who is always
completely pure, eternally liberated and full of spiritual bliss. One who has
taken shelter of the holy name of the Lord, which is identical with the Lord,
does not have to study Vedanta philosophy, for he has already completed all
such study.

One who is unfit to chant the holy name of Krsna but thinks that the holy name
is different from Krsna and thus takes shelter of Vedanta study in order to under-
stand Him must be considered a number one fool, as confirmed by Caitanya
Mahaprabhu by His personal behavior, and philosophical speculators who want to
make Vedanta philosophy an academic career are also considered to be within the
material energy. A person who always chants the holy name of the Lord, however,
is already beyond the ocean of nescience, and thus even a person born in a low
family who engages in chanting the holy name of the Lord is considered to be be-
yond the study of Vedanta philosophy. In this connection the Srimad-Bhagavatam
states:

aho bata $vapaco’to gariyan
yay jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmanucur nama grpanti ye te
“If a person born in a family of dog-eaters takes to the chanting of the holy name
of Krsna, it is to be understood that in his previous life he must have executed all
kinds of austerities and penances and performed all the Vedic yajfias.” (Bhag. 3.33.7)
Another quotation states:
rg-vedo 11000 yajur-vedah sama-vedo 'py atharvapah
adhTtas tena yenoktarn harir ity aksara-dvayam
“A person who chants the two syllables Ha-ri has already studied the four Vedas—
Sama, Rk, Yajuh and Atharva.”

Taking advantage of these verses, there are some sahajiyas who, taking everything
very cheaply, consider themselves elevated Vaisnavas but do not care even to touch
the Vedanta-sutras or Vedanta philosophy. A real Vaisnava should, however, study
Vedanta philosophy, but if after studying Vedanta one does not adopt the chanting
of the holy name of the Lord, he is no better than a Mayavadi. Therefore, one
should not be a Mayavadi, yet one should not be unaware of the subject matter of
Vedanta philosophy. Indeed, Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His knowledge of
Vedanta in His discourses with Prakasananda Sarasvati. Thus it is to be understood


--- Page 58 ---
1२.7८7 Chapter 7 57
that a Vaispava should be completely conversant with Vedanta philosophy, yet he
should not think that studying Vedanta is all in all and therefore be unattached to
the chanting of the holy name. A devotee must know the importance of simultaneous-
ly understanding Vedanta philosophy and chanting the holy names. If by studying
Vedanta one becomes an impersonalist, he has not been able to understand Vedanta.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.15). Vedanta means “006 end of knowl-
edge.” The ultimate end of knowledge is knowledge of Krsna, who is identical with
His holy name. Cheap Vaispavas (sahagjiyas) do not care to study the Vedanta
philosophy as commented upon by the four acaryas. In the Gaudiya-sampradaya
there is a Vedanta commentary called the Govinda-bhasya, but the sahajiyas
consider such commentaries to be untouchable philosophical speculation, and
they consider the acaryas to be mixed devotees. Thus they clear their way
to hell.

TEXT 73
কৃষ্ণমন্ত্র হৈতে হবে সংসার-মোচন |
কৃষ্ণনাম হৈতে পাবে কৃষ্ণের চরণ ॥ ৭৩ ॥
krsna-mantra haite habe sarhsara-mocana
krspa-nama haite pabe krspera carana
SYNONYMS
krsna-mantra—the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra; haite—from; habe—
it will be; sarnsara—material existence; mocana—deliverance; krsna-nama—the holy
name of Lord Krspa; haite—from; pabe—one will get; krspera—of Lord Krsna;
carana—|otus feet.
TRANSLATION
“‘Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna one can obtain freedom from
material existence. Indeed, simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one will be
able to see the lotus feet of the Lord.
PURPORT
In the Anubhasya, Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami says that the actual
effect that will be visible as soon as one achieves transcendental knowledge is that
he will immediately become free from the clutches of maya and fully engage in the
service of the Lord. Unless one serves the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Mukunda one cannot become free from fruitive activities under the external energy.
However, when one chants the holy name of the Lord offenselessly, he can realize a
transcendental position which is completely aloof from the material conception
of life. Rendering service to the Lord, a devotee relates to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in one of five relationships—namely, santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya


--- Page 59 ---
58 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

and madhurya—and thus he relishes transcendental bliss in that relationship.
Such a relationship certainly transcends the body and mind. When one real-
izes that the holy name of the Lord is identical with the Supreme Person, he
becomes completely eligible to chant the holy name of the Lord. Such an
ecstatic chanter and dancer must be considered to have a direct relationship
with the Lord.

According to the Vedic principles, there are three stages of spiritual advancement,
namely, sambandha-jiiana, abhidheya and prayojana. Sambandha-jiiana refers to
establishing one’s original relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
abhidheya refers to acting according to that constitutional relationship, and prayo-
jana is the ultimate goal of life, which is to develop love of Godhead (prema
pumartho mahan). 1 one adheres to the regulative principles under the order of the
spiritual master, he very easily achieves the ultimate goal of his life. A person who
is addicted to the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra very easily gets the opportunity
to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly. There is no need for such a
person to understand the grammatical jugglery in which Mayavadi sannyasis generally
indulge. Sri Sankaracarya also stressed this point. Nahi nahi raksati dukri-karane:
“Simply by juggling grammatical suffixes and prefixes one cannot save himself from
the clutches of death.” The grammatical word jugglers cannot bewilder a devotee
who engages in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Simply addressing the energy
of the Supreme Lord as Hare and the Lord Himself as Krsna very soon situ-
ates the Lord within the heart of the devotee. By thus addressing Radha and
Krsna one directly engages in His Lordship’s service. The essence of all re-
vealed scriptures and all knowledge is present when one addresses the Lord
and His energy by the Hare Krspa mantra, for this transcendental vibration
can completely liberate a conditioned soul and directly engage him in the
service of the Lord.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu presented Himself as a grand fool, yet He maintained
that all the words that He had heard from His spiritual master strictly followed the
principles stated by Vyasadeva in Srimad-Bhagavatam.

anarthopasamarn saksad
bhakti-yogam adhoksaje
lokasyajanato vidvarns
cakre satvata-sarhhitam
“The material miseries of a living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be
directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of
people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyasadeva compiled this Vedic
literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth.” (Bhag. 1.7.6) One can over-
come all misconceptions and entanglement in the material world by practicing
bhakti-yoga, and therefore Vyasadeva, acting on the instruction of Sri Narada,
has very kindly introduced Srimad-Bhagavatam to relieve the conditioned souls
from the clutches of maya. Lord Caitanya’s spiritual master instructed Him, there-


--- Page 60 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 59
fore, that one must read Srimad-Bhagavatam regularly and with scrutiny to gradually
become attached to the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.

The holy name and the Lord are identical. One who is completely free from the
clutches of maya can understand this fact. This knowledge, which is achieved by
the mercy of the spiritual master, places one on the supreme transcendental plat-
form. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu presented Himself as a fool because prior to accept-
ing the shelter of a spiritual master He could not understand that simply by chanting
one can be relieved from all material conditions. But as soon as He became a
faithful servant of His spiritual master and followed his instructions, He very easily
saw the path of liberation. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s chanting of the Hare Krsna
mantra must be understood to be devoid of all offenses. The ten offenses against
the holy name are as follows: (1) to blaspheme a devotee of the Lord, (2) to consider
the Lord and the demigods to be on the same level or to think that there are
many gods, (3) to neglect the orders of the spiritual master, (4) to minimize
the authority of scriptures (Vedas), (5) to interpret the holy name of God,
(6) to commit sins on the strength of chanting, (7) to instruct the glories of
the 10105 name to the unfaithful, (8) to compare the chanting of the holy
name with material piety, (9) to be inattentive while chanting the holy
name, and (10) to be attached to material things in spite of chanting the holy
name.

TEXT 74
নাম fag कनिकोटल নাহি আর ধর্য।
সর্বমন্ত্রলার নাম, - এই শাস্ত্রমর্ম 98 ॥
nama vinu kali-kale nahi ara dharma
sarva-mantra-sara nama, ei $astra-marma
SYNONYMS

nama—the holy name; vinu—without; kali-kale—in this age of Kali; nahi—there
is none; ara—or any alternative; dharma—religious principle; sarva—all; mantra—
hymns; sara—essence; nama—the holy name; ei—this is; sastra—revealed scriptures;
marma—purport.

TRANSLATION

‘“‘In this age of Kali there is no other religious principle than the chanting of the
holy name, which is the essence of all Vedic hymns. This is the purport of all
scriptures.’

PURPORT

The principles of the parampara system were strictly honored in the ages

Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga and Dvapara-yuga, but in the present age, Kali-yuga,


--- Page 61 ---
60 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta

people neglect the importance of this system of $rauta-parampara, or receiving
knowledge by disciplic succession. In this age, people are prepared to argue
that they can understand that which is beyond their limited knowledge and
perception through so-called scientific observations and experiments, not knowing
that actual truth comes down to man from authorities. This argumentative
attitude is against the Vedic principles, and it is very difficult for one who
adopts it to understand that the holy name of Krsna is as good as Krspa Him-
self. Since Krsna and His holy name are identical, the holy name is eternally
pure and beyond material contamination. It is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as a transcendental vibration. The holy name is completely different
from material sound, as confirmed by Narottama dasa Thakura. Golokera
prema-dhana, hari-nama-safkirtana: the transcendental vibration of hari-nama-
sahkirtana is imported from the spiritual world. Thus although materialists who
are addicted to experimental knowledge and the so-called ‘‘scientific method”
cannot place their faith in the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, it is
a fact that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra offenselessly one can
be freed from all subtle and gross material conditions. The spiritual world
is called Vaikuntha, which means ‘“‘without anxiety.” In the material world
everything is full of anxiety (kuntha), whereas in the spiritual world (Vaikuntha)
everything is free from anxiety. Therefore those who are afflicted by a com-
bination of anxieties cannot understand the Hare Krsna mantra, which 15
free from all anxiety. In the present age the vibration of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra is the only process which is in a transcendental position beyond material
contamination. Since the holy name can deliver a conditioned soul, it is ex-
plained here to be sarva-mantra-sara, the essence of all Vedic hymns.

A name which represents an object of this material world may be subjected
to arguments and experimental knowledge, but in the absolute world a
name and its owner, fame and the famous, are identical, and similarly the
qualities, pastimes and everything else pertaining to the Absolute are also
absolute. Although Mayavadis profess monism, they differentiate between the
holy name of the Supreme Lord and the Lord Himself. For this offense of
namaparadha they gradually glide down from their exalted position of brahma-
72/70, as confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhag. 10.2.32):

aruhya krcchrena parari padarn tatah

patanty adho 'nadrta-yusmad-ahghrayah
Although by severe austerities they rise to the exalted position of brahma-
jnana, they nevertheless fall down due to imperfect knowledge of the Ab-
solute Truth. Although they profess to understand the Vedic mantra, sarvarn
khalv idarh brahma (‘everything is brahman”), they are unable to understand
that the holy name is also brahman. 11 they regularly chant the maha-mantra,
however, they can be relieved from this misconception. Unless one properly
takes shelter of the holy name, he cannot be relieved from the offensive stage
in chanting the holy name.


--- Page 62 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 61
TEXT 75
এত दनि, এক car শিখাইল (मोदन |
कट করি” এই শ্লোক করিহ বিচারে ॥ ৭৫ ॥
eta bali’ eka sloka Sikhaila more
kanthe kari’ ei $loka kariha vicare
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; eka sloka—one verse; Sikhaila—taught; more—Me; kanthe—
in the throat; kari’—keeping; ei—this; sloka—verse; kariha—You should do; vicare—
in consideration.
TRANSLATION
“After describing the potency of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, My spiritual mas-
ter taught Me another verse, advising Me to always keep the name within My throat.
TEXT 76
হরেনাম হরের্নাম হরেরামেব (कवनम्‌ |
कटनी নাস্ত্যেব নাস্ত্যেব নাস্ত্যেব গতিরন্যথ! ॥ ৭৬ ॥
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
SYNONYMS
hareh nama—the holy name of the Lord; hareh nama—the holy name of the Lord;
hareh nama—the holy name of the Lord; eva—certainly; kevalam—only; kalau—in
this age of Kali; na asti—there is none; eva—certainly; na asti—there is none; eva—
certainly; na asti—there is none; eva—certainly; gatih—progress; anyatha—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
“‘In this age of Kali there is no alternative, there is no alternative, there is no
alternative for spiritual progress than the holy name, the holy name, the holy name
of the Lord.”
PURPORT
For progress in spiritual life, the sastras recommend meditation in Satya-yuga,
sacrifice for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu in Treta-yuga and gorgeous worship of
the Lord in the temple in Dvapara-yuga, but in the age of Kali one can achieve
spiritual progress only by chanting the holy name of the Lord. This is confirmed in


--- Page 63 ---
62 $ri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
various scriptures. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam there are many references to this fact.
In the Twelfth Canto it is said, kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah pararn vrajet:
In the age of Kali there are many faults, for people are subjected to many miserable
conditions, yet in this age there is one great benediction—simply by chanting the
Hare Krsna mantra one can be freed from all material contamination and thus be
elevated to the spiritual world. The Narada-paricaratra also praises the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra 25 follows:
trayo vedah sad-angani
chandarnsi vividhah surah
sarvam agtaksarantahstharn
yac canyad api van-mayam
sarva-vedanta-sararthah
sarnsararpava-taranah
“The essence of all Vedic knowledge—comprehending the three kinds of Vedic
activity [karma-kanda, jriana-kanda and upasana-kanda), the chandah or Vedic
hymns, and the processes for satisfying the demigods—is included in the eight syl-
lables Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna. This is the reality of all Vedanta. The chanting of the
holy name is the only means to cross the ocean of nescience.” Similarly, the
Kalisantarana Upanisad states, “1316 Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—these sixteen names composed of
thirty-two syllables are the only means to counteract the evil effects of Kali-yuga. In
all the Vedas it is seen that to cross the ocean of nescience there is no alternative to
the chanting of the holy name.” Similarly, Sri Madhvacarya, while commenting
upon the Mundaka Upanisad, has said:
dvapariyair janair vispuh
paricaratrais ca kevalam
kalau tu nama-matrena
pujyate bhagavan (10/17
“In the Dvapara-yuga one could satisfy Krsna or Visnu only by worshiping Him
gorgeously according to the Paficaratriki system, but in the age of Kali one can
satisfy and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari simply by chanting
the holy name.” In his Bhakti-sandarbha (verse 284), Srila Jiva Gosvami strongly
emphasizes the chanting of the holy name of the Lord as follows:
nanu bhagavan-namatmaka eva mantrah; tatra visesena namah-Sabdady-alankrtah Sri-
bhagavata srimad-rsibhis cahita-sakti-visesah, $ri-bhagavata samam atma-sambandha-visesa-
pratipadakas ca tatra kevalani $ri-bhagavan-namany api nirapeksany eva parama-purusartha-
phala-paryanta-dana-samarthani tato mantresu namato'py adhika-samarthye labdhe katharn
diksady-apeksa? ucyate—yady api svardpato ndsti, tathdpi prayah svabhavato dehadi-
sambandhena kadarya-silanarn viksipta-cittanarn jananarn tat-sankocikarapaya Srimad-rsi-
prabhrtibhir atrarcana-marge kvacit kvacit kacit kacin maryada sthapitasti
Srila Jiva Gosvami states that the substance of all the Vedic mantras is the chanting
of the holy name of the Lord. Every mantra begins with the prefix nama om and


--- Page 64 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 63
eventually addresses by name the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By the supreme
will of the Lord there is a specific potency in each and every mantra chanted by great
sages like Narada Muni and other rsis. Chanting the holy name of the Lord im-
mediately renovates the transcendental relationship of the living being with the
Supreme Lord.

To chant the holy name of the Lord, one need not depend upon other parapher-
nalia, for one can immediately get all the desired results of connecting or linking
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It may therefore be questioned why there
is a necessity for initiation or further spiritual activities in devotional service for one
who engages in the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The answer is that al-
though it is correct that one who fully engages in chanting the holy name need not
depend upon the process of initiation, generally a devotee is addicted to many
abominable material habits due to material contamination from his previous life. In
order to get quick relief from all these contaminations, it is required that one
engage in the worship of the Lord in the temple. The worship of the Deity in the
temple is essential to reduce one’s restlessness due to the contaminations of condi-
tional life. Thus Narada, in his Pancaratriki-vidhi, and other great sages have some-
times stressed that since every conditioned soul has a bodily concept of life aimed
at sense enjoyment, to restrict this sense enjoyment the rules and regulations for
worshiping the Deity in the temple are essential. Srila ২003 Gosvami has described
that the holy name of the Lord can be chanted by liberated souls, but almost all the
souls we have to initiate are conditioned. It is advised that one chant the holy name
of the Lord without offenses and according to the regulative principles, yet due to
their past bad habits they violate these rules and regulations. Thus the regulative
principles for worship of the Deity are also simultaneously essential.

TEXT 77
এই আজ্ঞা পাঞা নাম লই অনুষ্ষণ |
নাম লৈতে লৈতে মোর ভ্রান্ত হৈল मन ॥ ৭৭ ॥
ei 02/80/2080 nama la-i anuksana
nama laite laite mora bhranta haila mana
SYNONYMS

ei—this; agjia—order; pana—receiving; nama—the holy name;/a-i-chant;anuksana—
always; nama—the holy name;/aite—accepting;/aite—accepting;mora—My; bhranta—
bewilderment; haila—taking place; mana—in the mind.

TRANSLATION

“Since | received this order from My spiritual master, | always chant the holy
name, but | think that by chanting and chanting the holy name | have been
bewildered.


--- Page 65 ---
64 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 78
ধৈর্য ধরিতে নারি, হেলাম উন্মত্ত ৷
হাসি, কান্দি, নাচি, গাই, যৈছে মদমত্ত ॥ १४. ॥
dhairya dharite nari, hailama unmatta
hasi, kandi, naci, gai, yaiche madamatta
SYNONYMS
dhairya—patience; dharite—capturing; nari—unable to take; hailama—| have be-
come; unmatta—mad after it; hasi—laugh; kandi—cry ; naci—dance; gai—sing; yaiche—
as much as; madamatta—madman.
TRANSLATION
“While chanting the holy name of the Lord in pure ecstasy, | lose myself, and
thus | laugh, cry, dance and sing just like a madman.
TEXT 79
তবে ধৈর্য ধরি' মনে করিলু* বিচার ।
FRITH জ্ঞানাচ্ছন্নল হইল আমার ॥ ৭৯ ॥
10৮6 dhairya dhari’ mane karilun vicara
krsna-name jianacchana ha-ila amara
SYNONYMS
tave—thereafter; dhairya—patience; dhari’—accepting; mane—in the mind; karilun—
| did; vicara—consideration; krspa-name—in the holy name of Krsna; jiana-acchanna—
covering of My knowledge; ha-ila—has become; amara— of Me.
TRANSLATION
“Collecting My patience, therefore, | began to consider that chanting the holy
name of Krsna had covered all My spiritual knowledge.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu hints in this verse that to chant the holy name of Krsna
one does not need to speculate on the philosophical aspects of the science of God,
for one automatically becomes ecstatic and without consideration immediately
chants, dances, laughs, cries and sings just like a madman.
TEXT 80
পাগল হইলাঙ আমি, ধৈর্য নাহি मटन |
এত छः নিবেদিল্ু গুরুর চরণে ॥ ৮০ ॥


--- Page 66 ---
Adi-Ila, Chapter 7 65
pagala ha-ilan ami, dhairya nahi mane
eta cinti’ nivedilun gurura carane
SYNONYMS
pagala—madman; ha-ilan—1 have become; ami—I; dhairya—patience; nahi—not;
mane—in the mind; eta—thus; cinti-considering; nivedilun—| submitted; gurura—of
the spiritual master; carage—on his lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
“I saw that | had become mad by chanting the holy name, and | immediately
submitted this the lotus feet of my spiritual master.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as an ideal teacher,shows us how a disciple should deal
with his spiritual master. Whenever there is doubt regarding any point, he should
refer the matter to his spiritual master for clarification. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
said that while chanting and dancing He had developed the kind of mad ecstasy that
is possible only for a liberated soul. Yet even in His liberated position, He referred
everything to His spiritual master whenever there were doubts. Thus in any condi-
tion, even when liberated, we should never think ourselves independent of the
spiritual master, but must refer to him as soon as there is some doubt regarding our
progressive spiritual life.
TEXT 81
কিবা মন্ত্র দিল, গোলাঞি, foal তার वन्‌ ।
জপিতে জপিতে মন্ত্র করিল পাগল ॥ ৮১ ॥
kiba mantra dila, gosani, kiba tara bala
Japite japite mantra karila pagala
SYNONYMS
kiba—what kind of; mantra—hymn; dila—you have given; gosani—My lord; kiba—
what is; tara—its; bala—strength; japite—chanting; japite—chanting; mantra—the
hymn; karila—has made Me; pagala—madman.
TRANSLATION
‘“““My dear lord, what kind of mantra have you given Me? | have become mad
simply by chanting this maha-mantra!
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu prays in His Siksdstaka:
yugayitar nimesena
caksugsa pravysayitam


--- Page 67 ---
66 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Sunyayitarn jagat sarvari
govinda virahena me
“O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, | am considering a moment to be like twelve
years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain, and | am feeling
all vacant in the world in Your absence.” It is the aspiration of a devotee that while
he chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra his eyes will fill with tears, his voice falter
and his heart throb. These are good signs in chanting the holy name of the Lord. In
ecstasy, one should feel the entire world to be vacant without the presence of
Govinda. This is a sign of separation from Govinda. In material life we are all sepa-
rated from Govinda and are absorbed in material sense gratification. Therefore, when
one comes to his senses on the spiritual platform he becomes so eager to meet
Govinda that without Govinda the entire world becomes a vacant place.
TEXT 82
হাসায়, নাচায়, মোরে করায় FW |
এত শুনি গুরু হাসি বলিলা বচন ॥ ৮২ ॥
hasaya, nacaya, more karaya krandana
eta Suni’ guru hasi balila vacana
SYNONYMS
hasaya—it causes Me to laugh; nacaya—it causes Me to dance; more—unto Me;
karaya—it causes; krandana—crying; eta—thus; suni—hearing; guru—My spiritual
master; hasi—smiling; balila—said; vacana—words.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘Chanting the holy name in ecstasy causes one to dance, laugh and cry.’ When
My spiritual master heard all this, he smiled and then began to speak.
PURPORT
When a disciple very perfectly makes progress in spiritual life, this gladdens the
spiritual master, who then also smiles in ecstasy, thinking, “How successful my
disciple has become!” He feels so glad that he smiles as he enjoys the progress of the
disciple, just as a smiling parent enjoys the activities of a child who is trying to stand
up or crawl perfectly.
TEXT 83
কৃষ্ণনাম-মহামন্ত্রের এই ত' স্বভাব।
যেই জপে, তার কৃষ্ণে উপজয়ে ভাব ॥ ৮৩ ॥


--- Page 68 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 67
krspa-nama-maha-mantrera ei ta’ svabhava
yei jape, tara krspe upajaye bhava
SYNONYMS
krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna; maha-mantrera—of the supreme hymn; ei
ta’—this is its; svabhava—nature; yei—anyone; jape—chants; tara—his; krspe—unto
Krsna; upajaye—develops; bhava—ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
“‘1t is the nature of the Hare:Krspa maha-mantrajthat anyone who chants it
immediately develops his loving ecstasy for Krsna.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is said:
aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvari pravartate
iti matva bhajante mari
budha bhava-samanvitah
“I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me.
The wise who know this perfectly engage in My devotional service and worship Me
with all their hearts.” (Bg. 10.8) In this verse it is explained that one who chants
the Hare Krsna mantra develops bhava, ecstasy, which is the point at which revela-
tion begins. It is the preliminary stage in developing one’s original love for God.
A neophyte disciple begins by hearing and chanting, associating with devotees and
practicing the regulative principles, and thus he vanquishes all of his unwanted bad
habits. In this way he develops attachment for Krsna and cannot forget Krsna even
for a moment. Bhava is almost the successful stage of spiritual life. A sincere student
aurally receives the holy name from the spiritual master, and after being initiated
he follows the regulative principles given by the spiritual master. When the holy
name is properly served in this way, automatically the spiritual nature of the holy
name spreads; in other words, the devotee becomes qualified in offenselessly chant-
ing the holy name. When one is completely fit to chant the holy name in this way,
he is eligible to make disciples all over the world, and he actually becomes jagad-
guru. Then the entire world, under his influence, begins to chant the holy names
of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Thus all the disciples of such a spiritual master
increase in attachment for Krsna, and therefore he sometimes cries, sometimes
laughs, sometimes dances and sometimes chants. These symptoms are very promi-
nently manifest in the body of a pure devotee. Sometimes when our students of
the Krsna consciousness movement chant and dance, even in India people are
astonished to see how these foreigners have learned to chant and dance in this
ecstatic fashion. As explained by Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, actually this is
not due to practice, for without extra endeavor these symptoms become manifest


--- Page 69 ---
68 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
in anyone who sincerely chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.

Many fools, not knowing the transcendental nature of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra, sometimes impede our loudly chanting this mantra, yet one who is actually
advanced in the fulfillment of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra induces others
to chant also. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami explains, krspa-Sakti vina nahe tara
pravartana: unless one receives special power of attorney from the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, he cannot preach the glories of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
As devotees propagate the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, the general population of the
entire world gets the opportunity to understand the glories of the holy name. While
chanting and dancing or hearing the holy name of the Lord, one automatically
remembers the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and because there is no difference
between the holy name and Krsna, the chanter is immediately linked with Krsna.
Thus connected, a devotee develops his original attitude of service to the Lord. In
this attitude of constantly serving Krsna, which is called bhava, one always thinks
of Krsna in many different ways. One who has attained this bhava stage is no
longer under the clutches of the illusory energy. When other spiritual ingredients,
such as trembling, perspiration, tears, etc., are added to this bhava stage, the devotee
gradually attains love of Krsna.

The holy name of Krsna is called the maha-mantra. Other mantras mentioned in
the Narada-paricaratra are known simply as mantras, but the chanting of the holy
name of the Lord is called the maha-mantra.

TEXT 84
কৃষ্ণবিষয়ক (owl -পরম gard |
যার আগে Gorge চারি পুক্ুষার্থ ॥ ৮৪ ॥
krsna-visayaka prema——parama purusartha
yara age trpa-tulya cari purusartha
SYNONYMS

krsna-visayaka—in the subject of Krsna; prema—love; parama—the highest; purusa-
artha—achievement of the goal of life; yara— whose; age—before; trna-tulya—like the
grass in the street; cari—four; purusa-artha—achievements.

TRANSLATION

‘‘‘Religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation are known
as the four goals of life, but before love of Godhead, the fifth and highest goal,
these appear as insignificant as straw in the street.

PURPORT

While chanting the holy name of the Lord, one should not desire the material

advancements represented by economic development, religiosity, sense gratification


--- Page 70 ---
01413, Chapter 7 69
and ultimately liberation from the material world. As stated by Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
the highest perfection in life is to develop one’s love for Krsna (prema pumartho
mahan Sri-caitanya-mahaprabhor matam idam). When we compare love of Godhead
with religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation, we can
understand that these achievements may be desirable objectives for bubhuksus, or
those who desire to enjoy this material world, and mumuksus, or those who desire
liberation from it, but they are very insignificant in the eyes of a pure devotee who
has developed bhava, the preliminary stage of love of Godhead.

Dharma (religiosity), artha (economic development), kama (sense gratification)
and moksa (liberation) are the four principles of religion which pertain to the
material world. Therefore in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is declared,
dharmah projjhita-kaitavo’tra: cheating religious systems in terms of these four
material principles are completely discarded from Srimad-Bhagavatam, for Srimad-
Bhagavatam teaches only how to develop one’s dormant love of God. Bhagavad-gita
is the preliminary study of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and therefore it ends with the
words, sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekarn saranari vraja: ‘Abandon all varieties
of religion and just surrender unto Me.” (Bg. 18.66) To adopt this means, one
should reject all ideas of religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and
liberation and fully engage in the service of the Lord, which is transcendental to
these four principles. Love of Godhead is the original function of the spirit soul,
and itis as eternal 25 the soul and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This eternity
is called sanatana. When one revives his loving service to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, it should be understood that he has been successful in achieving the
desired goal of his life. At that time everything is automatically done by the mercy
of the holy name, and the devotee automatically advances in his spiritual progress.

TEXT 85
পঞ্চম পুরুষার্থ - প্রেমানন্দামৃতসিদ্ধু ৷
মোসক্ষাদি खांनन्न যার নহে এক বিন্দু ॥ ৮৫ ॥
paincama. purusartha—premanandamrta-sindhu
moksadi ananda yara nahe eka bindu
SYNONYMS

panicama—fifth; purusa-artha—goal of life; prema-ananda—the spiritual bliss of
love of Godhead; amrta—eternal; sindhu—ocean; moksa-adi—liberation and other
principles of religiosity; ananda—pleasures derived from them; yara—whose;nahe—
never comparable; eka—one; bindu—drop.

TRANSLATION

“‘For a devotee who has actually developed bhava, the pleasure derived from

dharma, artha, kama and moksa appears like a drop in the presence of the sea.


--- Page 71 ---
70 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 86
কৃষ্ণনামের ফল-_“প্রেমা”, ALTE कञ्च |
ভাগেযে সেই (थमा তোমায় করিল TAH ॥ ৮৬ ॥
krspa-namera phala— ‘prema’, sarva-$astre kaya
bhagye sei prema tomaya Rarila udaya
SYNONYMS
krspa-namera—of the holy name of the Lord; phala—result; prema—love of God-
head; sarva—in all; Sastre—revealed scriptures; kaya—describe; bhagye—fortunately;
sei—that; prema—love of Godhead; tomaya—Y our; karila—has done; udaya—arisen.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘The conclusion of all revealed scriptures is that one should awaken his dormant
love of Godhead. You are greatly fortunate to have already done so.
TEXT 87
প্রেমার স্বভাবে করে চিত্ত-তন্ু (WIS |
FLA চরণ-প্রাপ্ড্যে উপজায় লোভ ॥ ৮৭ ॥
premara sva-bhave kare citta-tanu ksobha
krspera carapa-praptye upajaya lobha
SYNONYMS
premara—out of love of Godhead; sva-bhave—by nature; kare—it induces; citta—
the consciousness; tanu—the body; ksobha—agitated; krspera—of Lord Krsna;
carana—lotus feet; praptye—having obtained; wpajaya—it so becomes; lobha—
aspiration.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘Itis a characteristic of love of Godhead that by nature it induces transcendental
symptoms in one’s body and makes one more and more greedy to achieve the
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 88
প্রেমার স্বভাবে ভক্ত হাসে, FITCH, গায়।
Bus হইয়। নাচে, ইতি-উতি ধায় ॥ ৮৮ ॥
premara sva-bhave bhakta hase, kande, gaya
unmatta ha-iya nace, iti-uti dhaya


--- Page 72 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 71
SYNONYMS
premara—by such love of Godhead; sva-bhave—by nature; bhakta—the devotee;
hase—laughs; kande—cries; gaya—chants; unmatta—mad; ha-iya—becoming; nace—
dances; jiti—here; uti—there; dhaya—moves.
TRANSLATION
‘““‘When one actually develops love of Godhead, he naturally sometimes cries,
sometimes laughs, sometimes chants and sometimes runs here and there just like a
madman.
PURPORT
In this connection Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami says that sometimes persons
who have no love of Godhead at all display ecstatic bodily symptoms. Artificially
they sometimes laugh, cry and dance just like madmen, but this cannot help one
progress in Krsna consciousness. Rather, such artificial agitation of the body is to
be given up when one naturally develops the necessary bodily symptoms. Actual
blissful life, manifested in genuine spiritual laughing, crying and dancing, is the
symptom of real advancement in Krsna consciousness, which can be achieved by a
person who always voluntarily engages in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord. If one who is not yet developed imitates such symptoms artificially, he creates
chaos in the spiritual life of human society.
TEXTS 89-90
স্বেদ, कन्थे, রোমাঞ্চাশ্রড, গদগদ, বৈবর্ণ্য৷
উদ্মাদ, বিষাদ, ধৈর্য, গর্ব, হর্য, HD ॥ ৮৯ ॥
এত ভাবে (यब ভক্তগণেরে নাচায়।
FLA আল্ন্দামৃততলাগঞ্জে SIH ॥ ৯০ ॥
sveda, kampa, romaricasru, gadgada, vaivarnya
unmada, visada, dhairya, garva, harsa, dainya
eta bhave prema bhaktaganere nacaya
krspera anandamrta-sagare bhasaya
SYNONYMS
sveda—perspiration; Rampa—trembling; romarica—standing of the hairs on the
body; asru—tears; gadgada—faltering;vaivarpya—changing of bodily color; unmada—
madness; visada—melancholy; dhairya—patience; garva—pride; harsa—joyfulness;
dainya—humbleness; eta—in many ways; bhave—in ecstasy; prema—love of Godhead;
bhakta-gapere—unto the devotees; nacaya—causes to dance; krspera—of Lord Krsna;
ananda—transcendental bliss; amrta—nectar; sagare—in the ocean; bhasaya—floats.


--- Page 73 ---
72 $H-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION

‘“‘Perspiration, trembling, standing of one’s bodily hairs, tears, faltering, fading,
madness, melancholy, patience, pride, joy and humility—these are various natural
symptoms of ecstatic love of Godhead, which causes a devotee to dance and float
in an ocean of transcendental bliss while chanting the Hare Krsna mantra.

PURPORT

Srila Jiva Gosvami, in his Priti-sandarbha (verse 66), explains this stage of love
of Godhead: bhagavat-priti-rupa vrttir mayadimayi na bhavati; Rintu svarupa-
Saktyananda-rupa, yadananda-paradhinah sri-bhagavan apiti. Similarly, in the 69th
verse he offers further explanation: tad evarh priter laksapari citta-dravas tasya ca
romaharsadikam. kathaiicij jate'pi citta-drave romaharsadike va na ced asaya-
Suddhis tadapi na bhakteh samyag-avirbhava iti jAiapitam. asaya-$uddhir nama canya-
tatparya-parityagah priti-tatparyari ca. ataevanimitta svabhaviki ceti tad visesapam.
Transcendental love of Godhead is not under the jurisdiction of the material energy,
for it is the transcendental bliss and pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Since the Supreme Lord is also under the influence of transcendental bliss,
when one comes in touch with such bliss in love of Godhead, one’s heart melts, and
the symptoms of this are standing of the hairs on end, etc. Sometimes a person thus
melts and manifests these transcendental symptoms yet at the same time is not well
behaved in his personal transactions. This indicates that he has not yet reached com-
plete perfection in devotional life. In other words, a devotee who dances in ecstasy
but after dancing and crying appears to be attracted to material affairs has not yet
reached the perfection of devotional service, which is called asaya-Suddhi, or the
perfection of existence. One who attains the perfection of existence is completely
averse to material enjoyment and engrossed in transcendental love of Godhead. It is
therefore to be concluded that the ecstatic symptoms of asaya-Suddhi are visible
when adevotee’s service has no material cause and is purely spiritual in nature. These
are characteristics of transcendental love of Godhead, as stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam:

sa vai purhsari paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje
ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati
“That religion is best which causes its followers to become ecstatic in love of God
which is unmotivated and free from material impediments, for this only can com-
pletely satisfy the self.” (Bhag. 1.2.6)
TEXT 91
ভাল হৈল, পাইলে তুমি পরমণপুকুষর্থ৷
তোমার প্রেমেতে আমি হৈলাঙ কৃতার্থ ॥ ৯১ ॥


--- Page 74 ---
Adi-I1la, Chapter 7 73
bhala haila, paile tumi parama-purusartha
tomara premete ami hailan krtartha
SYNONYMS
bhala haila—let it be good; paile—You have gotten; tumi—You; parama-
purusartha—superexcellent goal of life; tomara—Y our; premete—by development in
love of Godhead; ami—|; hailarn—become; krta-artha—very much obliged.
TRANSLATION
“‘It is very good, my dear child, that You have attained the supreme goal of life
by developing love of Godhead. Thus You have pleased me very much, and | am
very much obliged to You.
PURPORT
According to revealed scriptures, if a spiritual master can convert even one soul
into a perfectly pure devotee, his mission in life is fulfilled. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura always used to say, ‘Even at the expense of all the properties,
temples and mathas that | have, if | could convert even one person into a pure
devotee, my mission would be fulfilled.” It is very difficult, however, to understand
the science of Krsna, not to speak of developing love of Godhead. Therefore if by
the grace of Lord Caitanya and the spiritual master a disciple attains the standard of
pure devotional service, the spiritual master is very happy. The spiritual master is
not actually happy if the disciple brings him money, but when he sees that a disciple
is following the regulative principles and advancing in spiritual life, he is very. glad
and feels obliged to such an advanced disciple.
TEXT 92
নাচ, গাও, ভক্তসঙ্গে কর সংকীর্তন।
কৃষ্ণনাম BARR তার” সর্বজন ॥ ৯২ ॥
77200), gao, bhakta-sange kara sankirtana
krspa-nama upadesi’ tara’ sarva-jana
SYNONYMS
naca—go on dancing; 460०-८) 211६; bhakta-sange—in the society of devotees; kara—
continue; sankirtana—chanting of the holy name in assembly; krspa-nama—the holy
name of Krsna; upadesi—by instructing; tara —deliver;sarva-jana—all fallen souls.
TRANSLATION
““‘My dear child, continue dancing, chanting and performing sankirtana
in association with devotees. Furthermore, go out and preach the value of


--- Page 75 ---
74 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
chanting Krsna-nama, for by this process You will be able to deliver all fallen
souls.’

PURPORT

It is another ambition of the spiritual master to see his disciples not only chant,
dance and follow the regulative principles but also preach the sankirtana movement
to others in order to deliver them, for the Krsna consciousness movement is based
on the principle that one should become as perfect as possible in devotional service
oneself and also preach the cult for others’benefit. There are two classes of unalloyed
devotees—namely, gosthy-anandis and bhajananandis. Bhajananandi refers to one
who is satisfied to cultivate devotional service for himself, and gosthy-Gnandi is one
who is not satisfied simply to become perfect himself but wants to see others also
take advantage of the holy name of the Lord and advance in spiritual life. The out-
standing example is Prahlada Maharaja. When he was offered a benediction by Lord
Nrsimhadeva, Prahlada Maharaja said:

naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyas
tvad-virya-gayana-mahamyta-magna-cittah
Soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha-
maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimudhan
“My dear Lord, | have no problems and want no benediction from You because |
am quite satisfied to chant Your holy name. This is sufficient for me because when-
ever | chant | immediately merge in an ocean of transcendental bliss. | only lament
to see others bereft of Your love. They are rotting in material activities for transient
material pleasure and spoiling their lives toiling all day and night simply for sense
gratification, with no attachment for love of Godhead. | am simply lamenting for
them and devising various plans to deliver them from the clutches of maya.”
(Bhag. 7.9.43)

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura explains in his Anubhasya, “A person
who has attracted the attention of the spiritual master by his sincere service likes to
dance and chant with similarly developed Krsna conscious devotees. The spiritual
master authorizes such a devotee to deliver fallen souls in all parts of the world.
Those who are not advanced prefer to chant the Hare Krsna mantra in a solitary
place.” Such activities constitute, in the language of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura, a type of cheating process in the sense that they imitate the activities of
exalted personalities like Haridasa Thakura. One should not attempt to imitate such
exalted devotees. Rather, everyone should endeavor to preach the cult of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu in all parts of the world and thus become successful in spiri-
tual life. One who is not very expert in preaching may chant in a secluded place,
avoiding bad association, but for one who is actually advanced, preaching and
meeting people who are not engaged in devotional service are not disadvantages. A
devotee gives the nondevotees his association but is not affected by their misbe-
havior. Thus by the activities of a pure devotee even those who are bereft of love of
Godhead get a chance to become devotees of the Lord one day. In this connection


--- Page 76 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 75
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura advises that one discuss the verse in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, naitat samacarej jatu manasapi hy anisvarah (10.33.31),and the follow-
ing verse in Bhakti-rasamyta-sindhu:
anasaktasya visayan yatharham upayurijatah
nirbandhah krspa-sambandhe yuktarin vairagyam ucyate
(B.r.s. 1.2.255)
One should not imitate the activities of great personalities. One should be detached
from material enjoyment and should accept everything in connection with Krsna’s
service.
TEXT 93
এত বলি” এক শ্লোক শিখাইল মোরে |
ভাগবতের সার এই বলে বারে বারে ॥ ৯৩ ॥
eta bali’ eka $loka Sikhaila more
bhagavatera sara ei— bale vare vare
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; eka—one; sloka—verse; $ikhaila—has taught; more—unto Me;
bhagavatera—of Srimad-Bhagavatam; sara—essence; ei—this is; bale—he said; vare
vare—again and again.
TRANSLATION
“Saying this, My spiritual master taught Me one verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam.
It is the essence of all the Bhagavatam’s instructions; therefore he instructed Me this
verse again and again.
PURPORT
This verse from S$rimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.40) was spoken by Sri Narada Muni
to Vasudeva to teach him about Bhagavata-dharma. Vasudeva had already achieved
the result of Bhagavata-dharma because Lord Krsna appeared in his house as his son,
yet in order to teach others, he desired to hear from Sri Narada Muni to be en-
lightened in the process of Bhagavata-dharma. This is the humbleness of a great
devotee.
TEXT 94
এবংত্রতঃ স্বপ্রিয়নামকীর্ত্যা
জাতাঙ্নরাগো करर देष्ठः |
হুসত্যথো CARRS রৌতি গায়-
ত্যুন্মাদবন্ন ত্যতি লোকবাহ্‌ঃ ॥ ৯৪ ॥


--- Page 77 ---
76 SiT-Caitanya-caritimrta
evarhvratah sva-priya-nama-Rirtya
jatanurago druta-citta uccaih
hasaty atho roditi rauti gayaty
unmadavan nrtyati loka-bahyah
SYNONYMS
evarhvratah—when one thus engages in the vow to chant and dance; sva—own;
priya—very dear; nama—holy name; kirtya—by chanting; jata—in this way develops;
anuragah—attachment; druta-cittah—very eagerly; uccaih—loudly; hasati—laughs;
atho—also; roditi—cries; rauti—becomes agitated; gayati—chants; unmadavat—like a
madman; nrtyati—dancing; loka-bahyah— without caring for outsiders.
TRANSLATION
'“‘When a person is actually advanced and takes pleasure in chanting the holy
name of the Lord, who is very dear to him, he is agitated and loudly chants the
holy name. He also laughs, cries, becomes agitated and chants just like a madman,
not caring for outsiders.’
TEXTS 95-96
এই তার বাক্যে আমি ছৃঢ় বিশ্বাস ধরি'।
নিরস্তর কৃষ্ণনাম সংকীর্তন করি ॥ ৯৫ ॥
সেই কুষ্ণনাম কভু গাওয়ায়, নাচায়।
গাহি, নাচি নাহি আমি আপন-ইচ্ছায় ॥ ৯৬ ॥
ei tanra vakye ami 01070 visvasa dhari’
nirantara Rrsna-nama sankirtana kari
sei krsna-nama kabhu gaoyaya, nacaya
gahi, naci nahi ami apana-icchaya
SYNONYMS
ei—this; tanra—his (My spiritual master’s); vakye—in the words of; ami—1; drdha—
firm; vi§vasa—faith; dhari’—depend; nirantara—always; krspa-nama—the holy name
of Lord Krsna; sankirtana—chanting; kari—continue; sei— that; krspa-nama—the holy
name of Lord Krsna; kabhu—sometimes; gaoyaya—causes Me to chant; nacaya—
causes Me to dance; gahi—by chanting; naci—dancing; nahi—not; ami—Myself;
apana—own; icchaya— will.
TRANSLATION
“I firmly believe in these words of My spiritual master, and therefore | always
chant the holy name of the Lord, alone and in the association of devotees. That holy
name of Lord Krsna sometimes causes Me to chant and dance, and therefore |
chant and dance. Please do not think that | intentionally do it. | do it automatically.


--- Page 78 ---
01413, Chapter 7 77
PURPORT

A person who cannot keep his faith in the words of his spiritual master but acts
independently never receives the authority to chant the holy name of the Lord. It
is said in the Vedas:

yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah
“Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiri-
tual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed.” This
Vedic injunction is very important, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu supported it by
His personal behavior. Believing in the words of His spiritual master, He introduced
the sankirtana movement, just as the present Krsna consciousness movement was
started with belief in the words of our spiritual master. He wanted to preach, we
believed in his words and tried somehow or other to fulfill them, and now this
movement has become successful all over the world. Therefore faith in the words of
the spiritual master and in the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the secret of
success. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu never disobeyed the orders of His spiritual master
and stopped propagating the sankirtana movement. Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Gosvami, at the time of his passing away, ordered all his disciples to work
conjointly to preach the mission of Caitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world. Later,
however, some self-interested, foolish disciples disobeyed his orders. Each one of
them wanted to become head of the mission,and they fought in the courts, neglect-
ing the order of the spiritual master, and the entire mission was defeated. We are not
proud of this; however, the truth must be explained. We believed in the words of
our spiritual master and started in a humble way—in a helpless way—but due to the
spiritual force of the order of the supreme authority, this movement has become
successful.

It is to be understood that when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chanted and danced,
He did so by the influence of the pleasure potency of the spiritual world. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu never considered the holy name of the Lord to be a material
vibration, nor does any pure devotee mistake the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra
to be a material musical manifestation. Lord Caitanya never tried to be the
master of the holy name; rather He taught us how to be servants of the holy
name. If one chants the holy name of the Lord just to make a show, not know-
ing the secret of success, he may increase his bile secretion, but he will never
attain perfection in chanting the holy name. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu presented
himself in this way: “I am a great fool and do not have knowledge of right and
wrong. In order to understand the real meaning of Vedanta-sutra, | never followed
the explanation of the Sarikara-sampradaya or Mayavadi sannyasis. I'm very much
afraid of the illogical arguments of the Mayavadi philosophers. Therefore | think |
have no authority regarding their explanations of Vedanta-sutra. | firmly believe
that simply chanting the holy name of the Lord can remove all misconceptions of
the material world. | believe that simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord one
can attain the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. In this age of quarrel and


--- Page 79 ---
78 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
disagreement, the chanting of the holy names is the only way to liberation from
the material clutches.

“By chanting the holy name,” Lord Caitanya continued, “1 became almost mad.
However, after inquiring from My spiritual master | have come to the conclusion
that instead of striving for achievement in the four principles of religiosity (dharma),
economic development (artha), sense gratification (kama) and liberation (moksa), it
is better if somehow or other one develops transcendental love of Godhead. That is
the greatest success in life. One who has attained love of Godhead chants and dances
by his nature, not caring for the public.” This stage of life is known as bhagavata-
jivana, or the life of a devotee.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, “I never chanted and danced to make an
artificial show. | dance and chant because | firmly believe in the words of My spiri-
tual master. Although the Mayavadi philosophers do not like this chanting and
dancing, | nevertheless perform it on the strength of his words. Therefore it is to be
concluded that | deserve very little credit for these activities of chanting and dancing,
for they are being done automatically by the grace of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.”

TEXT 97
কৃষ্ণনামে যে STH AG- SNF |
द्वक्रानम्ब्‌ SIF खोट খাতোদক-সম ॥ ৯৭ ॥
krsna-name ye ananda-sindhu-asvadana
brahmananda tara age khatodaka-sama
SYNONYMS

krsna-name—in the holy name of the Lord; ye—which; ananda—transcendental
bliss; sindhu—ocean; asvadana—tasting; brahmananda—the transcendental bliss of
impersonal understanding; tara—its;age—in front; khata-udaka—shallow water in the
canals; sarma—like.

TRANSLATION

“Compared to the ocean of transcendental bliss which is tasted by chanting the
Hare Krsna mantra, the pleasure derived from impersonal Brahman realization
[brahmananda] is like the shallow water in a canal.

PURPORT

In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is stated:

brahmanando bhaved esa
cet pararddha-gunikrtah

naiti bhakti-sukhambodheh
paramanu-tulam api


--- Page 80 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 79
“If brahmananda, the transcendental bliss derived from understanding impersonal
Brahman, were multiplied a million times, such a quantity of brahmananda could
not compare with even an atomic portion of the pleasure relished in pure devo-
tional service.” (B.r.s. 1.1.38)
TEXT 98
স্বতসাক্ষাৎকরণাহলাদ-বিশুদ্ধাক্কিস্থিতস্ত মে
TUM গোস্পদায়ন্তে ব্রাহ্মাণ্যপি জগদ্গুরেো ॥ ৯৮ ॥
tvat-saksatkaranahlada-
visuddhabdhi-sthitasya me
sukhani gospadayante
brahmany api jagad-guro
SYNONYMS
tvat—Your; saksat—meeting; karapa—such action; ahlada—pleasure; visuddha—
spiritually purified; abdhi—ocean; sthitasya—being situated; me—by me; sukhani—
happiness; gospadayante—a small hole created by the hoof of a calf; brahmani—the
pleasure derived from impersonal Brahman understanding; api—also; jagat-guro—O
master of the universe.
TRANSLATION
“‘My dear Lord, 0 master of the universe, since | have directly seen You, my
transcendental bliss has taken the shape of a great ocean. Being situated in that
ocean, | now realize all other so-called happiness to be like the water contained in
the hoofprint of a calf.””
PURPORT
The transcendental bliss enjoyed in pure devotional service is like an ocean,
whereas material happiness and even the happiness to be derived from the realiza-
tion of impersonal Brahman are just like the water in the hoofprint of a calf. This is
a verse from the. Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (14.36).
TEXT 99
প্রভুর মিষ্টবাক্য শুনি” সন্ন্যাসীর भेन |
চিত্ত ফিরি' গেল, কহে মধুর বচন ॥ ৯৯ ॥
prabhura mista-vakya Suni’ sannyasira gana
citta phiri’ gela, kahe madhura vacana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; mista-vakya—sweet words; suni’—after hearing; sannyasira
gana—all the groups of sannyasis; citta—consciousness; phiri’—moved; gela—went;
kahe—said; madhura— pleasing; vacana—words.


--- Page 81 ---
80 $r-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION

After hearing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the Mayavadi sannyasis were

moved. Their minds changed, and thus they spoke with pleasing words.
PURPORT

The Mayavadi sannyasis met Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Varanasi to criticize the
Lord regarding His participation in the sankirtana movement, which they did not
like. This demonic nature of opposition to the sankirtana movement perpetually
exists. As it existed in the time of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, similarly it existed long
before that, even in the time of Prahlada Maharaja. He used to chant in sankirtana
although his father did not like it, and that was the reason for misunderstanding
between the father and son. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says:

na marn duskrtino mudhah

prapadyante naradhamah

mayayapahrta-jiana
asurarh bhavam asritah

“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose knowledge
is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not
surrender unto Me.” (Bg. 7.15) The Mayavadisannyasis are asurarn bhavam asritah,
which means that they have taken the path of the asuras (demons) who do not be-
lieve in the existence of the form of the Lord. The Mayavadis say that the ultimate
source of everything is impersonal, and in this way they deny the existence of God.
Saying that there is no God is direct denial of God, and saying that God exists but
has no head, legs and hands and cannot speak, hear or eat is a negative way of
denying His existence. A person who cannot see is called blind, one who cannot
walk can be called lame, one who has no hands can be called helpless, one who can-
not speak can be called dumb, and one who cannot hear can be called deaf. The
Mayavadis’ proposition that God has no legs, no eyes, no ears and no hands is an in-
direct way of insulting Him by defining Him as blind, deaf, dumb, lame, helpless,
etc. Therefore although they present themselves as great Vedantists, they are fac-
tually mayayapahrta-jiiana; in other words, they seem to be very learned scholars,

but the essence of their knowledge has been taken away.

Impersonalist Mayavadis always try to defy Vaisnavas because Vaignavas accept
the Supreme Personality as the supreme cause and want to serve Him, talk with Him
and see Him, just as the Lord is also eager to see His devotees and talk, eat and
dance with them. These personal exchanges of love do not appeal to the Mayavadi
sannyasis. Therefore the original purpose of the Mayavadi sannyasis of Benares in
meeting Caitanya Mahaprabhu was to defeat His personal conception of God. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, as a preacher, turned the minds of the Mayavadi
sannyasis. They were melted by the sweet words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
thus became friendly and spoke to Him also in sweet words. Similarly, all preachers
will have to meet opponents, but they should not make them more inimical. They
are already enemies, and if we talk with them harshly or impolitely their enmity will
merely increase. We should therefore follow in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya


--- Page 82 ---
Adi-ila, Chapter 7 81
Mahaprabhu as far as possible and try to convince the opposition by quoting from
the $astras and presenting the conclusion of the acaryas. It is in this way that we
should try to defeat all the enemies of the Lord.
TEXT 100
যে কিছু কহিলে তুমি, সব সত্য হয়।
FRAT সেই পায়, যার ভাগোযোদ্য় ॥ ১০০ ॥
ye Richu kahile tumi, saba satya haya
krspa-prema sei paya, yara bhagyodaya
SYNONYMS
ye—all; kichu—that; kahile—You spoke; tumi—You; saba—everything; satya—
truth; haya—becomes; krspa-prema—love of Godhead; sei—anyone; paya—achieves;
yara—whose; bhagya-udaya—fortune is now awakened.
TRANSLATION
“Dear $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, what You have said is all true. Only one who is
favored by fortune attains love of Godhead.
PURPORT
One who is actually very fortunate can begin Krsna consciousness, as stated by
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Srila 1২003 Gosvami:
brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
There are millions of living entities who have become conditioned by the laws of
material nature, and they are wandering throughout the planetary systems of this
universe in different bodily forms. Among them, one who is fortunate meets a bona
fide spiritual master by the grace of Krsna and comes to understand the meaning of
devotional service. By discharging devotional service under the direction of the bona
fide spiritual master or acarya, he develops love of Godhead. One whose love of God-
head (Krsna-prema) is awakened and who thus becomes a devotee of the incon-
ceivable Supreme Personality of Godhead is to be considered extremely fortunate.
The Mayavadi sannyasis admitted this fact to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It is not
easy for one to become a Krsna conscious person, but by the mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu it can be possible, as will be proven in the course of this narration.
TEXT 101
कटर ভক্তি কর - ইহায় সবার मटखास |
CANT না শুন কেনে, তার কিবা দোষ ॥ ১০১॥


--- Page 83 ---
82 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
krsne bhakti kara——ihaya sabara santosa
vedanta na suna Rene, tara kiba dosa
SYNONYMS
krspe—unto Krsna; bhakti—devotional service; kara—do; ihaya—in this matter;
sabara—of everyone; santogsa—there is satisfaction; vedanta—the philosophy of
Vedanta-sutra; na—do not; suna—hear; kene—why; tara—of the philosophy; kiba—
what is; dosa—fault.
TRANSLATION
“Dear sir, there is no objection to Your being a great devotee of Lord Krsna.
Everyone is satisfied with this. But why do You avoid discussion on the Vedanta-
satra? What is the fault in it?”
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in this connection, ‘“Mayavadi
sannyasis accept that the commentary by Sri Sarkaracarya known as Sariraka-
bhasya gives the real meaning of Vedanta-satra. In other words, Mayavadi
sannyasis accept the meanings expressed in the explanations of Vedanta-sitra
by Sarkaracarya, which are based on monism. Thus they explain Vedanta-
sutra, the Upanisads and all such Vedic literatures in their own impersonal way.”
The great Mayavadi sannyasi Sadananda Yogindra has written a book known as
Vedanta-sara in which he writes:
vedanto nama upanisat-pramanam
tad-upakarini sariraka-sutradini ca
According to Sadananda Yogindra, the Vedanta and Upanisads, as presented by Sri
Sarikaracarya in his Sariraka-bhasya commentary, are the only sources of Vedic evi-
dence. Actually, however, Vedanta refers to the essence of Vedic knowledge, and it
is not a fact that there is nothing more than Sarkaracarya’s Sariraka-bhasya. There
are other Vedanta commentaries written by Vaisnava acaryas, none of whom follow
Sri Sankaracarya or accept the imaginative commentary of his school. Their com-
mentaries are based on the philosophy of duality. Monist philosophers like Sarikar-
acarya and his followers want to establish that God and the living entity are one,
and instead of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead they present them-
selves as God. They want to be worshiped as God by others. Such persons do not
accept the philosophies of the Vaisnava acaryas, which are known as suddhadvaita
(purified monism), Suddha-dvaita (purified dualism), viSistadvaita (specific monism),
dvaitadvaita (monism and dualism) and acintya-bhedabheda (inconceivable oneness
and difference). Mayavadis do not discuss these philosophies, for they are firmly
convinced of their own philosophy of kevaladvaita, exclusive monism. Accepting
this system of philosophy as the pure understanding of Vedanta-sitra, they believe
that Krsna has a body made of material elements and that the activities of loving
service to Krsna are sentimentality. They are known as Mayavadis because according
to their opinion Krsna has a body which is made of maya, and the loving service of the


--- Page 84 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 83
Lord executed by devotees is also maya. They consider such devotional service to
be an aspect of fruitive activities (karma-kapda). According to their view, bhakti
consists of mental speculation or sometimes meditation. This is the difference be-
tween the Mayavadi and Vaisnava philosophies.
TEXT 102
এত শুনি' হাসি' প্রভু वलिल। বচন।
परथ नां মানহ যদি, করি নিবেদন ॥ ১০২ ॥
eta Suni’ hasi’ prabhu balila vacana
duhkha na manaha yadi, kari nivedana
SYNONYMS
eta—thus; $uni’—hearing; Hasi’—smiling; prabhu— Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
balila—said; vacana—His words; duhkha—unhappy; na—do not; manaha—take it;
yadi—if; kari—| say; nivedana—something unto you.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the Mayavadi sannyasis speak in that way, Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu smiled slightly and said, “My dear sirs, if you don’t mind | can say some-
thing to you regarding Vedanta philosophy.”
PURPORT
The Mayavadi sannyasis, appreciating Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, inquired from
Him why He did not discuss Vedanta philosophy. Actually, however, the entire
system of Vaisnava activities is based on Vedanta philosophy. Vaisnavas do not
neglect Vedanta, but they do not care to understand Vedanta on the basis of the
Sariraka-bhasya commentary. Therefore, to clarify the situation, Lord 91] Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, with the permission of the Mayavadi sannyasis, wanted to speak
regarding Vedanta philosophy. The Vaisnavas are by far the greatest philosophers
in the world, and the greatest among them was Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhu, whose
philosophy was again presented less than four hundred years later by Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Maharaja. Therefore one must know very well
that Vaisnava philosophers are not sentimentalists or cheap devotees like the
sahajiyas. All the Vaisnava acaryas were vastly learned scholars who understood
Vedanta philosophy fully, for unless one knows Vedanta philosophy he cannot be
an acarya. To be accepted as an acarya among Indian transcendentalists who follow
the Vedic principles, one must become a vastly learned scholar in Vedanta philoso-
phy, either by studying it or hearing it. ॥
Bhakti develops in pursuance of Vedanta philosophy. This is stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.12):
tac chraddadhana munayo
Jjhana-vairagya-yuktaya


--- Page 85 ---
84 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
pasyanty atmani catmanarm

bhaktya Sruta-grhitaya
The words bhaktya Sruta-grhitaya in this verse are very important, for they indicate
that bhakti must be based upon the philosophy of the Upanisads and Vedanta-sitra.
Srila Ripa Gosvamf said:

Sruti-smrti-purapadi-

paiicaratra-vidhiri vina
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva Ralpate
‘‘Devotional service performed without reference to the Vedas, Puranas, Paficaratras,
etc., must be considered sentimentalism, and it causes nothing but disturbance to
society.” There are different grades of Vaisnavas (kanistha-adhikari, madhyama-
adhikari, uttama-adhikari), but to be a madhyama-adhikarf preacher one must be a
learned scholar in Vedanta-sitra and other Vedic literature because when bhakti-
yoga develops on the basis of Vedanta philosophy it is factual and steady. In this
connection we may quote the translation and purport of the verse mentioned
above (Srimad-Bhagavatam, 1.2.12):
TRANSLATION
That Absolute Truth is realized by the seriously inquisitive student or sage who is well
equipped with knowledge and who has betome detached by rendering devotional service
and hearing the Vedanta-sruti.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is realized in full by the process of devotional service to the Lord

Vasudeva or the Personality of Godhead who is the full-fledged Absolute Truth. Brahman
is His transcendental bodily effulgence, and Paramatma is His partial representation. As
such, Brahman or Paramatma realization of the Absolute Truth is but a partial realization.
There are four different types of living beings, the karmis, the jianis, the yogis and the
devotees. The karmis are materialistic, whereas the other three are transcendental. The
first-class transcendentalists are the devotees who have realized the Supreme Person. The
second-class transcendentalists are those who have partially realized the plenary portion
of the absolute person. And the third-class transcendentalists are those who have barely
realized the spiritual focus of the absolute person. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita and
other Vedic literatures, the Supreme Person is realized by devotional service, which is
backed by full knowledge and detachment from the material association. We have already
discussed the point that devotional service is followed by knowledge and detachment from
material association. As Brahman and Paramatma realization are imperfect realizations of
the Absolute Truth, so the means of realizing Brahman and Paramatma, i.e., the paths of
Jnana and yoga, are also imperfect means of realizing the Absolute Truth. Devotional
service, which is based on the foreground of full knowledge combined with detachment
from material association fixed up on the aural reception of the Vedanta-sruti, is the only
perfect method of realizing the Absolute Truth by the seriously inquisitive student. Devo-
tional service is not, therefore, meant for the less intelligent class of transcendentalist.


--- Page 86 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 85

There are three classes of devotees, namely first, second and third class. The third-class
devotees, or the neophytes, who have no knowledge nor are detached from the material
association, but who are simply attracted by the preliminary processes of worshiping the
Deity in the temple, are called material devotees. Material devotees are more attached to
material benefit than transcendental profit. Therefore, one has to make definite progress
from the position of material devotional service to the second-class devotional position. In
the second-class position, the devotee can see four principles in the devotional line, namely
the Personality of Godhead, His devotees, the ignorant and the envious. One has to raise
himself at least to the stage of a second-class devotee and thus become eligible to know the
Absolute Truth.

A third-class devotee, therefore, has to receive the instructions of devotional service from
the authoritative sources of Bhagavatam. The number one Bhagavatam is the established
personality of devotee, and the other Bhagavatam is the message of Godhead. The third-class
devotee has, therefore, to go to the personality of devotee in order to learn the instructions
of devotional service. Such a personality of devotee is not a professional man who earns his
livelihood by the business of Bhagavatam. Such a devotee must be a representative of
Sukadeva Gosvamf, like Stita Gosvamf, and must preach the cult of devotional service for the
all-around benefit of all people. A neophyte devotee has very little taste for hearingfrom the
authorities. Such a neophyte devotee makes a show of hearing from the professional man to
satisfy his senses. This sort of hearing and chanting has spoiled the whole thing, so one
should be very careful about the faulty process. The holy messages of Godhead, as incul-
cated in the Bhagavad-gita or in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, are undoubtedly transcendental
subjects, but even though they are so, such transcendental matters are not to be received
from the professional man who spoils them like the serpent spoils the milk simply by the
touch of his tongue.

A sincere devotee must, therefore, be prepared to hear the Vedic literature like the
Upanisads, Vedanta and other literatures left by the previous authorities or Gosvamis, for
the benefit of his progress. Without hearing such literatures, one cannot make actual prog-
ress. And without hearing and following the instructions, the show of devotional service
becomes worthless and therefore a sort of disturbance in the path of devotional service.
Unless, therefore, devotional service is established on the principles of Sruti, smrti, purapa
or pancaratra authorities, the make-show of devotional service should at once be rejected.
An unauthorized devotee should never be recognized as a pure devotee. By assimilation of
such messages from the Vedic literatures, one can see the all-pervading localized aspect of
the Personality of Godhead within his own self constantly. This is called samadhi.

TEXT 103
ইহা শুনি' বলে সর্ব FEET গণ |
তোমাকে দেখিয়ে যৈছে সাক্ষাও নারায়ণ ॥ ১০৩ ॥
iha Suni’ bale sarva sannyasira gana
tomake dekhiye yaiche saksat narayana
SYNONYMS

iha—this; S$uni’—hearing; bale—spoke; sarva—all; sannyasira—of the Mayavadi
sannyasis; gapa—group; tomake—unto You; dekhiye—we see; yaiche—exactly like;
saksat—directly; narayana—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 87 ---
86 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, the Mayavadi sannyasis became somewhat humble and addressed
Caitanya Mahaprabhu 25 Narayana Himself, who they all agreed He was.’
PURPORT
Mayavadi sannyasis address each other as Narayana. Whenever they see another
sannyasf, they offer him respect by calling, namo narayapa (1 offer my respect unto
you, Narayana'’), although they know perfectly well what kind of Narayana he is.
Narayana has four hands, but although they are puffed-up with the idea of being
Narayana, they cannot exhibit more than two. Since their philosophy declares that
Narayana and an ordinary human being are both on the same level, they sometimes
use the term daridra-narayapa (‘‘poor Narayana’), which was invented by a so-called
svami who did not know anything about Vedanta philosophy. Therefore although
all these Mayavadi sannyasis who called themselves Narayana were actually unaware
of the position of Narayana, due to their austerities Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu en-
abled them to understand Him to be Narayana Himself. Lord Caitanya is certainly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Narayana appearing as a devotee of Narayana, and
thus the Mayavadi sannyasis, understanding that He was directly Narayana Himself
whereas they were false puffed-up Narayanas, spoke to Him as follows.
TEXT 104
তোমার বচন ॐनि' gots অবণ |
তোমার মাধুরী CHIL জুড়ায় নয়ন ॥ ১০৪ ॥
tomara vacana Suni’ judaya $ravapa
tomara madhuri dekhi’ judaya nayana
SYNONYMS
tomara—Y our; vacana—speeches; Suni’—hearing; jugdaya—very much satisfied;
$ravapa—aural reception; tomara—Y our; madhuri—nectar; dekhi’—seeing; judaya—
satisfies; nayana—our eyes.
TRANSLATION
“Dear Caitanya Mahaprabhu,” they said, “to tell You the truth, we are greatly
pleased to hear Your words, and furthermore Your bodily features are so pleasing
that we feel extraordinary satisfaction in seeing You.
PURPORT
In the sastras it is said:
atah $ri-krsnpa-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah


--- Page 88 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 87
“One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His name, form,
qualities or paraphernalia, but if one renders service unto Him the Lord reveals
Himself.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234) Here one can see the effect of the
Mayavadi sannyasis’ service toward Narayana. Because they offered a little respect
to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and because they were pious and actually followed the
austere rules and regulations of sannyasa, they had some understanding of Vedanta
philosophy, and by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu they could appreciate
that He was none other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is endowed
with all six opulences. One of these opulences is His beauty. By His extraordinarily
beautiful bodily features the Mayavadisannyasis recognized Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
as Narayana Himself. He was not a farcical Narayana like the daridra-narayanas
invented by so-called sannyasis.
TEXT 105
তোমার প্রভাবে সবার আনন্দিত मन |
কভু অসঙ্গত নহে তোমার বচন ॥ ১০৫ ॥
tomara prabhave sabara anandita mana
kabhu asangata nahe tomara vacana
SYNONYMS

tomara—Your; prabhave—by influence; sabara—of everyone; anandita—joyful;
mana—mind; kabhu—at any time; asafngata—unreasonable; nahe—does not; tomara—
Your; vacana—speeches.

TRANSLATION

“Dear sir, by Your influence our minds are greatly satisfied, and we believe that

Your words will never be unreasonable. Therefore You can speak on Vedanta-siitra.”
PURPORT

In this verse the words tomara prabhave (‘‘Y our influence’’) are very important.
Unless one is spiritually advanced he cannot influence an audience. Bhaktivinoda
Thakura has sung, suddha bhakata carana renu, bhajana-anukila: ‘Unless one asso-
ciates with a pure devotee he cannot be influenced to understand devotional service.”
These Mayavadi sannyasis were fortunate enough to meet the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the form of a devotee, and certainly they were greatly influenced by
the Lord. They knew that since a perfectly advanced spiritualist never says anything
false, all his words are reasonable and agree with the Vedic version. A highly realized
person never says anything that has no meaning. Mayavadi philosophers claim to be
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and this has no meaning, but SrT Caitanya
Mahaprabhu never uttered such nonsense. The Mayavadi sannyasis were convinced
about His personality, and therefore they wanted to hear from Him the purport of
Vedanta philosophy.


--- Page 89 ---
88 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 106
প্রভু কহে, বেদাস্ত-পূত্র ঈশ্বর-বচন।
ব্যাসরূপে एकल যাহা ল্রীনারায়ণ ॥ ১০৬ ॥
prabhu kahe, vedanta-sutra iSvara-vacana
vyasa-rupe Raila yaha sri-narayana
SYNONYMS

prabhu kahe—the Lord began to speak; vedanta-sutra—the philosophy of Vedanta-
sutra; Svara-vacana—spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vyasa-rupe—
in the form of Vyasadeva; kaila—He has made; yaha—whatever; Sri-narayapa— the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

The Lord said: “Vedanta philosophy consists of words spoken by the Supreme

Personality of Godhead Narayana in the form of Vyasadeva.
PURPORT

Vedanta-sutra, which consists of codes revealing the method of understanding
Vedic knowledge, is the concise form of all Vedic knowledge. It begins with the
words athato brahma-jijfiasa (‘‘now is the time to inquire about the Absolute Truth”).
The human form of life is especially meant for this purpose, and therefore the
Vedanta-sutra very concisely explains the human mission. This is confirmed by the
words of the Vayu and Skanda Puranas, which define a sutra as follows:

alpaksaram asandigdharn saravat visvatomukham
astobhamanavadyarh ca sutrarh sutra-vido viduh

“A sutra is a code that expresses the essence of all knowledge in a minimum of words.
It must be universally applicable and faultless in its linguistic presentation.”” Anyone
familiar with such sutras must be aware of the Vedanta-sutra, which is well known
among scholars by the following different names: (1) Brahma-sutra, (2) Sariraka,
(3) Vyasa-sutra, (4) Badarayapa-sutra, (5) Uttara-mimarnsa and (6) Vedanta-darsana.

There are four chapters (adhyayas) in the Vedanta-sutra, and there are four divi-
sions (padas) in each chapter. Therefore the Vedanta-sutra may be referred to as
sodasa-pada, or sixteen divisions of codes. The theme of each and every division is
fully described in terms of five different subject matters (adhikaranas), which are
technically called pratijia, hetu, udaharapa, upanaya and nigamana. Every theme
must necessarily be explained with reference to pratijfia, or a solemn declaration of
the purpose of the treatise. The solemn declaration given in the beginning of the
Vedanta-sutra is athato brahma-jijiasa, which indicates that this book was written
with the solemn declaration to inquire about the Absolute Truth. Similarly, reasons


--- Page 90 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 89
must be expressed (hetu), examples must be given in terms of various facts
(udaharana), the theme must gradually be brought nearer for understanding
(upanaya), and finally it must be supported by authoritative quotations from the
Vedic sastras (nigamana).

According to the great dictionary compiler Hemacandra, also known as Kosakara,:
Vedanta refers to the purport of the Upanisads and the Brahmanpa portion of
the Vedas. Professor Apte, in his dictionary, describes the Brahmana portion of the
Vedas as that portion which states the rules for employment of hymns at various
sacrifices and gives detailed explanations of their origin, sometimes with lengthy
illustrations in the form of legends and stories. It is distinct from the mantra portion
of the Vedas. Hemacandra said that the supplement of the Vedas is called the
Vedanta-sutra. Veda means knowledge, and anta means the end. In other words,
proper understanding of the ultimate purpose of the Vedas is called Vedanta knowl-
edge. Such knowledge, as given in the codes of the Vedanta-siitra, must be supported
by the Upanisads.

According to learned scholars, there are three different sources of knowledge,
which are called prasthana-traya. According to these scholars, Vedanta is one of such
sources, for it presents Vedic knowledge on the basis of logic and sound arguments.
In Bhagavad-gita (13.5) the Lord said, brahma-sitra-padais caiva hetumadbhir
viniscitaih: ‘Understanding of the ultimate goal of life is ascertained in the Brahma
sutra by legitimate logic and argument concerning cause and effect.” Therefore the
Vedanta-sutra is known as nyaya-prasthana, the Upanisads are known as Sruti-
prasthana, and the Gita, Mahabharata and Purapas are known as smrti-prasthana.
All scientific knowledge of transcendence must be supported by Sruti, smrti and a
sound logical basis.

It is said that both the Vedic knowledge and the supplement of the Vedas called
the Satvata-paficaratra emanated from the breathing of Narayana, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Vedanta-siitra codes were compiled by Srila Vyasadeva,
the powerful incarnation of Sri Narayana, although it is sometimes said that they
were compiled by a great sage named Apantaratama. Both the Paficaratra and
Vedanta-siatra, however, express the same opinions. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu there-
fore confirms that there is no difference in opinion between the two, and He
declares that because Vedanta-sutra was compiled by Srila Vyasadeva, it may be
understood to have emanated from the breathing of Sri Narayana. Srila Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that while Vyasadeva was compiling the
Vedanta-sutra, seven of his great saintly contemporaries were also engaged in
similar work. These saints were Atreya Rsi, Asmarathya, Audulomi, Karsnajini,
Kasakrtsna, | 21111111} and Badari. In addition, it is stated that Parasari and Karmandi-
bhiksu also discussed the Vedanta-sutra codes before Vyasadeva.

The Vedanta-sutra consists of four chapters. The first two chapters discuss the
relationship of the living entity with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
known as sambandha-jAiana, or knowledge of the relationship. The third chapter
describes how one can act in his relationship with the Supreme Personality of God-
head. This is called abhidheya-jriana. The relationship of the living entity with the
Supreme Lord is described by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. fivera svarapa haya krspera


--- Page 91 ---
90 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta

‘nitya-dasa’: the living entity is an eternal servant of the Supreme God. (Cc. Madhya
20.108) Therefore, to act in that relationship, one must perform sadhana-bhakti, or
the prescribed duties of service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
called abhidheya-jiana. The fourth chapter describes the result of such devotional
service (prayojana-jiiana). This ultimate goal of life is to go back home, back to
Godhead. The words anavrttih sabdat in the Vedanta-sitra indicate this ultimate
goal.

Srila Vyasadeva, the powerful incarnation of Narayana, compiled Vedanta-sitra,
and in order to protect it from unauthorized commentaries, he personally composed
Srimad-Bhagavatam on the instruction of his spiritual master, Narada Muni, as the
original commentary on Vedanta-sitra. Besides Srimad-Bhagavatam, there are com-
mentaries on the Vedanta-sutra composed by all the major Vaisnava dcaryas, and in
each of them devotional service to the Lord is described very explicitly. Only those
who follow Safnkara's commentary have described Vedanta-sitra in an impersonal
way, without reference to Visnu-bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord, ৬1500.
Generally people very much appreciate this Sariraka-bhasya or impersonal descrip-
tion of the Vedanta-sitra, but all commentaries which are devoid of devotional
service to Lord Visnu must be considered to differ in purpose from the original
Vedanta-sitra. In other words, Lord Caitanya definitely confirmed that the com-
mentaries or bhasyas written by the Vaisnava acaryas on the basis of devotional
service to Lord Visnu, and not the Sariraka-bhasya of Sarkaracarya, give the actual
explanation of Vedanta-sitra.

TEXT 107
ভ্রম, প্রমাদ, বিপ্রলিপ্স, করণাপাটব।
ঈশ্বরের বাক্যে নাহি দোষ এই जव ॥ ১০৭ ॥
bhrama, pramada, vipralipsa, karapapatava
fSvarera vakye nahi 4050 ei saba

bhrama—mistake; pramada—illusion;vipralipsa—cheating purposes; karanapatava—
inefficiency of the material senses; iSvarera—of the Lord; vakye—in the speech;
nahi—there is not; dosa—fault; ९/ saba—all this.

TRANSLATION

“The material defects of mistakes, illusions, cheating and sensory inefficiency do

not exist in the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT

A mistake is the acceptance of an object to be different than what it is or the
acceptance of false knowledge. For example, one may see a rope in the dark and
think it to be a serpent, or one may see a glittering oyster shell and think it to be
gold. These are mistakes. Similarly, an illusion is a misunderstanding which arises


--- Page 92 ---
Adi-hla, Chapter 7 91
from inattention while hearing, and cheating is the transmission of such defective
knowledge to others. Materialistic scientists and philosophers generally use such
words as ‘““maybe’’ and ‘‘perhaps’’ because they do not have actual knowledge of
complete facts. Therefore their instructing others is an example of cheating. The
final defect of the materialistic person is his inefficient senses. Although our eyes,
for example, have the power to see, they cannot see that which is situated at a
distance, nor can they see the eyelid, which is the object nearest to the eye. To our
untrained eyes the sun appears to be just like a plate, and to the eyes of one who is
suffering from jaundice everything appears to be yellow. Therefore we cannot rely
on the knowledge acquired through such imperfect eyes. The ears are equally im-
perfect. We cannot hear a sound vibrated a long distance away unless we put a
telephone to our ear. Similarly, if we analyze all our senses in this way, we will find
them all to be imperfect. Therefore it is useless to acquire knowledge through the
senses. The Vedic process is to hear from authority. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says,
evar parampara-praptam imari rajarsayo viduh: “1116 supreme science was thus
received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood
it in that way.” (Bg. 4.2) We have to hear not from a telephone but from an
authorized person, for it is he who has real knowledge.

TEXT 108
উপনিষৎ-সহিত সূত্র কহে যেই ड्‌ |
FUE (AZ অর্থ পরম মহত্ব ॥ ১০৮ ॥
upanisat-sahita satra kahe yei tattva
mukhya-vrttye sei artha parama mahattva
SYNONYMS
upanisat—the authorized Vedic version; sahita—along with; sidtra—the Vedanta-
sutra; kahe—it is said; yei—the subject matter; tattva—in truth; mukhya-vrttye—by
direct understanding; se/i—that truth; artha—meaning; parama—ultimate; mahattva—
glory.

TRANSLATION

“The Absolute Truth is described by the Upanisads and Brahma-sitra, but one
must understand the verses as they are. That is the supreme glory in understanding.
PURPORT

It has become fashionable since the time of Sarikaracarya to explain everything
regarding the $@stras in an indirect way. Scholars take pride in explaining everything
in their own way, and they declare that one can understand the Vedic scriptures in
any way he likes. This “any way you like’ method is foolishness, and it has created
havoc in the Vedic culture. One cannot accept scientific knowledge in his own
whimsical way. In the science of mathematics, for example, two plus two equals


--- Page 93 ---
92 Sri-Caitanya-caritaimrta

four, and one cannot make it equal three or five. Yet although it is not possible to
alter real knowledge, people have taken to the fashion of understanding Vedic
knowledge in any way they like. It is for this reason that we have presented
Bhagavad-gita As It Is. We do not create meanings by concoction. Sometimes com-
mentators say that the word kuruksetra in the first verse of Bhagavad-gita refers to
one’s body, but we do not accept this. We understand that Kuruksetra is a place
which still exists, and according to the Vedic version it is a dharmaksetra, or place
of pilgrimage. People still go there to perform Vedic sacrifices. Foolish commen-
tators, however, say that Kuruksetra means the body and that (07८0 Pandavas refers
to the five senses. In this way they distort the meaning, and people are misled. Here
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu confirms that all Vedic literatures, including the
Upanisads, Brahma-sitras and others, whether Sruti, smrti or nyaya, must be under-
stood according to their original statements. To describe the direct meaning of the
Vedic literatures is glorious, but to describe them in one’s own way, using imperfect
senses and imperfect knowledge, is a disastrous blunder. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
fully deprecated the attempt to describe the Vedas in this way.

Regarding the Upanisads, the following eleven Upanisads are considered to be
the topmost: fa, Kena, Katha, Prasna, Mundaka, Manpdiikya, Taittiriya, Aitareya,
Chandogya, Brhad-arapyaka and Svetasvatara. However, in the Muktikopanisad,
verses 30-39, there is a description of 108 Upanisads. They are as follows:
(1) IBopanisad, (2) Kenopanisad, (3) Kathopanisad, (4) Prasnopanisad, (5) Mupdako-
panisad, (6) Mandikyopanisad, (7) Taittiriyopanisad, (8) Aitareyopanisad, (9)
Chandogyopanisad, (10) Brhad-aranyakopanisad, (11) Brahmopanisad, (12) Kaiva-
Iyopanisad, (13) Jabalopanisad, (14) Svetasvataropanisad, (15) Harnsopanisad,
(16) Arupeyopanisad, (17) Garbhopanisad, (18) Narayanopanisad, (19) Parama-
harhsopanisad, (20) Amrta-bindipanisad, (21) Nada-bindapanisad, (22)S ira-upanisad,
(23) Atharva-Sikhopanisad, (24) Maitrayany-upanisad, (25) Kausitaky-upanisad,
(26) Brhaj-jabalopanisad, (27) Nrsirmha-tapaniyopanisad, (28) Kalagni-rudropanisad,
(29) Maitreyy-upanisad, (30) Subalopanisad, (31) Ksurikopanisad, (32) Mantriko-
panisad, (33) Sarva-saropanisad, (34) Niralambopanisad, (35) Suka-rahasyopanisad,
(36) Vajra-sucikopanisad, (37) Tejo-bindupanisad, (38) Nada-bindapanisad, (39)
Dhyana-bindapanisad, (40) Brahma-vidyopanisad, (41) Yoga-tattvopanisad, (42)
Atma-bodhopanisad, (43) Narada-parivrajakopanisad, (44) Tri$ikhy-upanisad, (45)
Sitopanisad, (46) Yoga-ciddamany-upanisad, (47) Nirvapopanisad, (48) Mandala-
brahmanopanisad, (49) Daksipa-miirty-upanisad, (50) Sarabhopanisad, (51) Skando-
panisad, (52) Mahanarayanpopanisad, (53) Advaya-tarakopanisad, (54) Rama-
rahasyopanisad, (55) Rama-tapany-upanisad, (56) Vasudevopanisad, (57) Mudgalo-
panisad, (58) Sandilyopanisad, (59) Paingalopanisad, (60) Bhiksapanisad, (61)
Mahadupanisad, (62) Sarirakopanisad, (63) Yoga-<ikhopanisad, (64) Turiyatito-
panisad, (65) Sannyasopanisad, (66) Paramaharnsa-parivrajakopanisad, (67) Maliko-
panisad, (68) Avyaktopanisad, (69) Ekaksaropanisad, (70) Pdrnopanisad, (71) Siryo-
panisad, (72) Aksy-upanisad, (73) Adhyatmopanisad, (74) Kundikopanisad, (75)
Savitry-upanisad, (76) Atmopanisad, (77) Pasupatopanisad, (78) Pararh Brahmo-
panisad, (79) Avadhitopanisad, (80) Tripuratapanopanisad, (81) Devy-upanisad,
(82) Tripuropanisad, (83) Katha-rudropanisad, (84) Bhavanopanisad, (85) Hrdayo-


--- Page 94 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 93
panisad, (86) Yoga-kundaliny-upanisad, (87) Bhasmopanisad, (88) Rudraksopanisad,
(89) Ganopanisad, (90) Darsanopanisad, (91) Tarasaropanisad, (92) Mahavakyopani-
sad, (93) Paica-brahmopanisad, (94) Pranagni-hotropanisad, (95) Gopala-tapano-
panisad, (96) Krsnopanisad, (97) Yajfia-valkyopanisad, (98) Varahopanisad, (99)
Satyayany-upanisad, (100) Hayagrivopanisad, (101) Dattatreyopanisad, (102)
Garudopanisad, (103) Kaly-upanisad, (104) Jabaly-upanisad, (105) Saubhagyopani-
sad, (106) Sarasvati-rahasyopanisad, (107) Bahvrcopanisad and (108) Muktikopani-
sad. Thus there are 108 generally accepted Upanisads, of which eleven are the most
important, as previously stated.

TEXT 109
গোৌণ-বৃত্তেয যেবা ভাষ্য করিল আচার্য ।
তাহার শ্রবণে নাশ হয় সর্ব কার্য ॥ ১০৯ ॥
gauna-vrttye yeba bhasya Rarila acarya
tahara Sravane nasa haya sarva karya
SYNONYMS
gauna-vrttya—by indirect meanings; yeba—which; bhasya—commentary; karila—
prepared; dcarya—Sarkaracarya; tahara—its; $ravape—hearing; nasa—destruction;
haya—becomes; sarva—all; karya—business.
TRANSLATION
“Sripada Sankaracarya has described all the Vedic literatures in terms of indirect
meanings. One who hears such explanations is ruined.
TEXT 110
তাহার নাহিক দোষ, ঈশ্বর-আজ্ঞা পাঞ) |
গোৌণার্থ করিল মুখ্য অর্থ আচ্ছাদিয়৷ ॥ ১১০ ॥
tanhara nahika 0050), 1ঠ$৮০/০-3/ pana
gaunartha Rarila mukhya artha acchadiya
SYNONYMS
tahhara—of Sri San karacarya; nahika—there is none; dosa—fault; iSvara—the
Supreme Lord; gjfia—order; pana—receiving; gauna-artha—indirect meaning; karila—
make; mukhya—direct; artha—meaning; acchadiya—covering.

TRANSLATION

“Sankaracarya is not at fault, for he has thus covered the real purpose of the
Vedas under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 95 ---
94 Sr-Caitanya-caritamrta
PURPORT

The Vedic literature is to be considered a source of real knowledge, but if one
does not take it as it is, one will be misled. For example, Bhagavad-gita is an im-
portant Vedic literature which has been taught for many years, but because it was
commented upon by unscrupulous rascals, people derived no benefit from it, and
no one came to the conclusion of Krsna consciousness. Since the purpose of
Bhagavad-gita is now being presented as it is, however, within four or five short
years thousands of people all over the world have become Krsna conscious. That is
the difference between direct and indirect explanations of Vedic literature. There-
fore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, mukhya-vrttye sei artha parama mahattva: to
instruct Vedic literature according to its direct meaning, without false commentary,
is glorious. Unfortunately, Sri Saiikaracarya, by the order of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, compromised between atheism and theism in order to cheat the
atheists and bring them to theism, and to do so he gave up the direct method of
Vedic knowledge and tried to present a meaning which is indirect. It is with this
purpose that he wrote his Sariraka-bhasya commentary on the Vedanta-satra. One
should not, therefore, attribute very much importance to the Sariraka-bhasya. In
order to understand Vedanta philosophy, one must study the Srimad-Bhagavatam,
which begins with the words, orh namo bhagavate vasudevaya, janmady asya yato
‘nvayad itarata$ carthesv abhijiiah sva-rat: “^ offer my obeisances unto Lord ऽन
Krsna, son of Vasudeva, who is the Supreme All-pervading Personality of
Godhead. | meditate upon Him, the transcendent reality, who is the primeval
cause of all causes, from whom all manifested universes arise, in whom they
dwell and by whom they are destroyed. | meditate upon that eternally ef-
fulgent Lord who is directly and indirectly conscious of all manifestations
and yet is fully independent.” (Bhag. 1.1.1) Srimad-Bhagavatam 15 the real
commentary on the Vedanta-sitra. Unfortunately, if one is attracted to Sri
Sarikaracarya’s commentary, Sariraka-bhdsya, his spiritual life is doomed.

One may argue that since Sarikaracarya is an incarnation of Lord Siva, how is it
that he cheated people in this way? The answer is that he did so on the order of his
master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in the Padma
Purana in the words of Lord Siva himself:

mayavadam asac-chastrarn
pracchannarn bauddham ucyate
mayaiva Ralpitarn devi
kalau brahmana-rapina
brahmanas capararn raparn
nirgunarn vaksyate maya
sarvasvari jagato’py asya
mohanartharin kalau yuge
vedante tu maha-$astre
mayavadam avaidikam


--- Page 96 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 95
mayaiva vaksyate devi
Jagatarn nasa-karanat
“The Mayavada philosophy, ” Lord Siva informed his wife Parvati, “‘is impious /asac-
chastra]. It is covered Buddhism. My dear Parvati, in the form of a brahmana in
Kali-yuga | teach this imagined Mayavada philosophy. In order to cheat the atheists,
| describe the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be without form and without
qualities. Similarly, in explaining Vedanta | describe the same Mayavada philosophy
in order to mislead the entire population toward atheism by denying the personal
form of the Lord.” In the Siva Purana the Supreme Personality of Godhead told
Lord Siva:
dvaparadau yuge bhatva
kalaya manusadisu
svagamaih kalpitais tvar ca
janan mad-vimukhan kuru
“In Kali-yuga, mislead the people in general by propounding imaginary meanings
for the Vedas to bewilder them.” These are the descriptions of the Puranas.

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that mukhya-vrtti (“the direct
meaning”) is abhidha-vrtti, or the meaning which one can understand immediately
from the statements of dictionaries, whereas gauna-vrtti (‘the indirect meaning”) is
a meaning that one imagines without consulting the dictionary. For example, one
politician has said that Kuruksetra refers to the body, but in the dictionary there is
no such definition. Therefore this imaginary meaning is gauna-vrtti, whereas the
direct meaning found in the dictionary is mukhya-vrtti or abhidha-vrtti. This is the
distinction between the two. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu recommends that one under-
stand the Vedic literature in terms of abhidha-vrtti, and the gauna-vrtti He rejects.
Sometimes, however, as a matter of necessity, Vedic literature is described in terms
of the laksana-vrtti or gauna-vrtti, but one should not accept such explanations as
permanent truths.

The purpose of the discussions in the Upanisads and Vedanta-satra is to philo-
sophically establish the personal feature of the Absolute Truth. The impersonalists,
however, in order to establish their philosophy, accept these discussions in terms of
laksana-vrtti, or indirect meanings. Thus instead of being tattva-vada, or in search of
the Absolute Truth, they become Mayavada, or illusioned by the material energy.
When Sri Visnusvami, one of the four acaryas of the Vaisnava cult, presented his
thesis on the subject matter of suddhadvaita-vada, immediately the Mayavadis took
advantage of this philosophy and tried to establish their advaita-vada or kevaladvaita-
vada, To defeat this kevalddvaita-vada, Sri Raimanujacarya presented his philosophy
as visistadvaita-vada, and Sri Madhvacarya presented his philosophy of tattva-vada,
both of which are stumbling blocks to the Mayavadis because they defeat their
philosophy in scrupulous detail. Students of Vedic philosophy know very well
how strongly Sri'Ramanujacarya’s visistadvaita-vada and Sri Madhvacarya’s tattva-
vada contest the impersonal Mayavada philosophy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, how-


--- Page 97 ---
96 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
ever, accepted the direct meaning of the Vedanta philosophy and thus defeated the
Mayavada philosophy immediately. He opined in this connection that anyone who
follows the principles of the Sariraka-bhasya is doomed. This is confirmed in the
Padma Purana where Lord Siva tells Parvati:
Srnu devi pravaksyami
tamasani yathakramam
yesarh Sravana-matrena
patityarn jhaninam api
apartharn $ruti-vakyanarn
darsayal | loka-garhitam
karma-svarapa-tyajyatvam
atra ca pratipadyate
sarva-karma-paribhrarmsan
naiskarmyarh tatra cocyate
paratma-jivayor aikyarn
mayatra pratipadyate
“My dear wife, hear my explanations of how | have spread ignorance through
Mayavada philosophy. Simply by hearing it, even an advanced scholar will fall down.
In this philosophy, which is certainly very inauspicious for people in general, | have
misrepresented the real meaning of the Vedas and recommended that one give up all
activities in order to achieve freedom from karma. In this Mayavada philosophy |
have described the jivatma and Paramatma to be one and the same.” How the
Mayavada philosophy was condemned by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His followers
is described in Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-fila, Second Chapter, verses 94
through 99, where Svaripa-damodara Gosvami says that anyone who is eager to
understand the Mayavada philosophy must be considered insane. This especially
applies to a Vaisnava who reads the Sariraka-bhasya and considers himself to be one
with God. The Mayavadi philosophers have presented their arguments in such at-
tractive flowery language that hearing Mayavada philosophy may sometimes change
the mind of even a maha-bhagavata, or very advanced devotee. An actual Vaisnava
cannot tolerate any philosophy that claims God and the living being to be one and
the same.
TEXT 111
্রঙ্মশব্দে মুখ্য অর্থে কহে — SAAN |
চিদৈপ্বর্য-পরিপুর্য, অনুধ্ব-সম।ন ॥ ১১১ ॥
‘brahma 'Sabde mukhya arthe kahe— ‘bhagavan’
cid-aisvarya-pariparna, anardhva-samana


--- Page 98 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 97
SYNONYMS

brahma—the Absolute Truth; sabde—by this word; mukhya—direct; arthe—mean-
ing; kahe—says; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; cit-aisvarya—
spiritual opulence; paripirna—full of; anidrdhva—unsurpassed by anyone; samana—
not equalled by anyone.

TRANSLATION

‘““According to direct understanding, the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who has all spiritual opulences. No one can be equal to or greater
than Him.

PURPORT

This statement by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is confirmed in the Srimad-

Bhagavatam:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvarn yaj /02/74/77 advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti Sabdyate
“Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual sub-
stance Brahman, Paramatma or Bhagavan.” (Bhag. 1.2.11) The Absolute Truth is
ultimately understood as Bhagavan, partially understood as Paramatma and
vaguely understood as the impersonal Brahman. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, is opulent in all excellence; no one can be equal to or greater than
Him. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, where the Lord says, mattah
paratarari nanyat Rificid asti dhanafjaya: *‘O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is
no truth superior to Me.” (Bg. 7.7) There are many other verses which prove that
the Absolute Truth in the ultimate sense is understood to be the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 112
তাহার বিস্ভুতি, দেহ,_সব চিদাকার ।
চিদ্বিভুতি আচ্ছাদি” তারে কহে “নিরাকার” ॥ ১১২ ॥
tanhara vibhati, deha,—saba cid-akara
cid-vibhatiacchadi’ tafire kahe ‘nirakara’
SYNONYMS

tanhara—His (the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s); vibhiti—spiritual power;
deha—body; saba—everything; cit-akara—spiritual form; cit-vibhati—spiritual opu-
lence; acchadi’—covering; tanre—Him; kahe—said; nirakara—without form.


--- Page 99 ---
98 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION

“Everything about the Supreme Personality of Godhead is spiritual, including His
body, opulence and paraphernalia. Mayavada philosophy, however, covering His
spiritual opulence, advocates the theory of impersonalism.

PURPORT

It is stated in the Brahma-samhita, iSvarah paramah krspah sac-cid-ananda-
vigrahah: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, has a spiritual body which
is full of knowledge, eternity and bliss.” In this material world everyone’s body is
just the opposite—temporary, full of ignorance and full of misery. Therefore when
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is sometimes described as nirakara, this is to
indicate that He does not have a material body like us.

Mayavadi philosophers do not know how it is that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is formless. The Supreme Lord does not have a form like ours but has a
spiritual form. Not knowing this, Mayavadi philosophers simply advocate the one-
sided view that the Supreme Godhead, or Brahman, is formless (nirakara). In this
connection Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura offers many quotes from the Vedic litera-
ture. If one accepts the real or direct meaning of these Vedic statements, one can
understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has a spiritual body (sac-cid-
ananda-vigrahah).

In the Brhad-agranyaka Upanisad it is said, purnam adah purnam idarh puarpat
puarnam udacyate. This indicates that the body of the Supreme Personality of God-
head is spiritual, for even though He expands in many ways, He remains the same.
In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, aharh sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvarh pravartate:
“l am the origin of all. Everything emanates from Me.” (Bg. 10.8) Mayavadi philoso-
phers materialistically think that if the Supreme Truth expands Himself in every-
thing, He must lose His original form. Thus they think that there cannot be any form
other than the expansive gigantic body of the Lord. But the mantra of the Brhad-
aranyaka Upanisad confirms, purnam idam parpat parpam udacyate: “Although He
expands in many ways, He keeps His original personality. His original spiritual body
remains as it is.” Similarly, in the Svetasvatara Upanisad it is stated, vicitra-Saktih
purusah purapnah: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original person
[purusal, has multifarious energies.” Sa vrksa-kalakrtibhih paro ‘nyo yasmat
praparncah parivartate 'yam dharmavaham papanudarin bhagesam: ‘‘He is the origin
of material creation, and it is due to Him only that everything changes. He is the pro-
tector of religion and annihilator of all sinful activities. He is the master of all opu-
lences.” (6.6) Vedaham etarn purusarn mahantam aditya-varnarn tamasah parastat:
“Now | understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be the greatest of the
great. He is effulgent like the sun and is beyond this material world.” (3.8) Patirh
patinarir paramarn parastat: ‘‘He is the master of all masters, the superior of all
superiors.” (6.7) Mahan prabhur vai purusah: ‘‘He is the supreme master and su-
preme person.” (3.12) Para@sya saktir vividhaiva srayate: ‘“We can understand His
opulences in different ways.” (6.8) These are statements of the Svetasvatara


--- Page 100 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 99
Upanisad. Similarly, in the Rg-veda it is stated, tad vispoh paramarn padarh sada
pasyanti sarayah: *‘Visnu is the Supreme, and those who are actually learned think
only of His lotus feet.” In the Prasna Upanisad it is said, sa iksaficakre: ‘‘He glanced
over the material creation.” (6.3) In the Aitareya {panisad it is said, sa aiksata—
‘“Heglanced over the material creation’’—and sa imal lokan asrjata—‘‘He created this
entire material world.” (1.1.1-2)

Thus many verses can be quoted from the Upanisads and Vedas which prove that
the Supreme Godhead is not impersonal. In the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) it is 2150
said, nityo nityanar cetanas cetananam eko bahinarn yo vidadhati kaman: ‘‘He is
the supreme eternally conscious person who maintains all other living entities.”
From all these Vedic references one can understand that the Absolute Truth is a
person, although no one can equal or excel Him. Although there are many foolish
Mayavadi philosophers who think that they are even greater than Krsna, Krsna is
asamaurdhva; no one is equal to or above Him.

As stated in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.19), apani-pado javano grahita. This
verse describes the Absolute Truth as having no legs or hands. Although this is an
impersonal description, however, it does not mean that the Absolute Personality of
Godhead has no form. He has a spiritual form which is distinct from the forms of
matter. In this verse Caitanya Mahaprabhu clarifies this distinction.

TEXT 113
9
চিদানন্দ - তেঁহো, তার স্থান, পরিবার ।
9. =
তারে কহে - প্রাকৃত-সস্ড্রের বিকার ॥ ১১৩ ॥
cid-ananda—tenho, tanra sthana, parivara
tanre kahe—prakrta-sattvera vikara
SYNONYMS

cit-ananda—spiritual bliss; tenho—He is personally; tafnra—His; sthana—abode;
parivara—entourage; tanre—unto Him; kahe—someone says; prakrta—material;
sattvera—goodness; vikara—transformation.

TRANSLATION

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is full of spiritual potencies. Therefore His
body, name, fame and entourage are all spiritual. The Mayavadi philosopher, due to
ignorance, says that these are all merely transformations of the material mode of
goodness.

PURPORT

In the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
classified His energies in two distinct divisions—namely, prakrta and aprakrta, or
para-prakrti and apara-prakrti. 11 the Vispu Purana the same distinction is made.
The Mayavadi philosophers cannot understand these two prakrtis or natures—mate-


--- Page 101 ---
100 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
rial and spiritual—but one who is actually intelligent can understand them. Con-
sidering the many varieties and activities in material nature, why should the Mayavadi
philosophers deny the spiritual varieties of the spiritual world? The Bhagavatam says:

ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa vimukta-maninas

tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah

(Bhag.10.2.32)

The intelligence of those who think themselves liberated but have no information of
the spiritual world is not yet clear. In this verse the term aviSuddha-buddhayah re-
fers to unclean intelligence. Due to unclean intelligence or a poor fund of knowledge,
the Mayavadi philosophers cannot understand the distinction between material and
spiritual varieties; therefore they cannot even think of spiritual varieties because they
take it for granted that all variety is material.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, therefore, explains in this verse that Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead or the Absolute Truth, has a spiritual body which is distinct
from material bodies, and thus His name, abode, entourage and qualities are all
spiritual. The material mode of goodness has nothing to do with spiritual varieties.
Mayavadi philosophers, however, cannot clearly understand spiritual varieties; there-
fore they imagine a negation of the material world to be the spiritual world. The
material qualities of goodness, passion and ignorance cannot act in the spiritual
world, which is therefore called nirguna, as clearly indicated in Bhagavad-gita
(traigunya-visaya veda nistraigunyo bhavarjuna). The material world is a manifesta-
tion of the three modes of material nature, but one has to become free from these
modes to come to the spiritual world where their influence is completely absent.
Now Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will disassociate Lord Siva from Mayavada
philosophy in the following verse.

TEXT 114
তার দৌষ নাহি, (Sez আজ্ঞা কারী FA |
আর যেই শুনে তার হয় সর্বনাশ ॥ ১১৪ ॥
tarira 01050 nahi, tenho ajha-kari dasa
ara yei sune tara haya sarva-nasa
SYNONYMS

tanra—his (Lord Siva’s); dosa—fault; nahi—there is none; tehrho—he; ajfia-kari—
obedient order carrier; dasa—servant; ara—others; yei—anyone; sune—hears (the
Mayavada philosophy); tara—of him; haya—becomes; sarva-nasa—everything lost.

TRANSLATION

“Sankaracarya, who is an incarnation of Lord Siva, is faultless because he is a
servant carrying out the orders of the Lord. But those who follow his Mayavadi
philosophy are doomed. They will lose all their advancement in spiritual knowledge.


--- Page 102 ---
Adi-Illa, Chapter 7 101
PURPORT

Mayavadi philosophers are very proud of exhibiting their Vedanta knowledge
through grammatical jugglery, but Lord Sri Krsna in Bhagavad-gita certifies that
they are mayayapahrta-jnanah, bereft of real knowledge due to maya. Maya has two
potencies with which to execute her two functions—praksepatmika-sakti, the power
to throw theliving entity in the ocean of material existence, and avaranatmika-sakti,
the power to cover the knowledge of the living entity. The function of the
avaranatmika-sakti is explained in Bhagavad-gita by the word mayayapahrta-jiana.

Why the daivi-maya or illusory energy of Krsna takes away the knowledge of the
Mayavadi philosophers is also explained in Bhagavad-gita by the use of the words
asurarn bhavam asritah, which refer to a person who does not agree to the existence
of the Lord. The Mayavadis who are not in agreement with the existence of the Lord
can be classified in two groups, exemplified by the impersonalist Sarikarites of
Varanasi and the Buddhists of Saranatha. Both of them are Mayavadis, and Krsna
takes away their knowledge due to their atheistic philosophies. Neither of them
agree to accept the existence of a personal God. The Buddhist philosophers clearly
deny both the soul and God, and although the Sarkarites do not openly deny God,
they say that the Absolute is nirakara, or formless. Thus both of them are avisuddha-
buddhayah, or imperfect and unclean in their knowledge and intelligence.

The most prominent Mayavadi scholar, Sadananda Yogindra, has written a book
called Vedanta-sara in which he expounds the philosophy of Sarnkaracarya, and all
the followers of Sankara’s philosophy attribute great importance to his statements.
In this Vedanta-sara Sadananda Yogindra defines Brahman as sac-cid-ananda com-
bined with knowledge and without duality, and he defines ignorance (jada) as knowl-
edge distinct from that of sat and asat. This is almost inconceivable, but it is a pro-
duct of the three material qualities. Thus he considers anything other than pure
knowledge to be material. The center of ignorance is considered to be sometimes all-
pervading and sometimes individual. Thus according to his opinion both the all-
pervading Visnu and the individual living entities are products of ignorance.

In simple language, it is the opinion of Sadananda Yogindra that since everything
is nirakara (formless), the conception of Visnu and the conception of the individual
soul are both products of ignorance. He also explains that the visuddha-sattva con-
ception of the Vaisnavas is nothing but pradhana, or the chief principle of creation.
He maintains that when all-pervading knowledge is contaminated by the viSuddha-
sattva, which consists of a transformation of the quality of goodness, there arises
the conception of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is the omnipotent, om-
niscient supreme ruler, the Supersoul, the cause of all causes, the supreme Svara,
etc. According to Sadananda Yogindra, because isvara, the Supreme Lord, is the
reservoir of all ignorance, He may be called sarva-jria or omniscient, but one who
denies the existence of the omnipotent Supreme Personality of Godhead is more
than vara, or the Lord. His conclusion, therefore, is that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (#Svara) is a transformation of material ignorance and that the living
entity (jiva) is covered by ignorance. Thus he describes both collective and individual
existence in darkness. According to Mayavadi philosophers, the Vaisnava conception
of the Lord as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and of the jiva or individual soul


--- Page 103 ---
102 SiT-Caitanya-caritimrta
as His eternal servant is a manifestation of ignorance. If we accept the judgment of
Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita, however, the Mayavadis are to be considered mayaya-
pahrta-jiiana, or bereft of all knowledge, because they do not recognize the exis-
tence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or they claim that His existence isa
product of the material conception (maya). These are characteristics of asuras or
demons. ,
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in His discourses with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya,
said:
Jjivera nistara lagi’ sutra kaila vyasa
mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-nasa
(Cc. Madhya 6.169)
Vyasadeva composed the Vedadnta-siatra to deliver the conditioned souls from this
material world, but Sahkaracarya, by presenting the Vedanfa-siatra in his own way,
has clearly done a great disservice to human society, for one who follows his
Mayavada philosophy is doomed. In the Vedanta-siitra, devotional service is clearly
indicated, but the Mayavadi philosophers refuse to accept the spiritual body of the
Supreme Absolute Person and refuse to accept that the living entity has an individual
existence separate from that of the Supreme Lord. Thus they have created atheistic
havoc all over the world, for such a conclusion is against the very nature of the
transcendental process of pure devotional service. The Mayavadi philosophers’
unrealizable ambition to become one with the Supreme through denying the exis-
tence of the Personality of Godhead results in a most calamitous misrepresentation
of spiritual knowledge, and one who follows this philosophy is doomed to remain
perpetually in this material world. Therefore they are called avisuddha-buddhayah,
or unclean in knowledge. Because they are unclean in knowledge, all their austerities
and penances end in frustration. Thus although they may be honored at first as very
learned scholars, ultimately they descend to physical activities of politics, social
work, etc. Instead of becoming one with the Supreme Lord, they again become one
with these material activities. This is explained by S$rimad-Bhagavatam:
aruhya krcchrepa pararin padarn tatah
patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah
(Bhag. 10.2.32)
In actuality the Mayavadi philosophers very strictly follow the austerities and
penances of spiritual life and in this way are elevated to the impersonal Brahman
platform, but due to their negligence of the lotus feet of the Lord they again fall
down to material existence.
TEXT 115
প্রাকৃত Flea! মানে বিষ্ণু-কলেবর ।
বিষ্ণুনিন্দ৷ আর নাহি ইহার উপর ॥ ১১৫ ॥


--- Page 104 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 103
prakrta kariya mane vispu-kalevara
visnu-ninda ara nahi ihara upara

SYNONYMS

prakrta—material; kariya—taking it'to be so; mane—accepts; visnu—Lord Visnu’s;
kalevara—body; visnu-ninda—defaming or blaspheming Lord Visnu; ara—beyond
this; nahi—none;ihara—of this; upara—above.

TRANSLATION

“One who considers the transcendental body of Lord Visnu to be made of
material nature is the greatest offender at the lotus feet of the Lord. There is no
greater blasphemy against the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami explains that the variegated personal
feature of the Absolute Truth is the Vispu-tattva, and the material energy which
creates this cosmic manifestation is the energy of Lord Visnu. The creative force is
merely the energy of the Lord, but the foolish conclude that the Lord has no
separate existence because He has distributed Himself in an impersonal form. The
impersonal Brahman, however, cannot possess energies, nor do the Vedic literatures
state that maya (the illusory energy) is covered by another maya. There are hundreds
and thousands of references, however, to Vispu-maya (parasya saktih), or the energy
of Lord Visnu. In Bhagavad-gita (7.14) Krsna refers to mama maya (“My energy’).
Maya is controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; it is not that He is
covered by maya. Therefore Lord Visnu cannot be a product of the material energy.
In the beginning of the Vedanta-sutra it is said, janmady asya yatah, indicating that
the material energy is also an emanation of the Supreme Brahman. How then could
He be covered by the material energy? If that were possible, material energy would
be greater than the Supreme Brahman. Even these simple arguments, however,
cannot be understood by the Mayavadi philosophers, and therefore the term
mayayapahrta-jnana which is applied to them in Bhagavad-gita is extremely appro-
priate. Anyone who thinks that Lord Visnu is a product of the material energy, as
explained by Sadananda Yogindra, should immediately be understood to be insane,
for his knowledge has been stolen by the illusory energy.

Lord Visnu cannot be placed within the category of the demigods. Those who
are actually bewildered by the Mayavada philosophy and are still in the darkness of
ignorance consider Lord Visnu to be a demigod, in defiance of the Rg-vedic mantra,
0/7 tad vispoh paramarin padam (‘“Visnu is always in a superior position”). This
mantra is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita. Mattah paratararin nanyat: there is no
truth superior to Lord Krsna or Visnu. Thus only those whose knowledge has been
bewildered consider Lord Visnu to be a demigod and therefore suggest that one
may either worship Lord Visnu, the goddess Kali or Durga or whomever he likes and
achieve the same result. This is an ignorant conclusion that is not accepted in


--- Page 105 ---
104 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta

Bhagavad-gita, which distinctly says, yanti deva-vrata devan. . .yanti mad-yajino pi
mam: “The worshipers of the demigods will be promoted to the respective planets
of the demigods, but devotees of the Supreme Lord will go back home, back to
Godhead.” (Bg. 9.25) Lord Krsna explains very clearly in Bhagavad-gita that His
material energy is very difficult to overcome (daivi hy esa gupamayi mama maya
duratyaya). Maya's influence is so strong that even learned scholars and
spiritualists are also covered by maya and think themselves to be as good as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Actually, however, to free oneself from the
influence of maya one must surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as
Krsna also states in Bhagavad-gita (mam eva ye prapadyante mayam 61377
taranti te). It is to be concluded, therefore, that Lord Visnu does not belong to this
material creation but to the spiritual world. To misconceive Lord Visnu to have a
material body or to equate Him with the demigods is the most offensive blasphemy
against Lord Visnu, and offenders against the lotus feet of Lord Visnu cannot
advance in spiritual knowledge. They are called mayayapahrta-jiiana, or those whose
knowledge has been stolen by the influence of illusion.

One who thinks that there is a difference between Lord Visnu’s body and His
soul dwells in the darkest region of ignorance. There is no difference between Lord
Visnu’s body and Visnu's soul, for they are advaya-jiiana, one knowledge. In this
world there is a difference between the material body and spiritual soul, but in the
spiritual world everything is spiritual, and there are no such differences. The greatest
offense of the Mayavadi philosophers is to consider Lord Visnu and the living
entities to be one and the same. In this connection the Padma Purana states:

arcye vispau Siladhir gurusu
nara-matir vaisnave jati-buddhih
“‘One who considers the arca-marti or worshipable Deity of Lord Visnu to be stone,
the spiritual master to be an ordinary human being, and a Vaisnava to belong to a
particular caste or creed, is possessed of hellish intelligence.” One who follows such
conclusions is doomed.
TEXT 116
ঈশ্বরের তত্ত্ব _ যেন उनि खनन |
জীবের खक्रणं - যৈছে স্ফুলিঙ্ের কণ ॥ ১১৬ ॥
1$৮0/6/0 tattva—yena jvalita jvalana
Jjivera svaripa— yaiche sphulirigera kana
SYNONYMS

7$varera tattva—the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yena—is like;
jvalita—blazing; jvalana—fire; jivera— of the living entities; svarédpa- identity; yaiche—
is like; sphulingera— of the spark; kana—particle.


--- Page 106 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 105
TRANSLATION

“The Lord is like a great blazing fire, and the living entities are like small sparks
of that fire.

PURPORT

Although sparks and a big fire are both fire and both have the power to burn, the
burning power of the fire and that of the spark are not the same. Why should one
artificially try to become like a big fire although by constitution he is like a small
spark? It is due to ignorance. One should therefore understand that neither the
Supreme Personality of Godhead nor the small sparklike living entities have any-
thing to do with matter, but when the spiritual spark comes in contact with the
material world his fiery quality is extinguished. That is the position of the con-
ditioned souls. Because they are in touch with the material world, their spiritual
quality is almost dead, but because these spiritual sparks are all Krsna’s parts and
parcels, as the Lord states in Bhagavad-gita (mamaivarnsah), they can revive their
original position by getting free from material contact. This is pure philosophical
understanding. In Bhagavad-gita the spiritual sparks are declared to be sanatana
(eternal); therefore the material energy, maya, cannot affect their constitutional
position.

Someone may argue, ‘Why is there a need to create the spiritual sparks?’’ The
answer can be given in this way. Since the Absolute Personality of Godhead is
omnipotent, He has both unlimited and limited potencies. This is the meaning of
omnipotent. To be omnipotent, He must have not only unlimited potencies but
limited potencies also. Thus to exhibit His omnipotency He displays both. The
living entities are endowed with limited potency although they are part of the Lord.
The Lord displays the spiritual world by His unlimited potencies, whereas by His
limited potencies the material world is displayed. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says:

apareyam itas tv anyarn
prakrtirn viddhi me param
jiva-bhatarh maha-baho
yayedarn dharyate jagat
“Besides the inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of
Mine, which is all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are
sustaining the universe.” (Bg. 7.5) The jiva-bhita, living entities, control this material
world with their limited potencies. Generally, people are bewildered by the activities
of scientists and technologists. Due to maya they think that there is no need of God
and that they can do everything and anything, but actually they cannot. Since this
cosmic manifestation is limited, their existence is also limited. Everything in this
material world is limited, and for this reason there is creation, sustenance and disso-
lution. However, in the world of unlimited energy, the spiritual world, there is
neither creation nor destruction.

If the Personality of Godhead did not possess both limited and unlimited energies,

He could not be called omnipotent. Mahato mahiyan aputo 'niyan: He is greater


--- Page 107 ---
106 Sri-Caitanya-carita mrta
than the greatest and smaller than the smallest. He is smaller than the smallest in
the form of the living entities and greater than the greatest in His form of Krsna. If
there were no one to control, there would be no meaning to the conception of the
supreme controller (7$vara), just as there is no meaning to a king without his subjects.
If all the subjects became king, there would be no distinction between the king and
an ordinary citizen. Thus for the Lord to be the supreme controller there must be
a creation to control. The basic principle for the existence of the living entities is
called cid-vilasa, or spiritual pleasure. The omnipotent Lord displays His pleasure
potency as the living entities. The Lord is described in Vedanta-sutra as anandamayo
‘bhyasat. He is by nature the reservoir of all pleasures, and because He wants to
enjoy pleasure, there must be energies to give Him pleasure or supply Him the
impetus for pleasure. This is the perfect philosophical understanding of the
Absolute Truth.
TEXT 117
RTT শক্তি, কৃষ্ণতস্ব _শক্তিমান্‌।
গীতা-বিযুুপুরাণাদি তাহাতে প্রমাণ ॥ ১১৭ ॥
Jjiva-tattva—sakti, krspa-tattva—saktiman
gita-vispupuranadi tahate pramana
SYNONYMS

Jjiva-tattva—the truth of the living entities; Sakti—energy; krsna-tattva—the truth
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saktiman—the possessor of the energies;
gita—Bhagavad-gita; vispnu-purana-adi—Visnu Purana and other Puranas; tahate—in
them; pramana— there are evidences.

TRANSLATION

“The living entities are energies, not the energetic. The energetic is Krsna. This is

very vividly described in Bhagavad-gita, the Visnu Purana and other Vedic literatures.
PURPORT

As already explained, there are three prasthanas on the path of advancement in
spiritual knowledge—namely, nyaya-prasthana (Vedanta philosophy), sruti-prasthana
(the Upanisads and Vedic mantras) and smrti-prasthana (the Bhagavad-gita, Maha-
bharata, Puranas, etc.). Unfortunately, Mayavadi philosophers do not accept the
smrti-prasthana. Smrti refers to the conclusions drawn from the Vedic evidence.
Sometimes Mayavadi philosophers do not accept the authority of Bhagavad-gita
and the Puranas, and this is called ardha-kukkuti-nyaya. 11 one believes in the Vedic
literatures, one must accept all the Vedic literatures recognized by the great acaryas,
but these Mayavadi philosophers accept only the nydya-prasthana and Sruti-
prasthana, rejecting the smrti-prasthana. Here, however, Sri Caitanya 13301306170


--- Page 108 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 107
cites evidence from the Gita, Visnu Purana, etc., which are smyti-prasthana. No one
can avoid the Personality of Godhead in the statements of Bhagavad-gita and other
Vedic literatures such as the Mahabharata and the Puranas. Lord Caitanya therefore
quotes a passage from Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.5).

TEXT 118
অপরেয়মিতস্বস্যাং প্রকৃতিং विकि মে পরাম্‌ ৷
slags মহাবাহো যয়েদং ICS জগৎ ॥ ১১৮ ॥
apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtirh viddhi me param
Jiva-bhatarn maha-baho
yayedarn dharyate jagat
SYNONYMS

apara—inferior energy; iyam—this material world; itah—beyond this; tu—but;
anyam—another; prakrtim—energy; viddhi—you must know; me—of Me; param—
which is superior energy; jiva-bhiatam—they are the living entities; maha-baho—O
mighty-armed; yaya—by which; idam—this material world; dharyate—is being con-
ducted; jagat—the cosmic manifestation.

TRANSLATION

‘Besides the inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy
of Mine, which is all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are
sustaining the universe.’

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita it is explained that the five elements earth, water, fire, air and
ether constitute the gross energy of the Absolute Truth and that there are also
three subtle energies, namely, the mind, intelligence and false ego, or identification
with the phenomenal world. Thus the entire cosmic manifestation is divided into
eight energies, all of which are inferior. As explained in Bhagavad-gita (mama maya
duratyaya), the inferior energy known as maya is so strong that although the living
entity does not belong to this energy, due to the superior strength of the inferior
energy the living entity (jiva-bhdta) forgets his real position and identifies with it.
Krsna says distinctly that beyond the material energy there is a superior energy
which is known 25 the jiva-bhdata or living entities. When in contact with the material
energy, this superior energy conducts all the activities of the entire material
phenomenal world.

The supreme cause is Krsna (janmady asya yatah), who is the origin of all energies,
which work variously. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has both inferior and
superior energies, and the difference between them is that the superior energy is
factual whereas the inferior energy is a reflection of the superior. A reflection of


--- Page 109 ---
108 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta

the sun in a mirror or on water appears to be the sun but is not. Similarly, the
material world is but a reflection of the spiritual world. Although it appears to be
factual, it is not; it is only a temporary reflection, whereas the spiritual world is a
factual reality. The material world, with its gross and subtle forms, is merely a re-
flection of the spiritual world.

The living entity is not a product of the material energy; he is spiritual energy,
but in contact with matter he forgets his identity. Thus the living entity identifies
himself with matter and enthusiastically engages in material activities in the guises
of a technologist, scientist, philosopher, etc. He does not know that he is not at all
a material product but is spiritual. His real identity thus being lost, he struggles very
hard in the material world, and the Hare Krsna movement or Krsna consciousness
movement tries to revive his original consciousness. His activities in manufacturing
big skyscrapers are evidence of intelligence, but this kind of intelligence is not at all
advanced. One should know that his only real concern is how to get free from
material contact, for by absorbing his mind in material activities he takes material
bodies again and again, and although he falsely claims to be very intelligent, in
material consciousness he is not at all intelligent. When we speak about the Krsna
consciousness movement, which is meant to make people intelligent, the conditioned
living entity therefore misunderstands it. He is so engrossed in the material concept
of life that he does not think that there can be any activities which are actually
based on intelligence beyond the construction of skyscrapers and big roads and the
manufacturing of cars. This is proof of mayayapahrta-jiiana, or loss of all intelligence
due to the influence of maya. When a living entity is freed from such misconcep-
tions, he is called liberated. When one is actually liberated he no longer identifies
with the material world. The symptom of mukti (liberation) is that one engages in
spiritual activities instead of falsely engaging in material activities.

Transcendental loving devotional service is the spiritual activity of the spirit soul.
Mayavadi philosophers confuse such spiritual activity with material activity, but
Bhagavad-gita confirms:

marn ca yo’vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhayaya kalpate
(Bg. 14.26)
One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional service
(avyabhicarini-bhakti) is immediately elevated to the transcendental platform, and
he is to be considered brahma-bhita, which indicates that he is no longer in the
material world but in the spiritual world. Devotional service is enlightenment or
awakening. When the living entity perfectly performs spiritual activities under the
direction of the spiritual master, he becomes perfect in knowledge and understands
that he is not God but a servant of God. As explained by Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Jivera ‘svardpa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’: the real identity of the living entity is
that he is an eternal servant of the Supreme (Cc. Madhya 20.108). As long as one
does not come to this conclusion, he must be in ignorance. This is also confirmed
by the Lord in Bhagavad-gita (Bg.7.19). 80/70/1077 janmanam ante jianavan mari
prapadyate: ‘‘After many births of struggling for existence and cultivating knowl-


--- Page 110 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 109
edge, when one comes to the point of real knowledge he surrenders unto Me.”’ Such
an advanced mahatma or great soul is very rarely to be seen. Thus although the
Mayavadi philosophers appear to be very advanced in knowledge, they are not yet
perfect. To come to the point of perfection they must voluntarily surrender to Krsna.

TEXT 119
বিষ্ণুশক্তিঃ পরা (थाक) ক্ষেত্রজ্ঞাথ্যা SAAR ।
অবিদ্যাকর্মসংজ্ঞান্য] তৃতীয়] শক্তিরিষ্যতে ॥ ১১৯ ॥
visnu-Saktif para prokta
ksetrajiiakhya tatha para
avidya-karma-sarnjianya
trtiya saktir isyate
SYNONYMS
visnu-saktih—the potency of Lord Visnu; para—spiritual; prokta—it is said;
ksetrajna-akhya—the potency known as ksetrajfia; tatha—as well as; para—spiritual;
avidya—ignorance; karma—fruitive activities; sarmjiia—known as;anya—other; trtiya—
third; saktih—potency; isyate—known thus.

TRANSLATION

“‘The potency of Lord Visnu is summarized in three categories—namely, the
spiritual potency, the living entities and ignorance. The spiritual potency is full of
knowledge; the living entities, although belonging to the spiritual potency, are
subject to bewilderment; and the third energy, which is full of ignorance, is always
visible in fruitive activities.’

PURPORT

In the previous verse, quoted from Bhagavad-gita, it has been established that the
living entities are to be categorized among the Lord’s potencies. The Lord is potent,
and there are varieties of potencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva sriyate). Now, in this
quotation from the Vispu Purana, this is further confirmed. There are varieties of
potencies, and they have been divided into three categories—namely, spiritual,
marginal and external.

The spiritual potency is manifested in the spiritual world. Krsna's form, qualities,
activities and entourage are all spiritual. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:

ajo 'pi sann avyayatma
bhitanam iSvaro ‘pi san

prakrtirh svam adhisthaya
sambhavamy atma-mayaya


--- Page 111 ---
110 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

“Although | am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and al-
though | am the Lord of all sentient beings, | still appear in every millennium in My
original transcendental form.” (Bg. 4.6) Atma-maya refers to the spiritual potency.
When Krsna comes to this or any other universe, He does so with His spiritual
potency. We take birth by the force of the material potency, but as stated here
with reference to the Vispu Purana, the ksetrajnia, or living entity, belongs to the
spiritual potency; thus when we free ourselves from the clutches of the material
potency we can also enter the spiritual world.

The material potency is the energy of darkness, or complete ignorance of spiritual
activities. In the material potency, the living entity engages himself in fruitive
activities, thinking that he can be happy through expansion in terms of material
energy. This fact is prominently manifest in this age of Kali because human society,
not understanding the spiritual nature, is busily expanding in material activities. The
men of the present day are almost unaware of their spiritual identity. They think
that they are products of the elements of the material world and that everything
will end with the annihilation of the body. Therefore they conclude that as long as
one has a material body consisting of material senses, one should enjoy the senses
as much as possible. Since they are atheists, they do not care whether there is a next
life. Such activities are described in this verse as avidya-karma-sarhjfianya.

The material energy is separated from the spiritual energy of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Thus although it is originally created by the Supreme Lord, He is
not actually present within it. The Lord also confirms in Bhagavad-gita, mat-sthani
sarva-bhitani: ‘Everything is resting on Me.” (Bg. 9.4) This indicates that every-
thing is resting on His own energy. For example, the planets are resting within outer
space, which is the separated energy of Krsna. The Lord explains in Bhagavad-gita:

bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
kharh mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyarn me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
‘Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together these
eight comprise My separated energies.” (Bg. 7.4) The separated energy acts as if it
were independent, but here it is said that although such energies are certainly
factual, they are not independent but merely separated.

The separated energy can be understood from a practical example. | compose
books by speaking into a dictaphone, and when the dictaphone is replayed, it
appears that | am speaking personally, but actually | am not. | spoke personally,
but then the dictaphone tape, which is separate from me, acts exactly like me.
Similarly, the material energy originally emanates from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but it acts separately, although the energy is supplied by the Lord.
This is also explained in Bhagavad-gita. Mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram:
“This material nature is working under My direction, 0 son of Kunti, and it is pro-
ducing all moving and unmoving beings.” (Bg. 9.10) Under the guidance or super-
intendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the material energy works as if
independent, although it is not actually independent.


--- Page 112 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 111

In this verse from the Visnu Purana the total energy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is classified in three divisions—namely, the spiritual or internal potency
of the Lord, the marginal potency or ksetrajia (the living entity), and the material
potency, which is separated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and appears
to act independently. When Srila Vyasadeva, by meditation and self-realization, saw
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he also saw the separated energy of the Lord
standing behind Him (apasyat purusari pérnarin mayarn ca tad-apasrayam). Vyasadeva
also realized that it is this separated energy of the Lord, the material energy, that
covers the knowledge of the living entities (vaya sammohito jiva atmanarn tri-
gunatmakam). The separated, material energy bewilders the living entities (jivas),
and thus they work very hard under its influence, not knowing that they are not
fulfilling their mission in life. Unfortunately, most of them think that they are the
body and should therefore enjoy the material senses irresponsibly, since when death
comes everything will be finished. This atheistic philosophy also flourished in India,
where it was sometimes propagated by Carvaka Muni, who said:

(14/77 krtva ghrtarn pibet
yavaj jivet sukharh jivet
bhasmi-bhitasya dehasya kutah
punar agamano bhavet

His theory was that as long as one lives one should eat as much ghee as possible. In
India, ghee (clarified butter) is a basic ingredient in preparing many varieties of
foodstuffs. Since everyone wants to enjoy nice food, Carvaka Muni advised that
one eat as much ghee as possible. One may say, “| have no money. How shall |
purchase ghee?” Carvaka Muni, however, says, “If you have no money, then beg,
borrow or steal, but in some way secure ghee and enjoy life.” For one who further
objects that he will be held accountable for such unauthorized activities as begging,
borrowing and stealing, Carvaka Muni replies, ‘You will not be held responsible. As
soon as your body is burned to ashes after death, everything is finished.” This is
called ignorance. From Bhagavad-gita it is understood that one does not die with the
annihilation of his body (na hanyate hanyamane $arire). The annihilation of one
body involves changing to another (tatha dehantara-praptih). Therefore, to perform
irresponsible activities in the material world is very dangerous. Without knowledge
of the spirit soul and its transmigration, people are allured by the material energy to
engage in many such activities, as if one could become happy simply by dint of
material knowledge, without reference to spiritual existence. Therefore the entire
material world and its activities are referred to 25 avidya-karma-sariyjfianya.

In order to dissipate the ignorance of the human beings who work under the
material energy, which is separated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Lord comes down to revive their original nature of spiritual activities (vada yada hi
dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata). As soon as they deviate from their original
nature, the Lord comes to teach them, sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekarn saraparn
vraja: ‘‘My dear living entities, give up all material activities and simply surrender
unto Me for protection.” (Bg. 18.66)


--- Page 113 ---
112 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

It is the statement of Carvaka Muni that one should beg, borrow or steal money
to purchase ghee and enjoy life (rpam krtva ghrtarn pibet). Thus even the greatest
atheist of India recommends that one eat ghee, not meat. No one could conceive
of human beings’ eating meat like tigers and dogs, but men have become so degraded
that they are just like animals and can no longer claim to have a human civilization.

TEXT 120
হেন জীবতদ্ব ल<3। লিখি” পরতস্ব ।
আচ্ছন্ন করিল (व्य ঈশ্বর-মহস্ব ॥ ১২০ ॥
hena jiva-tattva lafia likhi’ para-tattva
acchanna karila Srestha i$vara-mahattva
SYNONYMS

hena—such degraded; jiva-tattva—the living entities; /afia—taking them; likhi’—
having written; para-tattva—as the Supreme; dcchanna—covering; karila—did;
Srestha—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iSvara—the 1 01015; mahattva—glories.

TRANSLATION

“The Mayavada philosophy is so degraded that it has taken the insignificant living
entities to be the Lord, the Supreme Truth, thus covering the glory and supremacy
of the Absolute Truth with monism.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura comments in this connection that in all Vedic scrip-
tures the jiva-tattva, the truth of the living entities, is mentioned to be one of the
energies of the Lord. If one does not accept the living entity to be a minute, infini-
tesimal spark of the Supreme but equates the jiva-tattva with the Supreme Brahman
or Supreme Personality of Godhead, it must be understood that his entire philosophy
is based on a misunderstanding. Unfortunately, Sripada Sankaracarya purposely
claimed the jiva-tattva, or living entities, to be equal to the Supreme God. Therefore
his entire philosophy is based on a misunderstanding, and it misguides people to
become atheists whose mission in life is unfulfilled. The mission of human life, as
described in Bhagavad-gita, is to surrender unto the Supreme Lord and become His
devotee, but the Mayavada philosophy misleads one to defy the existence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and pose oneself as the Supreme Lord. Thus it
has misguided hundreds and thousands of innocent men.

In the Vedanta-siatra, Vyasadeva has described that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is potent and that everything, material or spiritual, is but an emanation of
His energy. The Lord, the Supreme Brahman, is the origin or source of everything
(fjanmady asya yatah}, and all other manifestations are emanations of different
energies of the Lord. This is also confirmed in the Visnu-Purana:


--- Page 114 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 113
ekadesa-sthitasyagner
Jyotsna vistarini yatha
parasya brahmanah Saktis
tathedam akhilari jagat
“Whatever we see in this world is simply an expansion of different energies of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is exactly like a fire which spreads illumina-
tion for a long distance although it is situated in one place.” This is a very vivid
example. Similarly, it is stated that just as everything in the material world exists
in the sunshine, which is the energy of the sun, so everything exists on the basis of
the spiritual and material energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus
although Krsna is situated in His own abode (go/oka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhito)
where He enjoys His transcendental pastimes with the cowherd boys and gopis, He
is nevertheless present everywhere, even within the atoms of this universe
(andantarastha-paramanu-cayantarastham). This is the verdict of the Vedic literature.
Unfortunately, the Mayavada philosophy, misguiding people by claiming the
living entity to be the Lord, has created havoc throughout the entire world and
led almost everyone to godlessness. By thus covering the glories of the Supreme
Lord, the Mayavadi philosophers have done the greatest disservice to human
society. It is to counteract these most abominable activities of the Mayavadi
philosophers that Lord Caitanya has introduced the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the
holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no
other way.” People should simply engage in the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra, for thus they will gradually come to understand that they are not the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as they have been taught by the Mayavadi philosophers,
but are eternal servants of the Lord. As soon as one engages himself in the transcen-
dental service of the Lord, he becomes free.
marh ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate
““One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circum-
stances, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level
of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26) Therefore the Hare Krsna movement or Krsna conscious-
ness movement is the only light for the foolish living entities who think either that
there is no God or that if God exists He is formless and they themselves are also
God. These misconceptions are very dangerous, and the only way to counteract
them is to spread the Hare Krsna movement.


--- Page 115 ---
114 SA-Caitanya-carita mrta
TEXT 121
ব্যাসের TCACS কহে “পরিণাম”-বাদ্ব |
“ব্যাস लोख" বলি” তার উঠাইল বিবাদ ॥ ১২১ ॥
vyasera sitrete kRahe ‘paripama’-vada
‘vyasa bhranta’—nbali’ tara uthdila vivada
SYNONYMS

vyasera—of Srila Vyasadeva; sitrete in the codes; kahe—describes; paripama—
transformation; vada— philosophy ; vyasa—Srila Vyasadeva; bhranta—mistaken; bali’—
accusing him; tara—his; uthaila—raised; vivada—opposition.

TRANSLATION

“In his Vedanta-siitra Srila Vyasadeva has described that everything is but a trans-
formation of the energy of the Lord. Sankaracarya, however, has misled the world
by commenting that Vyasadeva was mistaken. Thus he has raised great opposition
to theism throughout the entire world.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura explains, “In the Vedanta-satra of Srila Vyasadeva it
is definitely stated that all cosmic manifestations result from transformations of
various energies of the Lord. Sarkaracarya, however, not accepting the energy of
the Lord, thinks that it is the Lord who is transformed. He has taken many clear
statements from the Vedic literature and twisted them to try to prove that if the
Lord, or the Absolute Truth, were transformed, His oneness would be disturbed.
Thus he has accused Srila Vyasadeva of being mistaken. In developing his philosophy
of monism, therefore, he has established vivarta-vada, or the Mayavada theory of
illusion.”

In the Brahma-sitra, Second Chapter, the first quote is as follows: tad ananyatvam
arambhana-sabdadibhyah. Commenting on this satra in his Sdriraka-bhasya,
Sankaracarya has introduced the statement vacarambhapari vikaro namadheyam
from the Chandogya Upanisad to try to prove that acceptance of the transforma-
tion of the energy of the Supreme Lord is faulty. He has tried to defy this trans-
formation of energy in a misguided way, which will be explained later. Since his con-
ception of God is impersonal, he does not believe that the entire cosmic manifesta-
tion is a transformation of the energies of the Lord, for as soon as one accepts the
various energies of the Absolute Truth, one must immediately accept the Absolute
Truth to be personal, not impersonal. A person can create many things by the trans-
formation of his energy. For example, a businessman transforms his energy by estab-
lishing many big factories or business organizations, yet he remains a person although
his energy has been transformed into these many factories or business concerns. The
Mayavadi philosophers do not understand this simple fact. Their tiny brains and


--- Page 116 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 115
poor fund of knowledge cannot afford them sufficient enlightenment to realize
that when a man’s energy is transformed, the man himself is not transformed but
remains the same person.

Not believing in the fact that the energy of the Absolute Truth is transformed,
Sarkaracarya has propounded his theory of illusion. This theory states that although
the Absolute Truth is never transformed, we think that it is transformed, which is
an illusion. Sankaracarya does not believe in the transformation of the energy of
the Absolute Truth, for he claims that everything is one and that the living entity
is therefore also one with the Supreme. This is the Mayavada theory.

Srila Vyasadeva has explained that the Absolute Truth is a person who has differ-
ent potencies. Merely by His desire that there be creation and by His glance (sa
aiksata), He created this material world (sa asrjata). After creation, He remains the
same person; He is not transformed into everything. One should accept that the
Lord has inconceivable energies and that it is by His order and will that varieties of
manifestation have come into existence. In the Vedanta-sutra it is said, sa-tattvato
‘nyatha-buddhir vikara ity udahrtah. This mantra indicates that from one fact
another fact is generated. For example, a father is one fact, and a son generated
from the father is a second fact. Thus both of them are truths, although one is
generated from the other. This generation of a second, independent truth from a
first truth is called vikara, or transformation resulting in a by-product. The Supreme
Brahman is the Absolute Truth, and the other energies that have emanated from
Him and are existing separately, such as the living entities and the cosmic manifesta-
tion, are also truths. This is an example of transformation, which is called vikara or
parinama. To give another example of vikara, milk is a truth, but the same milk
may be transformed into yogurt. Thus yogurt is a transformation of milk, although
the ingredients of yogurt and milk are the same.

In the Chandogya Upanisad there is the following mantra: aitad atmyam idari
sarvam. This mantra indicates without a doubt that the entire world is Brahman.
The Absolute Truth has inconceivable energies, as confirmed in the Svetasvatara
Upanisad (parasya saktir vividhaiva sriyate), and the entire cosmic manifestation is
evidence of these different energies of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is a
fact, and therefore whatever is created by the Supreme Lord is also factual. Every-
thing is true and complete (parpam), but the original parpam, the complete Abso-
lute Truth, always remains the same. Parpat purpam udacyate parpasya pdrpam
adaya. The Absolute Truth is so perfect that although innumerable energies emanate
from Him and manifest creations which appear to be different from Him, He never-
theless maintains His personality. He never deteriorates under any circumstances.

It is to be concluded that the entire cosmic manifestation is a transformation of
the energy of the Supreme Lord, not of the Supreme Lord or Absolute Truth
Himself, who always remains the same. The material world and the living entities
are transformations of the energy of the Lord, the Absolute Truth or Brahman,
who is the original source. In other words, the Absolute Truth, Brahman, is the
original ingredient, and the other manifestations are transformations of this in-
gredient. This is also confirmed in the Taittiriya Upanisad. Yato va imani bhitani
jayante: ‘This entire cosmic manifestation is made possible by the Absolute


--- Page 117 ---
116 $r-Caitanya-ca ritamrta

Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” In this verse it is indicated that
Brahman, the Absolute Truth, is the original cause, and the living entities (jivas)
and cosmic manifestation are effects of this cause. The cause being a fact, the
effects are also factual. They are not illusion. Sarnkaracarya has inconsistently tried
to prove that acceptance of the material world and the jivas to be by-products of the
Supreme Lord is an illusion because in this conception the existence of the material
world and the jivas is different and separate from that of the Absolute Truth. With
this jugglery of understanding, Mayavadi philosophers have propagated the slogan
brahma satyarn jagan-mithya, which declares that the Absolute Truth is fact but
the cosmic manifestation and the living entities are simply illusions, or that all of
them are in fact the Absolute Truth and that the material world and living entities
do not separately exist.

It is therefore to be concluded that Sankaracarya, in order to present the Supreme
Lord, the living entities and the material nature as indivisible and ignorant, tries to
cover the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He maintains that the
material cosmic manifestation is mithya, or false, but this is a great blunder. If the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is a fact, how can His creation be false? Even in
ordinary dealings, one cannot think the material cosmic manifestation to be false.
Therefore Vaisnava philosophers say that the cosmic creation is not false but tem-
porary. It is separated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but since it is
wonderfully created by the energy of the Lord, to say that it is false is blasphemous.

Nondevotees factually appreciate the wonderful creation of material nature, but
they cannot appreciate the intelligence and energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who is behind this material creation. Sripada Ramanujacarya, however,
refers to a Vedic sutra, atma va idam agra asit, which points out that the supreme
atma, the Absolute Truth, existed before the creation. One may argue, “If the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely spiritual, how is it possible for Him
to be the origin of creation and have within Himself both material and spiritual
energies?’’ To answer this challenge, Sripada Ramanujacarya quotes 2 mantra from
the Taittirlya Upanisad which states:

yato va imani bhitani jayante

vena jatani jivanti

yat prayanty abhisarnvisanti.
This mantra confirms that the entire cosmic manifestation emanates from the
Absolute Truth, rests upon the Absolute Truth and after annihilation again reenters
the body of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living
entity is originally spiritual, and when he enters the spiritual world or the body of
the Supreme Lord, he still retains his identity as an individual soul. In this connec-
tion Sripada Ramanujacarya gives the example that when a green bird enters a green
tree it does not become one with the tree; it retains its identity as a bird, although
it appears to merge in the greenness of the tree. To give another example, an animal
that enters a forest keeps its individuality, although apparently the beast merges in
the forest. Similarly, in material existence, both the material energy and the living


--- Page 118 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 117
entities of the marginal potency maintain their individuality. Thus although the
energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead interact within the cosmic mani-
festation, each keeps its separate individual existence. Merging in the material or
spiritual energies, therefore, does not involve loss of individuality. According to Sri
Ramanujapada’s theory of visistadvaita, although all the energies of the Lord are
one, each keeps its individuality (vaiistya).

Sripada Sankaracarya has tried to mislead the readers of Vedanta-sutra by mis-
interpreting the words anandamayo 'bhyasat, and he has even tried to find fault with
Vyasadeva. All the codes of the Vedanta-sitra need not be examined here, how-
ever, since we intend to present the Vedanta-sitra in a separate volume.

TEXT 122
পরিণাম-বাদে ঈশ্বর হয়েন বিকারী |
এত FZ “বিবর্ত'-বাদ স্থাপনা যে করি ॥ ১২২ ॥
paripama-vade iSvara hayena vikari
eta kahi’ ‘vivarta'-vada sthapana ye kari
SYNONYMS

paripama-vade—by accepting the theory of transformation of energy; fSvara—the
Supreme Lord; hayena—becomes; vikari—transformed; eta kahi'—saying this;
vivarta—illusion; vada—theory; sthapana—establishing; ye—what; kari—do.

TRANSLATION

“According to Sankaracarya, by accepting the theory of the transformation of
the energy of the Lord, one creates an illusion by indirectly accepting that the
Absolute Truth is transformed.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura comments that if one does not clearly understand
the meaning of paripama-vada, or transformation of energy, one is sure to mis-
understand the truth regarding this material cosmic manifestation and the living
entities. In the Chandogya Upanisad it is said, san-malah saumyemah prajah
sadayatanah sat-pratisthah (Cha. U. 6.8.4). The material world and the living entities
are separate beings, and they are eternally true, not false. Sarikaracarya, however,
unnecessarily fearing that by paripama-vada (transformation of energy) Brahman
would be transformed (vikari), has imagined both the material world and the living
entities to be false and to have no individuality. By word jugglery he has tried to
prove that the individual identities of the living entities and the material world are
illusory, and he has cited the examples of mistaking a rope for a snake or an oyster
shell for gold. Thus he has most abominably cheated people in general.

The example of misunderstanding a rope to be a snake is mentioned in the
Mandikya Upanisad, but it is meant to explain the error of identifying the body


--- Page 119 ---
118 $H-Caitanya-caritamrta

with the soul. Since the soul is actually a spiritual particle, as confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (mamaivarmso jiva-loke), it is due 10 illusion (vivarta-vada) that a human being,
like an animal, identifies the body with the self. This is a proper example of vivarta,
or illusion. The verse atattvato’nyatha-buddhir vivarta ity udahrtah describes such
an illusion. To not know actual facts and thus to mistake one thing for another (as, for
example, to accept the body as oneself) is called vivarta-vada. Every conditioned
living entity who considers the body to be the soul is deluded by this vivarta-vada.
One can be attacked by this vivarta-vada philosophy when he forgets the incon-
ceivable power of the omnipotent Personality of Godhead.

How the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains as He is, never changing, is ex-
plained in the ISopanisad: parpasya pirpam adaya pirnam evavasisyate. God is
complete. Even if a complete manifestation is taken away from Him, He continues
to be complete. The material creation is manifested by the energy of the Lord, but
He is still the same person. His form, entourage, qualities and so on never deteriorate.
91112 Jiva Gosvamt, in his Paramatma-sandarbha, comments regarding the vivarta-vada
as follows: “Under the spell of vivarta-vada one imagines the separate entities,
namely, the cosmic manifestation and the living entities, to be one with Brahman.
This is due to complete ignorance regarding the actual fact. The Absolute Truth, or
Parabrahman, is always one and always the same. He is completely free from all
other conceptions of existence. He is completely free from false ego, for He is the
full spiritual identity. It is absolutely impossible for Him to be subjected to igno-
rance and fall under the spell of a misconception (vivarta-vada). The Absolute Truth
is beyond our conception. One must admit that He has unblemished qualities that
He does not share with every living entity. He is never tainted in the slightest degree
by the flaws of ordinary living beings. Everyone must therefore understand the
Absolute Truth to possess inconceivable potencies.”

TEXT 123
বস্তুতঃ পরিণাম-বাদ- সেই সে প্রমাণ |
দেহে আত্মবুদ্ধি_ এই বিবর্তের স্থান ॥ ১২৩ ॥
vastutah paripama-vada—sei se pramana
dehe atma-buddhi—ei vivartera sthana
SYNONYMS

vastutah—factually; paripama-vada—transformation of the energy; sei—that; se—
only; pramana—proof; dehe—in the body; atma-buddhi—concept of self; ei—this;
vivartera—of illusion; sthana—place.

TRANSLATION
“Transformation of energy is a proven fact. It is the false bodily conception of the
self that is an illusion.


--- Page 120 ---
Adi-I1la, Chapter 7 119
PURPORT
The jiva, or living entity, is a spiritual spark who is part of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, he thinks the body to be the self, and that
misunderstanding is called vivarta, or acceptance of untruth to be truth. The body
is not the self, but animals and foolish people think that it is. Vivarta (illusion)
does not, however, denote a change in the identity of the spirit soul; it is the mis-
conception that the body is the self that is an illusion. Similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead does not change when His external energy, consisting of
the eight gross and subtle material elements listed in Bhagavad-gita (bhamir apo
‘nalo vayuh, etc.), acts and reacts in different phases.
TEXT 124
অবিচিন্ত্য-শক্তিযুক্ত Asa
ইচ্ছায় জগদ্রূপে পায় পরিণাম ॥ ১২৪ ॥
avicintya-Sakti-yukta &/7-6/10441/2/
icchaya jagad-rupe paya parinama
SYNONYMS
avicintya—inconceivable; sakti—potency; yukta—possessed of; sri—the affluent;
bhagavan—Personality of Godhead; icchaya—by His wish; jagat-rupe—in the form of
the cosmic manifestation; pgya—becomes; parinama—transformed by His energy.
TRANSLATION
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is opulent in all respects. Therefore by
His inconceivable energies He has transformed the material cosmic manifestation.
TEXT 125
তথাপি অচিন্ত্যশক্ত্যে হয় অবিকারী |
প্রাকৃত চিন্তামণি তাহে দৃষ্টান্ত যে ধরি ॥ ১২৫ ॥
tathapi acintya-saktye haya avikari
prakrta cintamani tahe drstanta ye dhari
SYNONYMS
tathapi—yet; acintya-Saktye—by inconceivable potency; haya—remains; avikari—
without change; prakrta—material; cintamani—touchstone; tahe—in that respect;
drstanta—example; ye—which; dhari—we accept.


--- Page 121 ---
120 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
‘‘Using the example of a touchstone, which by its energy turns iron to gold and
yet remains the same, we can understand that although the Supreme Personality of
Godhead transforms His innumerable energies, He remains unchanged.
TEXT 126
नोन রত্নরাশি হয় চিন্তামণি হৈতে।
তথাপিহ মণি রহে স্বরূপে অবিক্তে ॥ ১২৬ ॥
nana ratna-rasi haya cintamani haite
tathapiha mani rahe svarupe avikrte
SYNONYMS
nana—varieties; ratna-rasi—valuable jewels; haya—become possible; cintamani—
the touchstone; haite—from; tathapiha—still, certainly; mani—the touchstone;
rahe—remains; svarape—in its original form; avikrte—without change.
TRANSLATION
“Although touchstone produces many varieties of valuable jewels, it nevertheless
remains the same. It does not change its original form.
TEXT 127
প্রাক্কৃত-বগ্ততে যদি অচিন্ত্যশক্তি হয়।
ঈশ্বরের অচিন্ত্যশক্তি,--ইথে कि বিশ্ময় ॥ ১২৭ ॥
prakrta-vastute yadi acintya-sakti haya
varera acintya-sakti,—ithe ki vismaya
SYNONYMS
prakrta-vastute—in material things; yadi—if; acintya—inconceivable; sakti—poten-
cy; haya—becomes possible; isvarera—of the Supreme Lord; acintya—inconceivable;
Sakti—potency;ithe—in this; ki—what; vismaya—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
“If there is such inconceivable potency in material objects, why should we not
believe in the inconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
PURPORT
The argument of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu described in this verse can be very
easily understood even by a common man if he simply thinks of the activities of


--- Page 122 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 121
the sun, which has been giving off unlimited amounts of heat and light since time
immemorial and yet has not even slightly decreased in power. Modern science
believes that it is by sunshine that the entire cosmic manifestation is maintained,
and actually one can see how the actions and reactions of sunshine maintain order
throughout the universe. The growth of vegetables and even the rotation of the
planets take place due to the heat and light of the sun. Sometimes, therefore,
modern scientists consider the sun to be the original cause of creation, not knowing
that the sun is only a medium, for it is also created by the supreme energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aside from the sun and touchstone, there are
many other material things which transform their energy in different ways and yet
remain as they are. It is not necessary, therefore, for the original cause, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, to change due to the changes or transformations of His
different energies.

The falsity of Sripada Sankaracarya’s explanation of vivarta-vada and paripama-
vada has been detected by the Vaisnava acaryas, especially Jiva Gosvami, whose
opinion is that actually 6201८273 did not understand the Vedanta-sitra. In Sankara’s
explanation of one sutra, anandamayo 'bhyasat, he has interpreted the affix mayat
with such word jugglery that this very explanation proves that he had little knowl-
edge of the Vedanta-satra but simply wanted to support his impersonalism through
the codes of the Vedanta philosophy. Actually, however, he failed to do so because
he could not put forward strong arguments. In this connection, Srila Jiva Gosvami
cites the code brahma-pucchari pratistha, which gives Vedic evidence that Brahman
is the origin of everything. In explaining this verse, Sripada Sarkaracarya interpreted
various Sanskrit words in such a way that he implied, according to Jiva Gosvami,
that Vyasadeva had very little knowledge of higher logic. Such unscrupulous devia-
tion from the real meaning of the Vedanta-sitra has created a class of men who by
word jugglery try to derive various indirect meanings from the Vedic literatures,
especially Bhagavad-—gita. One of them has even explained that the word kuruksetra
refers to the body. Such interpretations imply, however, that neither Lord Krsna
nor Vyasadeva had a proper sense of word usage or etymological adjustment. They
lead one to assume that since Lord Krsna could not personally sense the meaning
of what He was speaking and Vyasadeva did not know the meaning of what he was
writing, Lord Krsna left His book to be explained later by the Mayavadis. Such
interpretations merely prove, however, that their proponents have very little
philosophical sense.

Instead of wasting one’s time falsely deriving such indirect meanings from
Vedanta-satra and other Vedic literatures, one should accept the words of these
books as they are. In presenting Bhagavad-gita As It Is, therefore, we have not
changed the meaning of the original words. Similarly, if one studies Vedanta-siitra
as it is, without whimsical and capricious adulteration, one can understand the
Vedanta-siitra very easily. Srila Vyasadeva therefore explains Vedanta-sutra, be-
ginning from the first satra, janmady asya yatah, in his Srimad-Bhagavatam:

janmady asya yato ’'nvayad itaratas carthesv abhijfiah sva-rat
“I meditate upon Him [Lord Sri Krsna), the transcendent reality, who is the primeval


--- Page 123 ---
122 S$A-Caita nya-caritamrta
cause of all causes, from whom all manifested universes arise, in whom they dwell
and by whom they are destroyed. | meditate upon that eternally effulgent Lord
who is directly and indirectly conscious of all manifestations and yet is fully inde-
pendent.” The Supreme Personality of Godhead knows very well how to do every-
thing perfectly. He is abhijfiah, always fully conscious. The Lord therefore says in
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.26) that He knows everything, past, present and future, but no
one but a devotee knows Him as He is. Therefore, the Absolute Truth, the Person-
ality of Godhead, is at least partially understood by devotees of the Lord, but the
Mayavadi philosophers who unnecessarily speculate to understand the Absolute
Truth simply waste their time.
TEXT 128
প্রণব” সে মহাবাক্য — বেদের fama ।
ঈশ্বরস্বরূপ প্রণব সর্ববিশ্ব-ধাম ॥ ১২৮ ॥
‘pranava’ se mahavakya—vedera nidana
iSvara-svarupa pranava sarva-visva-dhama
SYNONYMS
pranava—the orhkara; se—that; maha-vakya—transcendental sound vibration;
vedera—of the Vedas; nidana—basic principle; iSvara-svarupa—direct representation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pranava—ornkara; sarva-vi§va—of all uni-
verses; dhama—is the reservoir.
TRANSLATION
“The Vedic sound vibration omkara, the principle word in the Vedic literatures,
is the basis of all Vedic vibrations. Therefore one should accept omkara as the sound
representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the reservoir of the
cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.13) the glories of ornkara are described as follows:
om ity ekaksararin brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deharn
sa yati paramarn gatim
This verse indicates that ormkara, or prapava, is a direct representation of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. Therefore if at the time of death one simply remem-
bers ormkara, he remembers the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is therefore
immediately transferred to the spiritual world. Orhkara is the basic principle of all


--- Page 124 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 123
Vedic mantras, for it is a representation of Lord Krsna, understanding of whom is
the ultimate goal of the Vedas, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (vedais ca sarvair aham eva
vedyah). Mayavadi philosophers cannot understand these simple facts explained
in Bhagavad-gita, and yet they are very proud of being Vedantis. Sometimes, there-
fore, we refer to the Vedanti philosophers as having no teeth (danta means “teeth,”
and ve means “‘without’’). The statements of the Sarikara philosophy, which are the
teeth of the Mayavadi philosopher, are always broken by the strong arguments of
Vaisnava philosophers such as the great dcaryas, especially Rimanujacarya. Sripada
Ramanujacarya and Madhvacarya break the teeth of the Mayavadi philosophers,
who can therefore be called Vedantis in the sense of “toothless.”
The transcendental vibration orhkara is explained in Bhagavad-gita, Chapter
Eight, verse thirteen:
om ity ekaksararn brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deharn
sa yati paramarn gatim
‘“‘After being situated in the yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable om, the
supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual planets.” If one actually
understands that orhkara is the sound representation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whether he chants orikadra or the Hare Krsna mantra, the result is certain-
ly the same.
The transcendental vibration of orhkara is further explained in Bhagavad-gita,
Chapter Nine, verse seventeen:
pitaham asya jagato
mata dhata pitamahah
vedyarn pavitram ornkara
rk sama yajur eva ca
“I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the grandsire. | am
the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable om. | am also the Rg-veda,
Sama-veda and Yajur-veda.”
Similarly, the transcendental sound om is further explained in Bhagavad-gita,
Chapter Seventeen, verse twenty-three:
orh-tat-sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas tri-vidhah smyrtah
brahmanas tena vedas ca
yajnas ca vihitah pura
“From the beginning of creation, the three syllables om tat sat have been used to
indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They were uttered by brahmanas
while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices for the satisfaction of the
Supreme.”


--- Page 125 ---
124 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

Throughout all the Vedic literatures the glories of orikara are specifically men-
tioned. Srila Jiva Gosvami, in his thesis Bhagavat-sandarbha, says that in the Vedic
literature orikara is considered to be the sound vibration of the holy name of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Only this vibration of transcendental sound can
deliver a conditioned soul from the clutches of maya. Sometimes orhkara is also
called the deliverer (tara). Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the omikara vibration:
om namo bhagavate vasudevaya. Therefore orikara has been described by the great
commentator Sridhara Svami 25 tarankura, the seed of deliverance from the mate-
rial world. Since the Supreme Godhead is absolute, His holy name and His sound
vibration orikara are as good as He Himself. Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that the holy
name, or ormkara, the transcendental representation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, has all the potencies of the Personality of Godhead.

namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis

tatrarpita niyamitah smarane na kalah
All potencies are invested in the holy vibration of the holy name of the Lord. There
is no doubt that the holy name of the Lord, or orhkara, is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Himself. in other words, anyone who chants orikara and the holy
name of the Lord, Hare Krsna, immediately meets the Supreme Lord directly in His
sound form. In the Narada-paiicaratra it is clearly said that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Narayana personally appears before the chanter who engages in chant-
ing the astaksara, or eight-syllable mantra, om namo narayanaya. A similar state-
ment in the Mandukya Upanisad declares that whatever one sees in the spiritual
world is all an expansion of the spiritual potency of orikara.

On the basis of all the Upanisads, Srila Jiva Gosvami says that orikara is the
Supreme Absolute Truth and is accepted as such by all the acaryas and authorities.
Ornkara is beginningless, changeless, supreme and free from deterioration and ex-
ternal contamination. Orhkara is the origin, middle and end of everything, and any
living entity who thus understands orhkara attains the perfection of spiritual iden-
tity in orhkara. Omkara, being situated in everyone’s heart, is vara, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (ivarah sarva-bhitanarn hrd-
dese 'rjuna tisthati). Ormkara'is as good as Visnu because orikara is as all-pervasive as
Visnu. One who knows orhkara and Lord Visnu to be identical no longer has to
lament or hanker. One who chants orikara no longer remains a sidra, but imme-
diately comes to the position of a brahmana. Simply by chanting orhkara one can
understand the whole creation to be one unit, or an expansion of the energy of the
Supreme Lord. (4/7 hi visvarn bhagavan ivetaro, yato jagat-sthana-nirodha-
sambhavah: ‘The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is Himself this cosmos,
and still He is aloof from it. From Him only this cosmic manifestation has emanat-
ed, in Him it rests, and unto Him it enters after annihilation.” (Bhdg. 1.5.20) Al-
though one who does not understand concludes otherwise, Srimad-Bhagavatam
states that the entire cosmic manifestation is but an expansion of the energy of the
Supreme Lord. Reaiization of this is possible simply by chanting the holy name of
the Lord, orhkara.


--- Page 126 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 125

One should not, however, foolishly conclude that because the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is omnipotent, we have manufactured a combination of letters—
a, u and m—to represent Him. Factually the transcendental sound ormkara, although
a combination of the three letters a, 4 and m, has transcendental potency, and one
who chantsorikara will very soon realize orikara and Lord Visnu to be nondifferent.
Krsna declares, pranavah sarva-vedesu: “^| am the syllable om in the Vedic mantras.”
(Bg. 7.8) One should therefore conclude that among the many incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, orinkara is the sound incarnation. All the Vedas
accept this thesis. One should always remember that the holy name of the Lord and
the Lord Himself are always identical (@abhinnatvan nama-naminoh). Since ormkara
is the basic principle of all Vedic knowledge, it is uttered before one begins to chant
any Vedic hymn. Without orikara, no Vedic mantra is successful. The Gosvamis
therefore declare that pragava (orhkara) is the complete representation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they have analyzed orikara in terms of its
alphabetical constituents as follows:

a-karenocyate Rrsnah
sarva-lokaika-nayakah
u-karenocyate radha
ma-karo jiva-vacakah
Ornkara is a combination of the letters a, 4 and m. A-karenocyate krsnah: the letter
a (a-kara) refers to Krsna, who is sarva-lokaika-nayakah, the master of all living enti-
ties and planets, material and spiritual. Nayaka means “leader.” He is the supreme
leader (nityo nityanarh cetanas cetananam). The letter u (u-kara) indicates Srimati
Radhararii, the pleasure potency of Krsna, and m (ma-kara) indicates the living enti-
ties (jivas). Thus om is the complete combination of Krsna, His potency and His
eternal servitors. In other words,ormkara represents Krsna, His name, fame, pastimes,
entourage, expansions, devotees, potencies and everything else pertaining to Him.
Sarva-visva-dhama: omkara is the resting place of everything, just as Krsna is the
resting place of everything (brahmano hi pratisthaham).

The Mayavadi philosophers consider many Vedic mantras to be the maha-vakya,
or principal Vedic mantra, such as tattvamasi (Chandogya Upanisad, 6.8.7), idarh
sarvarn yad ayam atma and brahmedarn sarvam (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad, 2.5.1),
atmaivedari sarvam (Chandogya Upanisad, 7.25.2) and neha nanasti Rificana (Katha
Upanisad, 2.1.11). That is a great mistake. Only orikara is the maha-vakya. All these
other mantras which the Mayavadis accept as the maha-vakya are only incidental.
They cannot be taken as the maha-vakya, or maha-mantra. The mantra tattvamasi
indicates only a partial understanding of the Vedas, unlike ০0/77/437৫, which repre-
sents the full understanding of the Vedas. Therefore the transcendental sound which
includes all Vedic knowledge is orinkara (prapava).

Aside from orhkara, none of the words uttered by the followers of Sankaracarya
can be considered the maha-vakya. They are merely passing remarks. Sankaracarya,
however, has never stressed chanting of the maha-vakya orhkara; he has accepted
only tattvamasi as the maha-vakya. Imagining the living entity to be God, he has


--- Page 127 ---
८

126 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta

misrepresented all the mantras of the Vedanta-satra with the motive of proving that
there is no separate existence of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth.
This is similar to the politician’s attempt to prove nonviolence from Bhagavad-gita.
Krsna is violent to demons, and to attempt to prove that Krsna is not violent is ulti-
mately to deny Krsna. As such explanations of Bhagavad-gita are absurd, so also is
Sankaracarya’s explanation of Vedanta-sitra, and no sane and reasonable man will
accept it. At present, however, Vedanta-siutra is misrepresented not only by the
so-called Vedantis but also by other unscrupulous persons who are so degraded that
they even recommend that sannyasis eat meat, fish and eggs. In this way, the so-
called followers of Sankara, the impersonalist Mayavadis, are sinking lower and
lower. How can these degraded men explain Vedanta-sitra, which is the essence of
all Vedic literature?

Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has declared, mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-
nasa: anyone who hears commentary on the Vedanta-sutra from the Mayavada
school is completely doomed. As explained in Bhagavad-gita, vedais ca sarvair aham
eva vedyah: all Vedic literature aims to understand Krsna (Bg. 15.15). Mayavada
philosophy, however, has deviated everyone from Krsna. Therefore there is a great
need for the Kyspa consciousness movement all over the world to save the world
from degradation. Every intelligent and sane man must abandon the philosophical
explanation of the Mayavadis and accept the explanation of Vaisnava acaryas. One
should read Bhagavad-gita As It Is to try to understand the real purpose of the Vedas.

TEXT 129
সর্বাশ্ৰয় ঈশ্বরের প্রণব উদ্দেশ।
“তন্তমসি'-বাক্য হয় ৰেদের একদেশ ॥ ১২৯ ॥
sarvasraya isvarera pranava uddesa
‘tattvamasi’—vakya haya vedera ekadesa
SYNONYMS

sarva-asraya—the reservoir of everything; iSvarera—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; prapava—orkara; uddesa—purpose; tattvamasi—the Vedic mantra
tattvamasi (‘‘you are the same’’); vakya—statement; haya—becomes; vedera—of the
Vedic literature; eka-desa—partial understanding.

TRANSLATION

“It is the purpose of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to present pranava
[omkara] as the reservoir of all Vedic knowledge. The words tat tvam asi are only
a partial explanation of the Vedic knowledge.

PURPORT
Tat tvam asi means ‘“‘you are the same spiritual identity.”


--- Page 128 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 127
TEXT 130
“প্রণব, মহাৰা ক্য _ তাহা করি” আচ্ছাদন |
মহাবাক্যে করি 'তত্ব্মসি'র স্থাপন ॥ ১৩০ ॥
‘prapava, maha-vakya—taha kari’ acchadana
mahavakye kari ‘tattvamasi’ra sthapana
SYNONYMS
pranava— ornkara; maha-vakya—principal mantra; taha—that; kari’—making; ac-
chadana—covered; maha-vakye—in place of the principal mantra; kari—| do; tat-
tvam-asira sthapana—establishment of the statement tat tvam asi.
TRANSLATION
“Pranava [omkara] is the maha-vakya [maha-mantra] in the Vedas. Sarikaracarya’s
followers cover this to stress without authority the mantra tat tvam asi.
PURPORT
The Mayavadi philosophers stress the statements tat tvam asi, so’ham, etc., but
they do not stress the real maha-mantra, prapava (ornkara). Therefore, because they
misrepresent Vedic knowledge, they are the greatest offenders to the lotus feet of
the Lord. Caitanya Mahaprabhu says clearly, mayavadi krspe aparadhi: Mayavadi
philosophers are the greatest offenders to Lord Krsna. Lord Krsna declares:
tan aharh dvisatah kraran
sarnsaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisv eva yonisu
“Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among mankind, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of
life.” (Bg. 16.19) Life in demoniac species awaits the Mayavadi philosophers after
death because they are envious of Krsna. When Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (9.34),
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru (“Engage your mind always
in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship 161), one demoniac scholar says
that it is not Krsna to whom one must surrender. This scholar is already suffering in
this life, and he will have to suffer again in the next if in this life he does not com-
plete his prescribed suffering. One should be very careful not to be envious of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the next verse, therefore, Sri Caitanya Maha
prabhu clearly states the purpose of the Vedas.
TEXT 131
TRICE FCT কৃষ্ণের অভিধান |
মুখ্যবৃত্তি ছাড়ি' কৈল লঞ্ষণা-ব্যাখ্যান ॥ > ॥


--- Page 129 ---
128 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
sarva-veda-sitre kare krsnera abhidhana
mukhya-vrtti chadi’ kaila laksana-vyakhyana
SYNONYMS
sarva-veda-sitre—in all the codes of Vedanta-sutra; kare—establishes; krspera— of
Lord Krsna; abhidhana—explanation; mukhya-vrtti—direct interpretation; chadi’—
giving up; kaila— made; laksana—indirect; vyakhyana—explanation.
TRANSLATION
“In all the Vedic sutras and literatures, it is Lord Krsna who is to be understood,
but the followers of Sarnkaracarya have covered the real meaning of the Vedas with
indirect explanations.
PURPORT
It is said:
vede ramayane caiva purane bharate tatha
adav ante ca madhye ca harih sarvatra giyate
In the Vedic literature, including the Ramayana, Puranas and Mahabharata, from
the very beginning (@dau) to the end (ante ca), as well as within the middle (madhye
ca), only Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is explained.
TEXT 132
স্বতঃপ্রমাণ বেদ - প্রমাণ-শিরোমণি |
well করিলে স্বতঃপ্রমাণতা-হানি ॥ ১৩২ ॥
svatah-pramana veda— pramana-siromani
laksana karile svatah-pramanata-hani
SYNONYMS
svatah-pramana—self-evident; veda—the Vedic literature; pramana—evidence;
Siromani—topmost; laksana—interpretation; karile—doing; svatap-pramanata—self-
evidence; hani—lost.
TRANSLATION
“The self-evident Vedic literatures are the highest evidence of all, but if these
literatures are interpreted, their self-evident nature is lost.
PURPORT
We quote Vedic evidence to support our statements, but if we interpret it accord-
ing to our own judgment, the authority of the Vedic literature is rendered imper-


--- Page 130 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 129
fect or useless. In other words, by interpreting the Vedic version one minimizes the
value of Vedic evidence. When one quotes from Vedic literature, it is understood
that the quotations are authoritative. How can one bring the authority under his
own control? That is a case of principiis obsta.

TEXT 133
এই মত প্রতিস্থত্রে সহজার্থ Blew |
গৌণার্থ ব্যাখ্যা করে कन्नन। করিয়] ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
ei mata pratisitre sahajartha chagdiya
gaunartha vyakhya kare kalpana kariya
SYNONYMS
ei mata—\ike this; pratisiatre—in every sitra or code of the Vedanta, sahaja-artha—
the clear, simple meaning; chadiy@—giving up; gauna-artha—indirect meaning;
vyakhya—explanation; kare—he makes; kalpana kariya—by imagination.

TRANSLATION

“The Mayavada school, giving up the real, easily understood meaning of Vedic
literature, has introduced indirect meanings, based on their imaginative powers, to
prove their philosophy.”

PURPORT

Unfortunately, the Sankarite interpretation has covered almost the entire world.
Therefore there is a great need to present the original, easily understood natural
import of the Vedic literature. We have therefore begun by presenting Bhagavad-
gita As It Is, and we propose to present all the Vedic literature in terms of the direct
meaning of its words.

TEXT 134
এই মতে প্রতিযূত্রে করেন দুষণ।
শুনি চমৎকার হৈল ATIF গণ ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
ei mate pratisitre karena dasana
Suni’ camatkara haila sannyasira gana
SYNONYMS

ei mate—in this way; pratisutre—in each and every code; karena—shows; dusana—
defects; suniya—hearing; camatkara—struck with wonder; haila—they became;
sannyasira—of all the Mayavadis; gana—the group.


--- Page 131 ---
130 $ri-Caitanya-carita mrta
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus showed for each and every siitra the defects
in Sankaracarya’s explanations, all the assembled Mayavadi sannyasis were struck
with wonder.
TEXT 135
সকল সন্ন্যাসী कट, “শুনহ প্রীপাদ |
তুমি যে খণ্ডিলে অর্থ, এ নহে বিবাদ ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
sakala sannyasi kahe,— ‘Sunaha Sripada
tumi ye khandile artha, € nahe vivada
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; sannyasi—the Mayavadi sannyasis; kahe—say; sunaha—please hear;
Sripada—Y our Holiness; tumi—Y ou; ye—that; khandile—refuted; artha—meaning; e—
this; nahe—not; vivada—quarrel.
TRANSLATION
All the Mayavadi sannyasis said: “Your Holiness, kindly know from us that we
actually have no quarrel with Your refutation of these meanings, for You have given
a clear understanding of the satras.
TEXT 136
আচার্য-কষ্পিত অর্থ, ইহ मटर जानि |
সম্প্রদায়-অমনুরোধে তবু তাহা মানি ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
acarya-kalpita artha,—iha sabhe jani
sampradaya-anurodhe tabu taha mani
SYNONYMS
aGcarya—Sankaracarya; kalpita—imaginative; artha—meaning; iha—this; sabhe—all
of us; jani—know; sampradaya-anurodhe—but for the sake of our party; tabu—still;
taha—that; mani—we accept.
TRANSLATION
“We know that all this word jugglery springs from the imagination of Sarikar-
acarya, and yet because we belong to his sect, we accept it although it does not
satisfy us.
TEXT 137
মুখ্যার্থ ব্যাখ্য৷ কর, দেখি তোমার am ¢
মুখ্যার্থে লাগাল প্রভু FIAT ॥ ১৩৭ ॥


--- Page 132 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 131
mukhyartha vyakhya kara, dekhi tomara bala’
mukhyarthe lagala prabhu satra-sakala
SYNONYMS
mukhya-artha—direct meaning; vyakhya—explanation; kara—Y ou do; dekhi—let
us see; tomara—Y our; bala—strength; mukhya-arthe—direct meaning; /lagala—began;
prabhu—the Lord; satra-sakala—all the sutras of Vedanta.
TRANSLATION
“Now let us see,” the Mayavadi sannyasis continued, “how well You can describe
the 50135 in terms of their direct meaning.” Hearing this, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
began His direct explanation of the Vedanta-siitra.
TEXT 138
বৃহদ্তস্ত TW কহি - “योरे वान्‌" ।
सष বিধৈশ্বর্যপুর্ণ, পরতত্বধাম ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
brhad-vastu ‘brahma’ kahi— ‘Sri-bhagavan’
sad-vidhaisvarya-parnpa, para-tattva-dhama
SYNONYMS
brhat-vastu—the substance, which is greater than the greatest; brahma—called by
the name Brahman; kahi—we call; sri-bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; sat—six; vidha—varieties; aisvarya—opulences; parpa—full; para-tattva—Abso-
lute Truth; dhama—reservoir.
TRANSLATION
“Brahman, who is greater than the greatest, is the Supreme Personality of God-
head. He is full of six opulences, and therefore He is the reservoir of ultimate truth
and absolute knowledge.
PURPORT
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that the Absolute Truth is understood in three
phases of realization: the impersonal Brahman, the localized Paramatma and ulti-
mately the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The impersonal Brahman and localized
Paramatma are expansions of the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who iscomplete in six opulences, namely, wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge
and renunciation. Since He possesses His six opulences, the Personality of Godhead
is the ultimate truth in absolute knowledge.
TEXT 139
স্বরূপ-এঁস্বর্যে ভার নাহি মায়াগন্ধ।
সকল বেদের হয় SNA সে CATE ॥ ১৩৯ ॥


--- Page 133 ---
132 Sr-Caitan ya-caritamrta
svardpa-aisvarye tanra nahi maya-gandha
sakala vedera haya bhagavan se ‘sambandha’
SYNONYMS
svardpa—in His original form; aisvarye—opulence; tanra—His; nahi—there is none;
maya-gandha—contamination of the material world; sakala—in all; vedera— Vedas;
haya—it isso; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; se—that; sambandha—
relationship.
TRANSLATION
“In His original form the Supreme Personality of Godhead is full of transcenden-
tal opulences which are free from the contamination of the material world. It is to
be understood that in all Vedic literature the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the ultimate goal.
TEXT 140
তারে “নির্বিশেষ' কহি, চিচ্ছক্তি না मौनि |
অর্ধ স্বরূপ না মানিলে পূর্ণতা হয় হানি ॥ ১৪০ ॥
tanre ‘nirvisesa’ kahi, cic-chakti na mani
ardha-svarupa na manile parnata haya hani
SYNONYMS
tanre—unto Him; nirvisesa—impersonal; kahi—we say; cit-Sakti—spiritual energy;
na—do not; mani—accept; ardha—half; svarigpa—form; na—not; manile—accepting;
purnata—fullness; haya—becomes; hani—defective.
TRANSLATION
“When we speak of the Supreme as impersonal, we deny His spiritual potencies.
Logically, if you accept half of the truth, you cannot understand the whole.
PURPORT
In the Upanisads it is said:
0/7 purnam adah parnam (4/7
purnat purnam udacyate
purnasya parpam adaya
purnam evavasisyate
This verse, which is mentioned in the /Sopanisad, Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad and
many other Upanisads, indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is full in
six opulences. His position is unique, for He possesses all riches, strength, influence,


--- Page 134 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 133
beauty, knowledge and renunciation. Brahman means the greatest, but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is greater than the greatest, just as the sun globe is greater
than the sunshine which is all-pervading in the universe. Although the sunshine that
spreads all over the universes appears very great to the less knowledgeable, greater
than the sunshine is the sun itself, and greater than the sun is the sun-god. Similarly,
impersonal Brahman is not the greatest, although it appears to be so. Impersonal
Brahman is only the bodily effulgence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
the transcendental form of the Lord is greater than both the impersonal Brahman
and localized Paramatma. Therefore whenever the word Brahman is used in Vedic
literature, it is understood to refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

11 Bhagavad-gita the Lord is also addressed as Parabrahman. Mayavadis and
others sometimes misunderstand Brahman because every living entity is also
Brahman. Therefore Krsna is referred to as Parabrahman (the Supreme Brahman).
In the Vedic literature, whenever the words Brahman or Parabrahman are used,
they are to be understood to refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
This is their real meaning. Since the entire Vedic literature deals with the subject of
Brahman, Krsna is therefore the ultimate goal of Vedic understanding. The imper-
sonal brahmajyoti rests on the personal form of the Lord. Therefore although the
impersonal effulgence, the brahmajyoti, is the first realization, one must enter into
it, as mentioned in the /$opanisad, to find the Supreme Person, and then one’s
knowledge is perfect. Bhagavad-gita (7.19) also confirms this. Bahanarn janmanam
ante jfianavan marin prapadyate: one’s search for the Absolute Truth by dint of spec-
ulative knowledge is complete when one comes to the point of understanding Krsna
and surrenders unto Him. That is the real point of perfectional knowledge.

Partial realization of the Absolute Truth as impersonal Brahman denies the com-
plete opulences of the Lord. This is a hazardous understanding of the Absolute
Truth. Unless one accepts all the features of the Absolute Truth—namely, impersonal
Brahman, localized Paramatma and ultimately the Supreme Personality of God-
head—hisknowledgeisimperfect. Sripada Ramanujacarya, in his Vedartha-sangraha,
says:

jhanena dharmena svarapam api nirapitam,

na tu jaana-matrarm brahmeti katham idam

avagamyate iti cet?
He thus indicates that the real absolute identity must be understood in terms of
both His knowledge and characteristics. Simply to understand the Absolute Truth
to be full of knowledge is not sufficient. In the Vedic literature we find the state-
ment yah sarva-jiah sarva-vit, which means that the Absolute Truth knows every-
thing perfectly, but we also learn from the Vedic description parasya Saktir vivi-
dhaiva $70% 016 that not only does He know everything, but He also acts accordingly
by utilizing His different energies. Thus to understand that Brahman, the Supreme,
is conscious is not sufficient. One must know how He consciously acts through His
different energies. Mayavada philosophy simply informs us of the consciousness of
the Absolute Truth but does not give us information of how He acts with His con-
sciousness. That is the defect of that philosophy.


--- Page 135 ---
134 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 141
ভগবান্‌:প্রাপ্তিহেতু (य করি উপায়।
অশ্রবণাদি ভক্তি _-কৃষ্ণ-প্রাপ্তির সহায় ॥ ১৪১ ॥
bhagavan-praptihetu ye kari upaya
Sravanadi bhakti— krsna-praptira sahaya
SYNONYMS
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prapti-hetu—the means by which
He can be approached; ye—what; kari—| do; upaya—means; sravana-adi—devotional
service, beginning with hearing; bhakti—devotional service; krsma—the Supreme
Lord; praptira—to approach Him; sahaya—means.
TRANSLATION
“It is only by devotional service, beginning with hearing, that one can approach
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the only means to approach Him.
PURPORT
Mayavadi philosophers are satisfied simply to understand Brahman to be the sum
total of knowledge, but Vaisnava philosophers not only know in detail about the
Supreme Personality of Godhead but also know how to approach Him directly.
The method for this is described by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as nine kinds of
devotional service, beginning with hearing.
Sravanarn Rirtanarn visnoh smaranarh pada-sevanam
arcanarn vandanarin dasyarn sakhyam atma-nivedanam
(Bhag. 7.5.23)
One can directly approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply by execut-
ing the nine kinds of devotional service, of which hearing about the Lord is the
most. important (Sravanadi). Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has very favorably stressed
the importance of this process of hearing. According to His method, if people are
simply given a chance to hear about Krsna, certainly they will gradually develop
their dormant awareness or love of Godhead. Sravanadi-suddha-citte karaye udaya
(Cc. Madhya 22.107). Love of God is dormant in everyone, but if one is given a
chance to hear about the Lord, certainly that love develops. Our Krsna conscious-
ness movement acts on this principle. We simply give people the chance to hear
about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and give them prasada to eat, and the
actual result is that all over the world people are responding to this process and be-
coming pure devotees of Lord Krsna. We open hundreds of centers all over the
world just to give people in general a chance to hear about Krsna and accept
Krsna's prasada. These two processes can be accepted by anyone, even a child. It
doesn’t matter whether one is poor or rich, learned or foolish, black or white, old


--- Page 136 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 135
or still a child—anyone who simply hears about the Supreme Personality of God-
head and takes prasada is certainly elevated to the transcendental position of devo-
tional service.

TEXT 142
সেই সর্ববেদের “অভিথেয়' नाय |
সাধনভক্তি হৈতে হয় প্রেমের উদগম ॥ ১৪২ ॥
sei sarva-vedera ‘abhidheya’ nama
sadhana-bhakti haite haya premera udgama
SYNONYMS

sei sarva-vedera—that is the essence of all Vedic literature; abhidheya nama—the
process called abhidheya, or devotional activities; sadhana-bhakti—another name of
this process, “devotional service in practice’; haite—from this; haya—there is;
premera—of love of Godhead; udgama—awakening.

TRANSLATION

“By practicing this regulated devotional service under the direction of the
spiritual master, certainly one awakens his dormant love of Godhead. This process
is called abhidheya.

PURPORT

By the practice of devotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting, the
impure heart of a conditioned soul is purified, and thus he can understand his
eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That eternal relation-
ship is described by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Jivera ‘svarapa’ haya krsnera nitya-
dasa: the living entity is an eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When one is convinced about this relationship, which is called sambandha, he then
acts accordingly. That is called abhidheya. The next step is prayojana-siddhi, or
fulfillment of the ultimate goal of one’s life. If one can understand his relationship
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and act accordingly, automatically his
mission in life is fulfilled. The Mayavadi philosophers miss even the first stage in
self-realization because they have no conception of God's being personal. He is the
master of all, and He is the only person who can accept the service of all living
entities, but since this knowledge is lacking in Mayavada philosophy, Mayavadis do
not have knowledge even of their relationship with God. They wrongly think that
everyone is God or that everyone is equal to God. Therefore, since the real position
of the living entity is not clear to them, how can they advance further? Although
they are very puffed-up at being liberated, Mayavadi philosophers very shortly fall
down again to material activities due to their neglecting the lotus feet of the Lord.
That is called patanty adhah.


--- Page 137 ---
136 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
aruhya krcchrena pararn padari tatah
patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah
(Bhag. 10.2.32)
It is the statement of Prahlada Maharaja that persons who think themselves liberated
but do not execute devotional service, not knowing their relationship with the Lord,
are certainly misled. One must know his relationship with the Lord and act accord-
ingly. Then the fulfillment of his life’s mission will be possible.
TEXT 143
কৃষ্ণের চরণে হয় যদি অনুরাগ ।
কৃষ্ণ fag অন্যত্র তার নাহি রহে রাগ ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
krsnera carane haya yadi anuraga
krsna binu anyatra tara nahi rahe raga
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Krsna; carane—at the lotus feet; haya—becomes; yadi—if; anuraga—
attachment; krsna—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; binu—without; anyatra—
anywhere else; tara—his; nahi—there does not; rahe—remain; raga—attachment.
TRANSLATION
“If one develops his love of Godhead and becomes attached to the lotus feet of
Krsna, gradually he loses his attachment to everything else.
PURPORT
This is a test of advancement in devotional service. Bhaktir parasyanubhavo
viraktir anyatra syat: in bhakti, a devotee’s only attachment is Krsna; he no longer
wants to maintain his attachments to many other things. Although Mayavadi
philosophers are supposed to be very advanced on the path of liberation, we see
that after some time they descend to politics and philanthropic activities. Many big
sannyasis who were supposedly liberated and very advanced have come down again
to materialistic activities, although they left this world as mithya (false). When 2
devotee develops in devotional service, however, he no longer has attachments to
such philanthropic activities. He is simply inspired to serve the Lord, and he engages
his entire life in such service. This is the difference between Vaisnava and Mayavadi
philosophers. Devotional service, therefore, is practical, whereas Mayavada philoso-
phy is merely mental speculation.
TEXT 144
পঞ্চম পুকুষার্থ সেই প্রেম-মহাধন |
কৃষ্ণের মাধুর্র-রস করায় আস্বাদন ॥ ১৪৪ ॥


--- Page 138 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 137
2400 ८0/710 purusartha sei prema-mahadhana
krsnera madhurya-rasa kardya asvadana
SYNONYMS

pancama—fifth; purusa-artha—goal of life; sei—that; prema—love of God; maha-
dhana—foremost wealth; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; madhurya—conjugal love; rasa—
mellow; kardya— causes; asvadana—taste.

TRANSLATION

“Love of Godhead is so exalted that it is considered to be the fifth goal of human
life. By awakening one’s love of Godhead, one can attain the platform of conjugal
love, tasting it even during the present span of life.

PURPORT

The Mayavadiphilosophers consider the highest goal of perfection to be liberation
(mukti), which is the fourth perfectional platform. Generally people are aware of
four principal goals of life—religiosity (dharma), economic development (artha),
sense gratification (kama) and ultimately liberation (moksa)—but devotional service
is situated on the platform above liberation. In other words, when one is actually
liberated (mukta) he can understand the meaning of love of Godhead (krsna-prema).
While teaching Rapa Gosvami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stated, kotimukta-madhye
‘durlabha’ eka krsna-bhakta: ‘Out of millions of liberated persons, one may be-
come a devotee of Lord Krsna.”

The most elevated Mayavadi philosopher can rise to the platform of liberation,
but Krsna-bhakti, devotional service to Krsna, is transcendental to such liberation. ,
Srila Vyasadeva explains this fact in Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhag. 1.1.2):

dharmah projjhita-kaitavo ‘tra paramo nirmatsaranarn satarn

vedyarn vdstavam atra vastu Sivadarh tapa-trayonmulanam
“Completely rejecting all religions which are materially motivated, the Bhagavata
Purana propounds the highest truth, which is understandable by those devotees who
are pure in heart. The highest truth is reality, distinguished from illusion for the
welfare of all. Such truth uproots the threefold miseries.” Srimad-Bhagavatam, the
explanation of Vedanta-sutra, is meant for paramo nirmatsaranpam, those who are
completely aloof from jealousy. Mayavadi philosophers are jealous of the existence
of the Personality of Godhead. Therefore Vedanta-sutra is not actually meant for
them. They unnecessarily poke their noses in the Vedanta-sutra, but they have no
ability to understand it because the author of Vedanta-sutra writes in his commen-
tary, Srimad-Bhdgavatam, that it is meant for those who are pure in heart (paramo
nirmatsarapam). If one is envious of Krsna, how can he understand Vedanta-sutra
or Srimad-Bhagavatam? The Mayavadis’ primary occupation is to offend the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna. For example, although Krsna demands our
surrender in Bhagavad-gita, the greatest scholar and so-called philosopher in India


--- Page 139 ---
138 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
has protested that it is “not to Krsna’ that we have to surrender. Therefore, he is
envious. Since Mayavadis of all different descriptions are envious of Krsna, they
have no scope to understand the meaning of Vedanta-sutra. Even if they were on
the liberated platform as they falsely claim, here Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami repeats
the statement of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that love of Krsna is beyond the state
of liberation.
TEXT 145
প্রেম। হৈতে কৃষ্ণ হয় নিজ SEA |
GRIT হৈতে পায় কৃষ্ণের সেবা-সুখরস ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
prema haite krsna haya nija bhakta-vasa
prema haite paya krsnera seva-sukha-rasa
SYNONYMS

prema—love of Krsna; haite—from; krspa—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; haya—becomes; nija—His own; bhakta-vasa—submissive to devotees; prema—
love of God; haite—from; paya—he gets; krspera—of Lord Krsna; seva-sukha-
rasa—the mellow of devotional service.

TRANSLATION

“The Supreme Lord, who is greater than the greatest, becomes submissive to
even a very insignificant devotee because of his devotional service. It is the beautiful
and exalted nature of devotional service that the infinite Lord becomes submissive
to the infinitesimal living entity because of it. In reciprocal devotional activities
with the Lord, the devotee actually enjoys the transcendental mellow quality of
devotional service.

PURPORT

Becoming one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not very important
for a devotee. Muktih svayarn mukulitanjali sevate 'sman (Krsna-karpamrta 107).
Speaking from his actual experience, Srila Bilvamargala Thakura says that if one
develops love of Godhead, mukti (liberation) becomes subservient and unimportant
to him. Mukti stands before the devotee and is prepared to render all kinds of ser-
vices. The Mayavadi philosophers’ standard of mukti is very insignificant for a devo-
tee, for by devotional service even the Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes
subordinate to him. An actual example is that the Supreme Lord Krsna became the
chariot driver of Arjuna, and when Arjuna asked Him to draw his chariot between
the two armies (senayor ubhayor madhye ratharn sthapaya me ’cyuta), Krsna exe-
cuted his order. Such is the relationship between the Supreme Lord and a devotee
that although the Lord is greater than the greatest, He is prepared to render service
to the insignificant devotee by dint of his sincere and unalloyed devotional service.


--- Page 140 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 139
TEXT 146
সম্বন্ধ, অভিথেয়, প্রয়োজন নাম।
এই তিন অর্থ সর্বপুত্জে পর্যবসান ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana nama
ei tina artha sarva-sutre paryavasana
SYNONYMS
sambandha—relationship; abhidheya—functional duties; prayojana—the goal of
life; mnama—name; ei—there; tina—three; artha—purport; sarva—all; sutre—in the
codes of Vedanta; paryavasana—culmination.
TRANSLATION
“‘One’s relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, activities in terms
of that relationship, and the ultimate goal of life [to develop love of God] —these
three subjects are explained in every code of the Vedanta-sutra, for they form the
culmination of the entire Vedanta philosophy.”
PURPORT
In the Srimad-Bhdagavatam (5.5.5) it is said:
parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
yavan na jijiasata atma-tattvam
A human being is defeated in all his activities as long as he does not know the goal
of life, which can be understood when one is inquisitive about Brahman. It is such
inquiry that begins Vedanta-sutra: athato brahma-jijidsa. A human being should be
inquisitive to know who he is, what the universe is, what God is and what the
relationship is between himself, God and the material world. Such questions cannot
be asked by cats and dogs, but they must arise in the heart of a real human being.
Knowledge of these four items—namely, oneself, the universe, God, and their
internal relationship—is called sambandha-jiiana, or the knowledge of one’s relation
ship. When one’s relationship with the Supreme Lord is established, the next pro-
gram is to actin that relationship. This is called abhidheya, or activity in relationship
with the Lord. After executing such prescribed duties, when one attains the highest
goal of life, love of Godhead, he achieves prayojana-siddhi, or the fulfillment of his
human mission. In the Brahma-sutra, or Vedanta-sutra, these subjects are very care-
fully explained. Therefore one who does not understand the Vedanta-sutra in terms
of these principles is simply wasting his time. This is the version of Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.8):


--- Page 141 ---
140 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
dharmah svanusthitah purisarm
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratirh
srama eva hi kevalam
One may be a very learned scholar and execute his prescribed duty very nicely, but
if he does not ultimately become inquisitive about the Supreme Personality of God-
head and is indifferent to sravanarn kirtanam (hearing and chanting), all that he has
done is but a waste of time. Mayavadi philosophers who do not understand the
relationship between themselves, the cosmic manifestation and the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead are simply wasting their time, and their philosophical specula-
tion has no value.
TEXT 147
এইমত সর্বপূত্রের ব্যাখ্যান শুনিয়া |
সকল AIT কহে বিনয় করিয়া ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
eimata sarva-sutrera vyakhyana suniya
sakala sannyasi kahe vinaya kariya
SYNONYMS
ef~mata—in this way; sarva-satrera—of all the codes of Vedanta-sitra; vyakhyana—
explanation; Suniya—by hearing; sakala—all; sannyasi—the groups of Mayavadi
sannyasis; kahe—said; vinaya—humbly; kariya—doing so.
TRANSLATION
When all the Mayavadi sannyasis thus heard the explanation of Caitanya Maha-
prabhu on the basis of sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana, they spoke very
humbly.
PURPORT
Everyone who actually desires to understand Vedanta philosophy must certainly
accept the explanation of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu or the Vaisnava acaryas who
have also commented on the Vedanta-sutra according to the principles of bhakti-
yoga. After hearing the explanation of Vedanta-sitra from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
all the sannyasis, headed by Prakasananda Sarasvati, became very humble and
obedient to the Lord, and they spoke as follows.
TEXT 148
বেণেময়-মুতি তুমি,- সাক্ষাৎ নারায়ণ |
छम অপরাধ:- পূর্বে যে eT নিন্দন ॥ ১৪৮ ॥


--- Page 142 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 141
vedamaya-murti tumi,—saksat narayana
ksama aparadha,—purve ye kailun nindana
SYNONYMS
vedamaya—transformation of the Vedic knowledge; mirti—form; tumi—You;
saksat—directly; nargyana—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ksama—excuse;
aparadha— offense; ptirve—before; ye—that; kailuri—we have done; nindana—criticism.
TRANSLATION
“Dear sir, You are Vedic knowledge personified and are directly Narayana Him-
self. Kindly excuse us for the offenses we previously committed by criticizing You.”
PURPORT
The complete path of bhakti-yoga is based upon the process of becoming
humble and submissive. By the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the Maya-
vadi sannyasis were very humble and submissive after hearing His explanation of
Vedanta-satra, and they begged to be pardoned for the offenses that they had com-
mitted by criticizing the Lord for simply chanting and dancing, not taking part in the
study of Vedanta-sutra. We are propagating the Krsna consciousness move-
ment simply by following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. We may
not be very well versed in the Vedanta-sutra codes and may not understand their
meaning, but we follow in the footsteps of the acaryas, and because of our strictly
and obediently following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, it is to be
understood that we know everything regarding Vedanta-satra.
TEXT 149
সেই হৈতে সন্ল্যাসীর ফিরি গেল मन ।
‘FR ‘JR नांम সদা FACT গ্রহণ ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
sei haite sannyasira phiri gela mana
‘krspa’ ‘krspa’ nama sada karaye grahana
SYNONYMS
sei haite—from that time; sannyasira—all the Mayavadi sannyasis; phiri—turn;
gela—became; mana— mind; krsna, krsna—the holy name of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Krsna; nama—name; sada—always; karaye—do; grahana—accept.
TRANSLATION
From that moment when the Mayavadi sannyasis heard the explanation of
Vedanta-satra from the Lord, their minds changed, and on the instruction of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they too chanted, ‘“‘Krsna! Krsna!” always.


--- Page 143 ---
142 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
PURPORT
In this connection it may be mentioned that sometimes the sahajiya class of
devotees opine that Prakasananda Sarasvati and Prabodhananda Sarasvati are the
same man. Prabodhananda Sarasvati was a great Vaisnava devotee of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, but Prakasananda Sarasvati, the head of the Mayavadi sannyasis in
Benares, was a different person. Prabodhananda Sarasvati belonged to the Ramanuja-
sampradaya, whereas Prakasananda Sarasvati belonged to the Sankaracarya-
sampradaya. Prabodhananda Sarasvati wrote a number of books, among which are
Caitanya-candramrta, Radha-rasa-sudha-nidhi, Sangita-madhava, Vrndavana-sataka
and Navadvipa-sataka. While traveling in Southern India, Caitanya Mahaprabhu met
Prabodhananda Sarasvati, who had two brothers, Vyenkata Bhatta and Tirumalaya
Bhatta, who were Vaisnavas of the Ramanuja-sampradaya. Gopala Bhatta Gosvami"
was the nephew of Prabodhananda Sarasvati. From historical records it is
found that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu traveled in South India in the year 1433
Sakabda during the Caturmasya period, and it was at that time that He met
Prabodhananda, who belonged to the Ramanuja-sampradaya. How then could
the same person meet Him as a member of the Sarikara-sampradaya in 1435
Sakabda, two years later? It is to be concluded that the guess of the sahijiya-
sampradaya that Prabodhananda Sarasvati and Prakasananda Sarasvati were
the same man is a mistaken idea.
TEXT 150
এইমতে তাঁ-সবার ক্ষমি' অপরাধ |
সবাকারে কৃষ্ণনাম করিলা প্রসাদ ॥ ১৫০ ॥
eimate tan-sabara ksami’ aparadha
sabakare krspa-nama karila prasada
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; tan-sabara—of all the sannyasis; ksami’—excusing; aparadha—
offense; sabakare—all of them; krspa-nama—the holy name of Krsna; karila—gave;
prasada—as mercy.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Caitanya excused all the offenses of the Mayavadi sannyasis and very
mercifully blessed them with Krsna-nama.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the mercy incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is addressed by Srila Ripa Gosvami as maha-vadanyavatara, or the
most magnanimous incarnation. Srila Ripa Gosvami also says, karunayavatirnah
kalau: it is only by His mercy that He has descended in this age of Kali. Here this


--- Page 144 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 143
is exemplified. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not like to see Mayavadi sannyasis
because He thought of them as offenders to the lotus feet of Krsna, but here He
excuses them (tan-sabara ksami’ aparadha). This is an example in preaching. Apani
acari’ bhakti-sikhaimu sabare. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches us that those whom
preachers meet are almost all offenders who are opposed to Krsna consciousness,
but it is a preacher’s duty to convince them of the Krsna consciousness movement
and then induce them to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Our propagation of
the sankirtana movement is continuing, despite many opponents, and people are
taking this chanting process even in remote parts of the world like Africa. By induc-
ing the offenders to chant the Hare Krspa mantra, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
exemplified the success of the Krsna consciousness movement. We should follow
very respectfully in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya, and there is no doubt that we
shall be successful in our attempts.

TEXT 151
তবে जव সন্ন্যাসী মহাপ্রভুকে टरा |
ভিক্ষা করিলেন সত্ভে, মধ্যে বসাইয়া ॥ ১৫১ ॥
1006 saba sannyasi mahaprabhuke laiya
bhiksa karilena sabhe, madhye vasaiya
SYNONYMS
tabe—after this; saba—all; sannyasi—the Mayavadi sannyasis; mahaprabhuke—
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; /aiya—taking Him; bhiksa karilena—took prasada or took
lunch; sabhe—all together; madhye—in the middle; vasaiya—seating Him.

TRANSLATION

After this, all the sannyasis took the Lord in their midst, and thus they all took
their meal together.

PURPORT

Previously Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu neither mixed nor talked with the Mayavadi
sannyasis, but now He is taking lunch with them. It is to be concluded that when
Lord Caitanya induced them to chant Hare Krsna and excused them for their
offenses, they were purified, and therefore there was no objection to taking lunch
or Bhagavat-prasada with them, although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu knew that the
foodstuffs were not offered to the Deity. Mayavadi sannyasis do not worship the
Deity, or if they do so they generally worship the deity of Lord Siva or the
paicopasana (Lord Visnu, Lord Siva, Durgadevi, Ganesa and Surya). Here we do
not find any mention of the demigods or Visnu, and yet Caitanya Mahaprabhu
accepted food in the midst of the sannyasis on the basis that they had chanted the
Hare Krsna maha-mantra and that He had excused their offenses.


--- Page 145 ---
144 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 152
fowl করি' মহাপ্রভু আইলা বাসাঘর |
হেন চিত্র-লীল৷ করে গৌরাল্গ-সুন্দর ॥ ১৫২ ॥
bhiksa kari’ mahaprabhu aila vasaghara
hena citra-Iila kare gauranga-sundara
SYNONYMS
bhiksa—accepting foodstuff from others; kari’—accepting; mahaprabhu—Lord
Caitanya; aila—returned; vasaghara—to His residence; hena—thus; citra-lila—wonder-
ful pastimes; kare—does; gauranga—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sundara—very
beautiful.
TRANSLATION
After taking lunch among the Mayavadi sannyasis, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who is known as Gaurasundara, returned to His residence. Thus the Lord performs
His wonderful pastimes.
TEXT 153
চন্দ্রশেখর, তপন মিশ্র, আর AAS |
শুনি” দেখি' আনন্দিত সবাকার मन ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
candrasekhara, tapana misra, ara sanatana
Suni’ dekhi’ anandita sabakara mana
SYNONYMS
candrasekhara—of the name Candrasekhara; tapana misra—of the name Tapana
Misra; ara—and; sandatana—of the name Sanatana; Suni’—hearing; dekhi’—seeing;
anandita—very pleased; sabakara—all of them; mana— minds.
TRANSLATION
Hearing the arguments of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and seeing His victory,
Candrasekhara, Tapana Miéra and Sanatana were all extremely pleased.
PURPORT
Here is an example of how a sannydasi should preach. When Sri Caitanya Maha
prabhu went to Varanasi, He went there alone, not with a big party. Locally, how-
ever, He made friendships with Candrasekhara and Tapana Misra, and Sanatana
Gosvami also came to see Him. Therefore, although He did not have many friends
there, due to His sound preaching and His victory in arguing with the local sannyasis


--- Page 146 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 145
on Vedanta philosophy, He became greatly famous in that part of the country, as
explained in the next verse.

TEXT 154
প্রভুকে দেখিতে আইসে সকল সন্ন্যাসী |
প্রভুর প্রশংস৷ করে मव বারাণসী ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
prabhuke dekhite aise sakala sannyasi
prabhura prasarnsa kare saba varanasi
SYNONYMS
prabhuke—unto Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhite—to see; aise—they came;
sakala—all; sannyasi—the Mayavadi sannyasis; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Maha-
07201 0; prasarisa—praise; kare—they do; saba—all; varanasi—the city of Varanasi.
TRANSLATION
Many Mayavadi sannyasis of Varanasi came to see the Lord after this incident,
and the entire city praised Him.
TEXT 155
বারাণসীপুরী আইলা ল্রীকৃষ্ণচেতন্ত |
পুব্রীসহ সর্বলোক হৈল AGT ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
varapasi-purf aila sri-krspa-caitanya
puri-saha sarva-loka haila maha-dhanya
SYNONYMS
, varanasi—of the name Varanasi; puri—city; aila—came; 4/7-€($(10-0/2/71/4-- 1.01
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; puri—city; saha—with; sarva-loka—all the people; haila—
became; maha-dhanya— thankful.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited the city of Varanasi, and all of its people were
very thankful.
TEXT 156
লক্ষ লক্ষ লোক আইসে প্রভুকে (HTS |
মহাভিড় হৈল দ্বারে, নারে প্রবেশিতে ॥ ১৫৬ ॥


--- Page 147 ---
146 $H-Caitanya-caritimrta
laksa laksa loka aise prabhuke dekhite
maha-bhida haila dvare, nare pravesite
SYNONYMS
laksa laksa—hundreds and thousands; /oka—people; gise—came; prabhuke—unto
the Lord; dekhite— to see; maha-bhida—a great crowd; haila—there happened; dvare—
at the door; nare—may not; pravesite—to enter.
TRANSLATION
The crowd at the door of His residence was so great that it numbered hundreds
and thousands.
TEXT 157
প্রভু যবে AA বিশ্বেশ্বর-দরশনে।
লক্ষ লক্ষ লোক আসি' মিলে সেই স্থানে ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
prabhu yabe ya’'na visvesvara-darasane
laksa laksa loka asi’ mile sei sthane
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yabe—when; ya’na—goes; visvesvara—the
deity of Varanasi; darasane—to visit; laksa laksa—hundreds and thousands; /oka—
people; asi’—come; mile—meet; sei—that; sthane—on the place.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord went to visit the temple of Visvesvara, hundreds and thousands
of people assembled to see Him.
PURPORT
The important point in this verse is that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regularly visited
the temple of Visvesvara (Lord Siva) at Varanasi. Vaisnavas generally do not visit a
demigod’s temple, but here we see that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regularly visited
the temple of Visvesvara, who was the predominating deity of Varanasi. Generally
Mayavadi sannyasis and worshipers of Lord Siva live in Varanasi, but how is it that
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who took the part of a Vaisnava sannyasi, also visited the
Visvesvara temple? The answer is that a Vaispava does not behave impudently
toward the demigods. A Vaisnava gives proper respect to all, although he never
accepts a demigod to be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the Brahma-sarhhita there are mantras offering obeisances to Lord Siva, Lord
Brahma, the sun-god and Lord Ganesa, as well as Lord Visnu, all of whom are wor-
shiped by the impersonalists as paficopasana. In their temples impersonalists also


--- Page 148 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 7 147
install deities of Lord Visnu, Lord Siva, the sun-god, goddess 00183 and sometimes
Lord Brahma also, and this system is continuing at present in India under the guise
of the Hindu religion. Vaisnavas can also worship all these demigods, but only on
the principles of Brahma-sarhhita, which is recommended by Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. We may note in this connection the mantras for worshiping Lord Siva, Lord
Brahma, goddess Durga, the sun-god and Ganesa, as described in the Brahma-sarnhita:

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga
icchanurapam api yasya ca cestate sa
govindam adi-purusari tam 00017 bhajami
“The external potency, maya, who is of the nature of the shadow of the cit [spiri-
tual] potency, is worshiped by all people as Durga, the creating, preserving and
destroying agency of this mundane world. | adore the primeval Lord Govinda, in
accordance with whose will Durga conducts herself.” (Bs. 5.44)
ksirarn yatha dadhi vikara-visesa-yogat
safjayate na hi tatah prthag asti hetoh
yah sambhutam api tatha samupaiti karyad
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
“Milk is transformed into curd by the actions of acids, yet the effect ‘curd’ is
neither the same as nor different from its cause, viz., milk. | adore the primeval
Lord Govinda, of whom the state of Sambu is a similar transformation for the per-
formance of the work of destruction.” (Bs. 5.45)
bhasvan yathasma-sakalesu nijesu tejah
sviyarn kiyat prakatayaty api tad-vadatra
brahma ya esa jagadanda-vidhana-karta
govindam adi-purusarn tam 00017 bhajami
“I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, from whom the separated subjective portion
Brahma receives his power for the regulation of the mundane world, just as the sun
manifests a portion of his own light in all the effulgent gems that bear such names
as sarya-kanta.” (Bs. 5.49)
yat-pada-pallava-yugarh vinidhaya kumbha-
dvandve pranama-samaye sa ganadhirajah
vighnan vihantum alam asya jagat-trayasya
govindam adi-purusarin tam ahari bhajami
“I worship the primeval Lord Govinda. Ganesa always holds His lotus feet upon the
pair of tumuli protruding from his elephant head in order to obtain power for his


--- Page 149 ---
148 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
function of destroying all obstacles on the path of progress in the three worlds.”
(Bs. 5.50)
yac caksur esa savita sakala-grahanarn
raja samasta-sura-mdartir asesa-tejah
yasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusarn tam aharn bhajami
“The sun, full of infinite effulgence, who is the king of all the planets and the image
of the good soul, is like the eye of this world. 1 adore the primeval Lord Govinda,
in pursuance of whose order the sun performs his journey, mounting the wheel of
time.” (Bs. 5.52)

All the demigods are servants of Krsna; they are not equal with Krsna. Therefore
even if one goes to a temple of the paficopasana, as mentioned above, one should
not accept the deities as they are accepted by the impersonalists. All of them are to
be accepted as personal demigods, but they all serve the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. $ankaracarya, for example, is understood to be an incarna-
tion of Lord Siva, as described in the Padma Purana. He propagated the Mayavada
philosophy under the order of the Supreme Lord. We have already discussed this
point in text 114 of this chapter:

tanra dosa nahi, tenho ajnakari dasa

ara yei Sune tara haya sarva-nasa
“Sankaracirya is not at fault, for he has thus covered the real purpose of the Vedas
under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” Although Lord Siva, in
the form of a brahmana (Sankaracarya), preached the false philosophy of Mayavada,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu nevertheless said that since he did it on the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there was no fault on his part (t@nra dosa nahi).

We must offer proper respects to all the demigods. If one can offer respects even
to an ant, why not to the demigods? One must always know, however, that no
demigod is equal to or above the Supreme Lord. Ekala iSvara krspa, ara saba bhrtya.
“Only Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all others, including the
demigods such as Lord Siva, Lord Brahma, goddess Durga and Ganesa, are His
servants.” Everyone serves the purpose of the Supreme Godhead, and what to speak
of such small and insignificant living entities as ourselves? We are surely eternal
servants of the Lord. The Mayavada philosophy maintains that the demigods, living
entities and Supreme Personality of Godhead are all equal. It is therefore a most
foolish misrepresentation of Vedic knowledge.

TEXT 158
স্নান করিতে যবে যান গঙ্গাতীরে।
তাহাঞ্ি সকল লোক হয় মহাস্ভিড়ে ॥ ১৫৮ |


--- Page 150 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 149
snana karite yabe ya’na ganga-tire
tahani sakala loka haya maha-bhide
SYNONYMS
snana—bath; karite—taking; yabe—when; ya’na—goes; ganigai— Ganges; tire—bank;
tahani—then and there; sakala—all; loka—people; haya—assembled; maha-bhide—in
great crowds.
TRANSLATION
Whenever Lord Caitanya went to the banks of the Ganges to take bath, big
crowds of many hundreds and thousands of people also assembled there.
TEXT 159
বাছ YT প্রভু वटन,- वन হরি হরি।
হরিধ্বনি করে লোক স্বর্গমর্ত্য ভরি” ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
bahu tuli’ prabhu bale,— bala hari hari
hari-dhvani kare loka svarga-martya bhari’
SYNONYMS
bahu tuli’—raising the arms; prabhu—Lord SriCaitanya Mahdprabhu;bale—speaks;
bala—all of you chant; hari hari—the holy name of Lord Krsna (Hari); hari-dhvani—
the sound vibration of Hari; kare—does; loka—all people; svarga-martya—in heaven,
the sky and the land; bhari’—completely filling.
TRANSLATION
Whenever the crowds were too great, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up, raised
His hands and chanted, “Hari! Hari!” to which all the people again responded, filling
both the land and sky with the vibration.
TEXT 160
লোক নিস্তারিয়া প্রভুর চলিতে হৈল मन |
TRAC পাঠাইল। nares ॥ ১৬০ ॥
loka nistariya prabhura calite haila mana
vrndavane pathaila sri-sanatana
SYNONYMS
loka—people; nistariya—delivering; prabhura—of the Lord; calite—to leave; haila—
became; mana—mind; vrndavane—toward Vrndavana; pathaila—sent; sri-sanatana—
Sanatana Gosvami.


--- Page 151 ---
150 Sr-Caitanya-carita mrta
TRANSLATION
After thus delivering the people in general, the Lord desired to leave Varanasi.
After instructing Sri Sanatana Gosvami, He sent him toward Vindavana.
PURPORT
The actual purpose of Lord Caitanya’s stay at Varanasi after coming back from
Vrndavana was to meet Sanatana Gosvami and teach him. Sanatana Gosvami met
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu after the Lord’s return to Varanasi, where the Lord
taught him for two months about the implications of Vaisnava philosophy and
Vaisnava activities. After completely instructing him, He sent him to Vrndavana to
execute His orders. When Sanatana Gosvami went to Vrndavana, there were no
temples. The city was lying vacant like an open field. Sanatana Gosvami sat down
on the bank of the Yamuna, and after some time he gradually constructed the
first temple; then other temples were constructed, and now the city is full of
temples, numbering about 5,000.
TEXT 161
রাত্রি-দিবসে লোকের wie (कोलङ्न ।
FAR टा প্রভু खादेन) নীলাচল ॥ ১৬১ ॥
ratri-divase lokera suni’ kolahala
varanasi chadi’ prabhu dila nilacala
SYNONYMS
ratri—night;divase—day;/lokera—of the people in general; Suni—hearing; kolahala—
tumult; varapasi—the city of Benares; chadi’—leaving; prabhu—the Lord; aila—
returned; nilacala—to PurT.
TRANSLATION
Because the city of Varapasi was always full of tumultuous crowds, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, after sending Sanatana 10 Vrndavana, returned to Jagannatha
Puri.
TEXT 162
এই লীলা কহিব আগে বিস্তার করিয়া।
সংক্ষেপে কহিলাঙ ইহ প্রসঙ্গ পাইয়। ॥ ১৬২ ॥
ei lila kahiba age vistara kariya
sanksepe kahilan ihan prasanga paiya


--- Page 152 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 7 151
SYNONYMS
ei—these; lila—pastimes; kahiba—| shall speak; age—later on; vistara—vivid descrip-
tion; kariya—making; sanksepe—in short; kahilan—| have spoken; ihan—in this place;
prasanga—topics; paiya—taking advantage of.
TRANSLATION
I have here given a brief account of these pastimes of Lord Caitanya, but later
I shall describe them in an extensive way.
TEXT 163
এই পঞ্চতত্বরূপে Baise |
কৃষ্ণ-নাম-প্রেম किरा বিশ্ব কৈল। @ ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
ei pahcatattva-rape sri-krsna-caitanya
krsna-nama-prema diya visva kaila dhanya
SYNONYMS
ei—this; paficatattva-rape—the Lord in His five forms; sri-krsna-caitanya—L ord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna-nama—the holy name of Lord Krsna; prema—love of
Krsna; diya—delivering; visva—the whole world; kaila— made; dhanya—thankful.
TRANSLATION
Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates of the Parica-tattva distributed
the holy name of the Lord to invoke love of Godhead throughout the universe, and
thus the entire universe was thankful.
PURPORT
Here it is said that Lord Caitanya made the entire universe thankful to Him for
propagating the sankirtana movement with His associates. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has already sanctified the entire universe by His presence 500 years ago, and there-
fore anyone who attempts to serve Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sincerely by following
in His footsteps and following the instructions of the dcaryas will successfully be
able to preach the holy names of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra all over the universe.
There are some foolish critics who say that Europeans and Americans cannot be
offered sannyasa, but here we find that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to preach
the sankirtana movement all over the universe. For preaching work, sannyasis are
essential. These critics think that only Indians or Hindus should be offered sannyasa
to preach, but their knowledge is practically nil. Without sannyasis, the preaching
work will be impeded. Therefore, under the instruction of Lord Caitanya and with
the blessings of His associates, there should be no discrimination in this matter, but
people in all parts of the world should be trained to preach and given sannyasa so


--- Page 153 ---
152 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
that the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s sankirtana movement will expand
boundlessly. We do not care about the criticism of fools. We shall go on with our
work and simply depend on the blessings of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His
associates, the Pafica-tattva.
TEXT 164
মধুতে পাঠাইল क्रन॑-मनारन |
प्रदे লেনাপতি टेकल ভক্তি গ্রচারণ ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
mathurate pathdila rapa-sanatana
dui sena-pati kaila bhakti pracarana
SYNONYMS
mathurate—toward Mathura; pathaila—sent; rapa-sanatana; the two . brothers
Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvamf; dui—both of them;sena-pati—as commanders
in chief; kaila—He made them; bhakti—devotional service; pracarapna—to broadcast.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya dispatched the two generals ২ 013 Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami
to Vrndavana to preach the bhakti cult.
PURPORT
When Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami went to Vrndavana, there was not a
single temple, but by their preaching they were gradually able to construct various
temples. Sanatana Gosvami constructed the Madana-mohana temple, and Ripa
Gosvami constructed the Govindaji temple. Similarly, their nephew Jiva Gosvami
constructed the Radha-Damodara temple, Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami constructed
the Radha-Ramana temple, Sri Lokanatha Gosvami constructed the Gokulananda
temple, and Syamananda Gosvami constructed the Syamasundara temple. In this
way, many temples were gradually constructed. For preaching, construction of
temples is also necessary. The Gosvamis not only engaged in writing books but also
constructed temples because both are needed for preaching work. $r7 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu wanted the cult of His sankirtana movement to spread all over the
world. Now that the International Society for Krishna Consciousness has taken up
this task of preaching the cult of Lord Caitanya, its members should not only con-
struct temples in every town and village of the globe but also distribute books
which have already been written and further increase the number of books. Both
distribution of books and construction of temples must continue side by side in
parallel lines.
TEXT 165
নিত্যানন্দু-গোসাঞে পাঠাইল! গৌড়দেশে |
ডেহো ভক্তি প্রচারিল| ভাশেষ-বিশেষে ॥ sve ॥


--- Page 154 ---
2411713, Chapter 7 153
nityananda-gosarne pathaila gauda-dese
tenho bhakti pracarila asesa-visese
SYNONYMS
nityananda—\Lord Nityananda; gosafie—the acdrya; pathaila—was sent; gauda-
dese—in Bengal; tenho—He; bhakti—devotional cult; pracarila—preached; asesa-
visese—in a very extensive way.
TRANSLATION
As Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami were sent toward Mathura, so Nityananda
Prabhu was sent to Bengal to preach extensively the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
The name of Lord Nityananda is very famous in Bengal. Of course, anyone who
knows Lord Nityananda knows Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also, but there are some
misguided devotees who stress the importance of Lord Nityananda more than that
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is not good. Nor should Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
be stressed more than Lord Nityananda. The author of Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsna-
dasa Kaviraja Gosvami, left his home because of his brother’s stressing the impor-
tance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu over that of Nityananda Prabhu. Actually, one
should offer respect to the Pafica-tattva without such foolish discrimination, not
considering Nityananda Prabhu to be greater, Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be greater
or Advaita Prabhu to be greater. The respect should be offered equally: sri-krsna-
caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. All
devotees of Lord Caitanya or Nityananda are worshipable persons.
TEXT 166
আপনে দক্ষিণ দেশ कव्रिन्‌। গমন |
গ্রামে গ্রামে কৈল। কৃষ্ণনাম SITE ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
apane daksina desa karila gamana
grame grame Raila krsna-nama pracarana
SYNONYMS
apane—personally; daksina desa—South India; karild—went; gamana— traveling;
grame grame—in each and every village; kaila—He did; krsna-nama—the holy name
of Lord Krsna; pracarana—broadcasting.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally went to South India, and He broadcast the
holy name of Lord Krsna in every village and town.


--- Page 155 ---
154 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 167
সেতুবদ্ধ পর্যন্ত কৈল। ভক্তির প্রচার |
ক্বঞ্ণপ্রেম দিয় কৈল৷ সবার নিস্তার ॥ ১৬৭ ॥
setubandha paryanta kaila bhaktira pracara
krsna-prema diya kaila sabara nistara
SYNONYMS
setubandha—the place where Lord Ramacandra constructed His bridge; paryanta—
up to that place; kaila—did; bhaktira—of the cult of devotional service; pracara—
broadcast; krsna-prema—love of Krsna; diya—delivering; kaila—did; sabara—every-
one; nistara—deliverance.
TRANSLATION
Thus the Lord went to the southernmost tip of the Indian peninsula, known as
Setubandha [Cape Comorin]. Everywhere He distributed the bhakti cult and love
of Krsna, and in this way He delivered everyone.
TEXT 168
এই © কহিল পঞ্চতস্ববের BAI |
ইহার অবণে হয় চৈতন্যতস্ব-জ্ঞান ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
ei ta’ kahila pafica-tattvera vyakhyana
ihara Sravane haya caitanya-tattva-jiiana
SYNONYMS
ei ta’—this; kahila—described; parica-tattvera—of the Pafca-tattva; vyakhyana—
explanation; ihara—of this; sravane—hearing; haya—becomes; caitanya-tattva—the
truth of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jigna—knowledge.
TRANSLATION
I thus explain the truth of the Pafica-tattva. One who hears this explanation
increases in knowledge of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
The Paiica-tattva is a very important factor in understanding Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. There are sahajiyas who, not knowing the importance of the Pafca-tattva,
concoct their own slogans such as bhaja nitai gaura, radhe Syama, japa hare krsna
hare rama or sri krspa caitanya prabhu nityananda hare krspa hare rama sri radhe
govinda. Such chants may be good poetry, but they cannot help us to go forward


--- Page 156 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 7 155
in devotional service. In such chants there are also many discrepancies, which need
not be discussed here. Strictly speaking, when chanting the names of the Parica-
tattva, one should fully offer his obeisances: $ri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda
sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. By such chanting one is blessed
with the competency to chant the Hare Krsna rmaha-mantra without offense. When
chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, one should also chant it fully: Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. One should not foolishly adopt any of the slogans concocted by imaginative
devotees. If one actually wants to derive the effects of chanting, one must strictly
follow the great acaryas. This is confirmed in the Mahabharata. Maha-jano yena
gatah sa panthah: “1116 real path of progress is that which is traversed by great
acaryas and authorities.”

TEXT 169
Arey, निखोनन््‌, অদ্বৈত, छिन जम |
জ্রীবাস-গছাধর-আদি যত ভক্তগণ ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
Sri-caitanya, nityananda, advaita,—tina jana
$rivasa-gadadhara-adi yata bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
Sri-caitanya, nityananda, advaita— Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu
and Advaita Prabhu; tina—these three; jana—personalities; Srivasa-gadadhara—
Srivasa and Gadadhara; adi—etc.; yata—all; bhakta-gana—the devotees.
TRANSLATION
While chanting the Pafica-tattva maha-mantra, one must chant the names of Sri
Caitanya, Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara and Srivasa with their many devotees.
This is the process.
TEXT 170
সবাকার পাদপন্থে কোটি নমস্কার ।
যৈছে তৈছে কহি কিছু চৈতন্তয-বিহার ॥ ১৭০ ॥
sabakara padapadme koti namaskara
yaiche taiche kahi kichu caitanya-vihara
SYNONYMS
sabakara—all of them; pada-padme—on the lotus feet; koti—countless; namaskara—
obeisances; yaiche taiche—somehow or other; kahi—| speak; kichu—something;
caitanya-vihara—about the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 157 ---
156 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
| again and again offer obeisances unto the Paiica-tattva. Thus | think that I will
be able to describe something about the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 171
প্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ ।
চৈতঙ্তযচরিতামৃত কহে কুৃষ্ণদাস ॥ ১৭১॥
sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe Rrspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-riipa—Srila 1২003 Gosvami; raghundtha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvam;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; @sa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—the
book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspa-dasa—Srila Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri २०७० and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring their
mercy, |, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their footsteps.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to preach the safkirtana movement of love of
Krsna throughout the entire world, and therefore during His presence He inspired
the sankirtana movement. Specifically, He sent Rupa Gosvami to Vrndavana and
Nityananda to Bengal and personally went to South India. In this way He kindly
left the task of preaching His cult in the rest of the world to the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness. The members of this Society must always
remember that if they stick to the regulative principles and preach sincerely accord-
ing to the instructions of the acaryas, surely they will have the profound blessings
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and their preaching work will be successful every-
where throughout the world.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-Ila, Seventh
Chapter, describing Lord Caitanya in five features.:


--- Page 158 ---
THe Eighth Chapter of S$ri-Caitanya-caritamyta is summarized by Srila Bhakti:
vinoda Thakura in his Amyta-pravaha-bhasya. In this Eighth Chapter, the glories of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda are described, and it also stated that if
one commits offenses in chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, he does not achieve love
of Godhead even after chanting for many years. In this connection, Srila Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura warns against artificial displays of the bodily symptoms called
asta-sattvika-vikara. That is also another offense. One should seriously and sincerely
continue to chant the Paiica-tattva names $ri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda $ri-
advaita gadadhara Srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. All these acaryas will bestow their
causeless mercy upon a devotee and gradually purify his heart. When he is actually
purified, automatically he will experience ecstasy in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. Previous to the composition of Caitanya-caritamrta, Srila Vrndavana dasa
Thakura wrote a book called Sri-Caitanya-bhagavata. Only those subjects which
were not discussed by Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura in his Caitanya-bhagavata have
been taken up by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami to be depicted in Sri-Caitanya-
caritamrta. In his very old age, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami went to Vrndavana, and
by the order of Sri Madana-mohanaji he wrote Sri-Caitanya-caritamyrta. Thus we are
now able to relish its transcendental bliss.

TEXT 1
CW दएङ्ड्टणदर তং ভগবস্তং यजिण्डपर |
প্রসতং AEITS চিত্রং লেখরজে জঅড়ো২প্যয়ম্‌ ॥ 9 ॥
vande caitanya-devari tari bhagavantam yad-icchaya
prasabharh nartyate citrarh lekharange jado ‘py ayam
SYNONYMS

vande—| offer my respectful obeisances; caitanya-devam—unto Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tam—Him; bhagavantam—the Personality of Godhead; yat-icchaya—
by whose desires; prasabham—all of a sudden; nartyate—dancing; citram—wonder-
‘fully; lekharafnge—in the matter of writing; jadah—dull fool; api—although; ayam—
this.

157


--- Page 159 ---
158 Sr Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
1 offer my respects to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu, by whose desire | have become like a dancing dog and, although | am a fool,
I have suddenly taken to the writing of Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় প্রীকৃষ্চৈতন্ত chasm |
জয় জয় পরমানন্দ জয় নিত্যান্ন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
Jaya jaya Sri-krspa-caitanya gauracandra
jaya jaya paramananda jaya nityananda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; Sri-krspa-caitanya—Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gaura-
candra—whose name is Lord Gauranga; jaya jaya—all glories; paramananda—most,
joyful; jaya—all glories; nityananda—unto Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
is known as Gaurasundara. | also offer my respectful obeisances unto Nityananda
Prabhu, who is always very joyful.
TEXT 3
জয় জয়াদ্বৈত আচার্থ কৃপাময়।
জয় জয় গদাধর পণ্ডিত মহাশয় ॥ ৩ ॥
jaya jayadvaita acarya krpamaya
Jaya jaya gadadhara pandita mahasaya
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; advaita—unto Advaita Prabhu; acarya—teacher; krpamaya—
very merciful; jaya jaya—all glories to; gadadhara—of the name Gadadhara; pandita—
learned scholar; mahasaya—great personality.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Advaita Acarya, who is very merciful,
and also to that great personality Gadadhara Pandita, the learned scholar.


--- Page 160 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 8 159
TEXT 4
জয় জয় জীবাসাদি যত ভক্তগণ |
প্রণত হইয়া বন্দে] সবার চরণ ॥ 8 ॥
Jaya jaya $rivasadi yata bhakta-gapa
prapata ha-iya vandon sabdra carapa
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; srivasa-adi—unto Srivasa Thakura, etc.; yata—all; bhakta-
gana—devotees; pranata—offering obeisances; ha-iya-doing so; vandon—| pray;
sabara—all; carana—\otus feet.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Srivasa Thakura and all other devotees
of the Lord. | fall down to offer them respect. | worship their lotus feet.
PURPORT
, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami teaches us first to offer respect to the Pafica-tattva—
Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Prabhu, Gadadhara
Prabhu and Srivasa and other devotees. We must strictly follow the principle of
offering our respects to the Parfica-tattva, as summarized in the mantra—sri-kysna-
caitanya prabhu nityananda $ri-advaita gadadhara $rivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. At
the beginning of every function in preaching, especially before chanting the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—we must chant the Pafca-tattva’s names and
offer our respects to them.
TEXT 5
भूक कवि করে যঁ-সবার we |
गोष গিরি লক্কেঘ, सक দেখে তারাগণে ॥ 0 ॥
muka kavitva kare yan-sabara smarane
pangu giri lahghe, andha dekhe tara-gane
SYNONYMS
muka—dumb; kavitva—poet; kare—becomes; yari—whose; sabara—all; smarane—
by remembering; pangu—the lame; giri—mountains; /anghe—crosses; andha—blind;
dekhe—sees; tara-gane—the stars.


--- Page 161 ---
160 (1 Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION

By remembering the lotus feet of the Parica-tattva, a dumb man can become a

poet, a lame man can cross mountains, and a blind man can see the stars in the sky.
PURPORT"

In Vaisnava philosophy there are three ways for perfection—namely, sadhana-
siddha, perfection attained by executing devotional service according to the rules
and regulations, nitya-siddha, eternal perfection attained by never forgetting Krsna
at any time, and krpa-siddha, perfection attained by the mercy of the spiritual
master or a Vaisnava. Kaviraja Gosvami here stresses krpa-siddha, perfection by the
mercy of superior authorities. This mercy does not depend on the qualifications of
a devotee. By such mercy, even if a devotee is dumb he can speak or write to glori-
fy the Lord splendidly, even if lame he can cross mountains, and even if blind he can
see the stars in the sky.

TEXT 6
এ-সব না মানে যেই পণ্ডিত जकन |
তা-মবার বিভাপাঠ ভেক-কোলাহল ॥ ৬ ॥
e-saba na mane yei pandita sakala
ta-sabara vidya-patha bheka-kolahala
SYNONYMS

e-saba—all these; na—does not; mane—accept; yei—anyone; pandita—so-called
learned; sakala—all; ta-sabara—of all of them; vidya-patha—the educational cultiva-
tion; bheka—of frogs; kolahala— tumultuous sound.

TRANSLATION

The education cultivated by so-called learned scholars who do not believe these

statements of Caitanya-caritamrta is like the tumultuous croaking of frogs.
PURPORT

The croaking of the frogs in the rainy season resounds very loudly in the forest,
with the result that snakes, hearing the croaking in the darkness, approach the
frogs and swallow them. Similarly, the so-called educational vibrations of the tongues
of university professors who do not have spiritual knowledge is like the croaking
of frogs.

TEXT 7
এই जव न মানে যেবা করে TWEE |
কষ্ণ-কূপা নাহি তারে, নাহি তার গতি ॥ ৭ ॥


--- Page 162 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 161
ei saba na mane yeba kare krsna-bhakti
krsna-krpa nahi tare, nahi tara gati
SYNONYMS
ei—these; saba—all; na mane—does not accept; yeba—anyone who; kare—
executes; krsna-bhakti—devotional service; krsna-krpa—mercy of Krsna; nahi—is not;
tare—unto him; nahi—there is not; tara—his; gati—advancement.
TRANSLATION
One who does not accept the glories of the Pafca-tattva but still makes a show of
devotional service to Krsna can never achieve the mercy of Krsna nor advance to the
ultimate goal.
PURPORT
If one is seriously interested in Krsna conscious activities, he must be ready to
follow the rules and regulations laid down by the acaryas, and he must understand
their conclusions. The $astra says: dharmasya tattvarn nihitarh guhayarh maha-jano
yena gatah sa panthah (Mahabharata, Vana Parva 313.117). It is very difficult to
understand the secret of Krsna consciousness, but one who advances by the instruc-
tion of the previous dcaryas and follows in the footsteps of his predecessors in the
line of disciplic succession will have success. Others will not. Srila Narottama dasa
Thakura says in this connection, chadiya vaispava-seva nistara payeche keba: ‘‘Unless
one serves the spiritual master and acaryas, one cannot be liberated.” Elsewhere
he says:
ei chaya gosaii yanra—mui tanra dasa
tan-sabara pada-repu mora pafica-grasa
“I simply accept a person who follows in the footsteps of the six Gosvams, and the
dust of such a person's lotus feet is my foodstuff.”
TEXT 8
পূর্বে যেছে জরাসন্ধ-আদি রাজগণ |
বেদ-ধর্ম করি' করে বিষ্ণুর পুজন ॥ ४. ॥
parve yaiche jarasandha-adi raja-gana
veda-dharma kari’ kare vispura pujana
SYNONYMS
parve—formerly; yaiche—as it was; jarasandha—King Jarasandha; adi—heading;
raja-gana—kings; veda-dharma—performance of Vedic rituals; kari’—doing; kare—
does; vispnura—of Lord Visnu; pdjana—worship.


--- Page 163 ---
162 Si Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION

Formerly kings like Jarasandha [the father-in-law of Kamsa] strictly followed

the Vedic rituals, thus worshiping Lord Visnu.
PURPORT"

In these verses the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami,
is very seriously stressing the importance of worship of the Paiica-tattva. If one
becomes a devotee of Gaurasundara or Krsna but does not give importance to the
Pafca-tattva (Sri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara Srivasadi-
gaura-bhakta-vrnda), his activities are considered to be offenses, or, in the words of
Srila Rupa Gosvami, utpata (disturbances). One must therefore be ready to offer
due respects to the Pafica-tattva before becoming a devotee of Lord Gaurasundara
or of Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT9
কৃষ্ণ নাহি মানে, তাতে দৈত্য क्रि" मानि ।
চৈতন্য না মানিলে তৈছে দৈত্য তারে जानि ॥ > ॥
krsna nahi mane, tate daitya kari’ mani
caitanya na manile taiche daitya tare jani
SYNONYMS

krsna—Lord Krsna; nahi—does not; mane—accept; tate—therefore; daitya—demon;
kari’ mdni—we accept; caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na—without;
manile—accepting; taiche—similarly; daitya—demon; tare—to him; jdni—we know.

TRANSLATION

One who does not accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
certainly a demon. Similarly, anyone who does not accept Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu-
as Krsna, the same Supreme Lord, is also to be considered a demon.

PURPORT

Formerly there were kings like Jarasandha who strictly followed the Vedic
rituals, acted as charitable, competent ksatriyas, possessed all ksatriya qualities and
were even obedient to the brahminical culture but who did not accept Krsna as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Jarasandha attacked Krsna many times, and each
time, of course, he was defeated. Like )Jarasandha, any man who performs Vedic
rituals but does not accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead must be
considered an asura or demon. Similarly, one who does not accept Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as Krsna Himself is also a demon. This is the conclusion of authorita-
tive scriptures. Therefore, both so-called devotion to Gaurasundara without devo-
tional service to Krsna and so-called Krsna-bhakti without devotional service to


--- Page 164 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 8 163
Gaurasundara are nondevotional activities. If one wants to be successful on the path
of Krsna consciousness, he must be thoroughly conscious of the personality of Gaura-
sundara as well as the personality of Krsna. Knowing the personality of Gaurasundara
means knowing the personalities of Sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita
gadadhara Srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. The author of Caitanya-caritamrta, pursuant
to the authorities, stresses this principle for perfection in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 10
মোরে না| মানিলে সব লোক হবে নাশ।
ইথি লাগি' FoNE প্রভু করিল সন্ন্যাস ॥ ১০॥
more na manile saba loka habe nasa
ithi lagi’ krpardra prabhu Rarila sannyasa
SYNONYMS
more—unto Me; na—without; manile—accepting; saba—all; loka—people in general;
habe—will go to; nasa—destruction; ithi—for this; fagi’—for the reason of; krpa-
ardra—all merciful; prabhu— Lord Caitanya; karila—accepted;sannyasa—the sannyasa
order.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thought that unless people accepted Him they
would all be destroyed. Thus the merciful Lord accepted the sannyasa order.
PURPORT
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said, kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah pararn
vrajet: “Simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, or Lord Krsna's name, one is
liberated and goes back home, back to Godhead.” (Bhag. 12.3.51) This Krsna
consciousness must be achieved through the mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
One cannot be complete in Krsna consciousness unless he accepts Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and His associates as the only means for success. It is because of these
considerations that the Lord accepted sannyasa, for thus people would offer Him
respect and very quickly come to the platform of Krsna consciousness. Since Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krsna Himself, inaugurated the Krsna consciousness
movement, without His mercy one cannot be elevated to the transcendental plat-
form of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 11
সন্ন্যাসি-বুদ্ধে;য মোরে করিবে নমস্কার ।
তথাপি খণ্ডিবে দুঃখ, পাইবে নিস্তার ॥ >> ॥


--- Page 165 ---
164 (11 Caitanya-caritamrta
sannyasi-buddhye more karibe namaskara
tathapi khandibe duhkha, paibe nistara
SYNONYMS

sannyasi-buddhye—by consideration of a sannyasi; more—unto Me; karibe—they
will; namaskara—offer obeisances; tathapi—therefore; khandibe—will diminish;
duhkha—distress; paibe—will get; nistara—liberation.

TRANSLATION

If a person offers obeisances to Lord Caitanya, even due to accepting Him only
as an ordinary sannyasi, his material distresses will diminish, and he will ultimately
get liberation.

PURPORT

Krsna is so merciful that He always thinks of how to liberate the conditioned
souls from the material platform. It is for this reason that Krsna incarnates, as
clearly indicated in Bhagavad-gita:

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanarn srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of
Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time | descend Myself.” (Bg.
4.7) Krsna always protects the living entities in many ways. He comes Himself, He
sends His own confidential devotees, and He leaves behind Him sastras like Bhagavad-
gita. Why? It is so that people may take advantage of the benediction to be liberated
from the clutches of maya. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa so that
even a foolish person who accepted Him as an ordinary sannyasi would offer Him
respect, for this would help diminish his material distresses and ultimately liberate
him from the material clutches. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati points out in this
connection that Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the combined form of Sri Radha
and Krsna (mahdprabhu sri-caitanya, radha-kgspa—nahe anya). Therefore when
fools considered Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be an ordinary human being and thus
treated Him disrespectfully, the merciful Lord, in order to deliver these offenders,
accepted sannyadsa so that they would offer Him obeisances, accepting Him as a
sannyasi. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa to bestow His great mercy
on people in general who cannot appreciate Him as Radha and Krsna Themselves.
TEXT 12
হেন কূপাময় दण्डय ন| ভজে যেই कन |
সর্বোত্তম হইলেও তারে অস্থরে গণন ॥ ১২ ॥


--- Page 166 ---
Adi-Iia, Chapter 8 165
hena krpamaya caitanya na bhaje yei jana
sarvottama ha-ileo tare asure ganana
SYNONYMS
hena—such; krpamaya—merciful; caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya;ina—does not;bhaje
—worship; yei—one; jana—person; sarvottama—supreme; ha-ileo—in spite of his being;
tare—unto him; asure—among the demons; ganana—the calculation.
TRANSLATION
One who does not show respect unto this merciful Lord, Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
or does not worship Him should be considered a demon, even if he is very exalted
in human society.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Maharaja says in this connection: 0 living entities,
simply engage yourselves in Krsna consciousness. This is the message of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.” Lord Caitanya preached this cult, instructing the philosophy of
Krsna consciousness in His eight verses, or Siksastaka, and He said, iha haite sarva-
siddhi haibe tomara: ‘‘By chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, one will get all perfec-
tion in life.” Therefore one who does not show Him respect or cannot appreciate
His mercy despite all these merciful gestures is still an asura, or opponent of bona
fide devotional service to Lord Visnu, even though he is very exalted in human
society. Asura refers to one who is against devotional service to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Visnu. It should be noted that unless one worships Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu it is useless to become a devotee of Krsna, and unless one worships
Krsna it is also useless to become a devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Such
devotional service is to be understood to be a product of Kali-yuga. Srila Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks in this connection that atheist smartas, or
worshipers of the five kinds of demigods, worship Lord Visnu for a little satisfaction
in material success but have no respect for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thinking Him
to be one of the ordinary living entities, they discriminate between Gaurasundara
and Sri Krsna. Such understanding is also demoniac and is against the conclusion
of the acaryas. Such a conclusion is a product of Kali-yuga.
TEXT 13
অতএব পুনঃ FE উধ্ববাছ হা |
চৈতদন্ত-নিত্যানজ্দ ভজ কুতর্ক ছাড়িয়। ॥ ১৩ ॥
ataeva punah kahon.ardhva-bahu hana
caitanya-nityananda bhaja kutarka chadiya


--- Page 167 ---
166 Sr Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; punah—again; kahon—!| speak; urdhva—lifting; bahu—arms;
hana—so doing; caitanya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityananda—L ord Nityananda;
bhaja—worship; kutarka—useless arguments; chadiya—giving up.
TRANSLATION
Therefore | say again, lifting my arms: O fellow human beings, please worship Sri
Caitanya and Nityananda without false arguments!
PURPORT
Because a person who performs Krsna-bhakti but does not understand Sri Krsna
Caitanya and Prabhu Nityananda will simply waste his time, the author, Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami, requests everyone take to the worship of Sri Caitanya and
Nityananda Prabhu and the Parica-tattva. He assures everyone that any person who
does so will be successful in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 14
যদি বা তাক্কিক কহে, তর্ক সে व्यमा |
তর্কশাস্ত্রে সিদ্ধ যেই, সেই সেব্যমান ॥ ১৪ ॥
yadi va tarkika kahe,—tarka se pramana
tarka-sastre siddha yei, sei sevyamana
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; va—or; tarkika—\ogician; kahe—says; tarka—logic; se—that; pramana—
evidence; tarka-sastre—in the logic; siddha—accepted; yei—whatever; sei—that;
sevyamana—is worshipable.
TRANSLATION
Logicians say, ‘‘Unless one gains understanding through logic and argument, how
can one decide upon a worshipable Deity?”
TEXT 15
লীকফ্ণচৈতন্য-দয়| করহ वित्र |
বিচার করিলে চিত্তে পাবে চমৎকার ॥ ১৫ ॥
Sri-krsna-caitanya-daya karaha vicara
vicara Karile citte pabe camatkara


--- Page 168 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 8 167
SYNONYMS

$ri-krsna-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; daya—His mercy; karaha—just
put into; vicara—consideration; vicara—when such consideration; karile—will be
done by you; citte—in your heart; pabe—you will get; camatkara—striking wonder.

TRANSLATION

If you are indeed interested in logic and argument, kindly apply it to the mercy
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. If you do so, you will find it to be strikingly
wonderful.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta 53135 30 Thakura comments in this connection that people
in general, in their narrow-minded conception of life, create many different types
of humanitarian activities, but the humanitarian activities inaugurated by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu are different. For logicians who want to accept only that
which is proven through logic and argument, it is a fact that without logic and
reason there can be no question of accepting the Absolute Truth. Unfortunately,
when such logicians take to this path without the mercy of 917 Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
they remain on the platform of logic and argument and do not advance in spiritual
life. However, if one is intelligent enough to apply his arguments and logic to the
subtle understanding of the fundamental spiritual substance, he will be able to know
thatapoor fund of knowledge established on the basis of material logic cannot help
one understand the Absolute Truth, which is beyond the reach of imperfect senses.
The Mahabharata therefore says: acintyah khalu ye bhava na tars tarkena yojayet
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva. 5.22). How can that which is beyond the imagination
or sensory speculation of mundane creatures be approached simply by logic? Logic
and argument are very poor in spiritual strength and always imperfect when applied
to spiritual understanding. By putting forward mundane logic one frequently comes
to the wrong conclusion regarding the Absolute Truth, and as a result of such a con-
clusion one may fall down to accept a body like that of a jackal.

Despite all this, those who are actually inquisitive to understand the philosophy
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu through logic and argument are welcome. Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami addresses them, “Please put Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mercy to
your crucial test, and if you are actually a logician you will come to the right con-
clusion that there is no personality more merciful than Lord Caitanya.” Let the
logicians compare all the results of other humanitarian work with the merciful
activities of Lord Caitanya. If their judgment is impartial, they will understand
that no other humanitarian activities can surpass those of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

Everyone is engaged in humanitarian activities on the basis of the body, but from
Bhagavad-gita (2.18) we understand, antavanta ime deha nityasyoktah Saririnah:
The material body is ultimately subject to destruction, whereas the spiritual soul is
eternal. 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s philanthropic activities are performed in connec-
tion with the eternal soul. However one tries to benefit the body, it will be destroyed,
and one will have to accept another body according to his present activities. 1 one


--- Page 169 ---
168 ऽन Caitanya-caritamrta
does not, therefore, understand this science of transmigration but considers the
body to be all in all, his intelligence is not very advanced. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
without neglecting the necessities of the body, imparted spiritual advancement to
purify the existential condition of humanity. Therefore if a logician makes his
judgment impartially, he will surely find that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the maha-
vadanyavatara, the most magnanimous incarnation. He is even more magnanimous
than Lord Krsna Himself. Lord Krsna demanded that one surrender unto Him, but
He did not distribute love of Godhead as magnanimously as Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. Therefore Srila Ripa Gosvami offers Lord Caitanya his respectful obeisances
with the words namo maha-vadanyaya krsna-prema-pradaya te krspaya krsna-
caitanya-namne gaura-tvise namah. Lord Krsna simply gave Bhagavad-gita, by which
one can understand Lord Krsna as He is, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is also
Krsna Himself, gave people love of Krsna without discrimination.
TEXT 16
বছ জন্ম করে যদি শ্রবণ, कोन |
তবু ©’ না পায় কৃষ্ণপদে প্রেমধন ॥ ১৬ ॥
bahu janma kare yadi $ravana, kirtana
tabu ta’ na paya krsna-pade prema-dhana
SYNONYMS
bahu—many ;janma—births; kare—does; yadi—if; Sravana—hearing; kirtana—chant-
ing; tabu—still; ta’—in spite of; na—does not; paya—get; krsna-pade—unto the lotus
feet of Krsna; prema-dhana—love of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
If one is infested with the ten offenses in the chanting of the Hare Krspa maha-
mantra, despite his endeavor to chant the holy name for many births, he will not
get the love of Godhead which is the ultimate goal of this chanting.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says in this connection that unless one
accepts Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, although one goes on chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra for many, many years, there is no possibility of his attaining the platform of
devotional service. One must follow strictly the instruction of Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu given in the Siksastaka:
trnad api sunicena taror api sahigsnuna
amdanina manadena Kirtaniyah sada harih
“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking
oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree,


--- Page 170 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 8 169
devoid of all sense of false prestige, and should be ready to offer all respect to others.
In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.”
(Siksastaka, 3) One who follows this direction, being freed from the ten kinds of
offenses, becomes successful in Krsna consciousness and ultimately reaches the
platform of loving service to the Personality of Godhead.

One must come to the understanding that the holy name of the Lord and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself are identical. One cannot reach this
conclusion unless one is offenseless in chanting the holy name. By our material
calculation we see a difference between the name and the substance, but in the
spiritual world the Absolute is always absolute; the name, form, quality and
pastimes of the Absolute are all as good as the Absolute Himself. As such, one is
understood to be an eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he
considers himself an eternal servant of the holy name and in this spirit distributes
the holy name to the world. One who chants in that spirit, without offenses, is
certainly elevated to the platform of understanding that the holy name and the
Personality of Godhead are identical. To associate with the holy name and chant
the holy name is to associate with the Personality of Godhead directly. In Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu it is clearly said: sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah.
The holy name becomes manifest when one engages in the service of the holy
name. This service in a submissive attitude begins with one’s tongue. Sevonmukhe
hi jihvadau: One must engage his tongue in the service of the holy name. Our Krsna
consciousness movement is based on this principle. We try to engage all the mem-
bers of the Krsna consciousness movement in the service of the holy name. Since
the holy name and Krsna are nondifferent, the members of the Krsna consciousness
movement not only chant the holy name of the Lord offenselessly, but also do not
allow their tongues to eat anything which is not first offered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord declares:

patrarh pusparn phalari toyarn
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aharih bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
“If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, | will
accept it.” (Bg. 9.26) Therefore the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
has many temples all over the world, and in each and every temple the Lord is offered
these foodstuffs. On the basis of His demands, the devotees chant the holy name of
the Lord offenselessly and never eat anything that is not first offered to the Lord.
The functions of the tongue in devotional service are to chant the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra and eat prasada that is offered to the Lord.
TEXT 17
खानः शनङ। মুক্তিভূক্তির্ষজ্ঞাদিপুণ্যতঃ |
সেয়ং मांधनमारुटेरईत्रिडक्किः FoF! ॥ ১৭ ॥


--- Page 171 ---
170 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Jjhanatah sulabha muktir
bhuktir yajaadi-punyatah
seyari sadhana-sahasrair
hari-bhaktih sudurlabha
SYNONYMS
jhanatah—by cultivation of knowledge; su-/abha—easily obtainable; muktih—
liberation; bhuktih—sense enjoyment; yajna-adi—performance of sacrifices, etc.;
punyatah—and by performing pious activities; sa—that; iyam—this; sadhana-
sahasraih—execution of thousands of sacrifices; hari-bhaktih—devotional service;
sudurlabha—is very rare.
TRANSLATION
“By cultivating philosophical knowledge one can understand his spiritual position
and thus be liberated, and by performing sacrifices and pious activities one can
achieve sense gratification in a higher planetary system, but the devotional service
of the Lord is so rare that even by executing hundreds and thousands of such sacri-
fices one cannot obtain it.”
PURPORT
Prahlada Maharaja instructs:
matir na Rrsne paratah svato va
mitho ‘bhipadyeta grha-vratanam
(Bhag. 7.5.30)
naigarin matis tavad urukramanghriri
sprsaty anarthapagamo yad arthah
mahiyasam pada-rajo 'bhisekam
nigkificananam na vrnita yavat
(Bhag. 7.5.32)
These S/okas are to be discussed. Their purport is that one cannot obtain Krsna-
bhakti, or the devotional service of the Lord, by official execution of the Vedic
rituals. One has to approach a pure devotee. Narottama dasa Thakura sings, chadiya
vaispava-seva nistara payeche keba: “Who has been elevated without rendering
service to a pure Vaisnava?”’ It is the statement of Prahlada Maharaja that unless one
is able to accept the dust from the lotus feet of a pure Vaispava there is no possi-
bility of his achieving the platform of devotional service. That is the secret. The
above-mentioned 7antra-vacana, quoted from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, is our
perfect guidance in this connection.
TEXT 18
কৃষ্ণ যদি ছুটে ভক্তে ভুক্তি মুক্তি দ্বিয়|।
কভু প্রেমভক্তি না দেন রাখেন জুকাইয়া॥ ১৮ ॥


--- Page 172 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 8 17
krsna yadi chute bhakte bhukti mukti diya
kabhu prema-bhakti na dena rakhena lukaiya
SYNONYMS
krspna—Lord Krsna; yadi—of course; chute—goes away; bhakte—unto the devotee;
bhukti—material enjoyment; mukti—liberation; diya—offering; kabhu—at any time;
prema-bhakti—love of Godhead; na—does not; dena—give; rakhena—keeps; lukaiya—
hiding.
TRANSLATION
If a devotee wants material sense gratification or liberation from the Lord, Krsna
immediately delivers it, but pure devotional service He keeps hidden.
TEXT 19
রাজন্‌ পতিগুরুরলৎ ভবতাং যদুনাং
দৈবং প্রিয়ঃ কুলপতিঃ क ए কিন্করে वः
অস্বেবমঙ্গ ভগবান্‌ ভজতাং মুক্কুন্দে
মুক্তিং দদাতি কহিচিৎ चन ভক্তিযোগম্‌ ॥ ১৯ ॥
rajan patir gurur 01017 bhavatarin yadunarm
daivarh priyah kula-patih kva ca kinkaro vah
astv evam anga bhagavan bhajatarn mukundo
muktirn dadati karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam
SYNONYMS
rajan—O King; patih—master; guruh—spiritual master; alam—certainly; bhavatam—
of your; yadunam—of the Yadus; daivam—God; priyah—very dear; kula-patih—head
of the family; kva—even sometimes; ca—also; kinkarah—order carrier; vah—you;
astu—there is; evam—thus; afiga—however; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bhajatam—those who are in devotional service; mukundah—Lord Krsna;
muktim—liberation; dadati—gives; Rarhicit—sometimes; sma—certainly; na—not;
bhakti-yogam—devotional service.
TRANSLATION
“The great sage Narada said: ‘My dear Maharaja Yudhisthira, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead Krsna is always ready to help you. He is your master, guru,
God, very dear friend and head of your family. Yet sometimes He agrees to act as
your servant or order carrier. You are greatly fortunate because this relationship is
only possible by bhakti-yoga. The Lord can give liberation [mukti] very easily, but
He does not give one bhakti-yoga because by that process He is bound to the
devotee.””


--- Page 173 ---
172 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
PURPORT

This passage is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.6.18). While Sukadeva
Gosvami was describing the character of Rsabhadeva, he distinguished between
bhakti-yoga and liberation by reciting this verse. In relationship with the Yadus
and Pandavas, the Lord acted sometimes as their master, sometimes as their ad- -
visor, sometimes as their friend, sometimes as the head of their family and some-
times even as their servant. Krsna once had to carry out an order of Yudhisthira’s
by carrying a letter he had written to Duryodhana regarding peace negotiations.
Similarly, He also became the chariot driver of Arjuna. This illustrates that in bhakti-
yoga there is a relationship established between the Supreme Personality of God-
head and the devotee. Such a relationship is established in the transcendental
mellows known 25 dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. If a devotee wants simple
liberation, he gets it very easily from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as con-
firmed by Bilvamangala Thakura. Muktif svayarn mukulitanjali sevate 'sman: for a
devotee, mukti is not very important because mukti is always standing on his door-
step waiting to serve him in some way. A devotee, therefore, must be attracted by
the behavior of the inhabitants of Vrndavana who live in a relationship with Krsna.
The land, water, cows, trees and flowers serve Krsna in santa-rasa, Krsna's servants
serve Krsna in dasya-rasa, and Krsna's cowherd friends serve Him in sakhya-rasa.
Similarly, the elderly gopis and gopas serve Krsna as father and mother, uncle and
other relatives, and the gopis, the young girls, serve Krsna in conjugal love.

While executing devotional service, one must be naturally inclined to serve Krsna
in one of these transcendental relationships. That is the actual success of life. For a
devotee, to get liberation is not very difficult. Even one who 15 unable to establish
a relationship with Krsna can achieve liberation by merging in the Brahman efful-
gence. This is called sayujya-mukti. Vaisnavas never accept sayujya-mukti, although
sometimes they accept the other forms of liberation, namely, sarapya, salokya,
samipya and sarsti. A pure devotee, however, does not accept any kind of mukti.
He wants only to serve Krsna in a transcendental relationship. This is the perfection-
al stage of spiritual life. Mayavadi philosophers desire to merge in the existence of
the Brahman effulgence, although this aspect of liberation is always neglected by devo-
tees. Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati Thakura, describing this kind of mukti, which
is called kaivalya, or becoming one with the Supreme, has said, kaivalyam naraka-
yate: ‘Becoming one with the Supreme is as good as going to hell.” Therefore the
ideal of Mayavada philosophy, becoming one with the Supreme, is hellish for a
devotee; he never accepts it. Mayavadi philosophers do not know that even if they
merge in the effulgence of the Supreme, this will not give them ultimate rest. An
individual soul cannot live in the Brahman effulgence in a state of inactivity; after
some time, he must desire to be active. However, since he is not related with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and therefore has no spiritual activity, he must
come down for further activities in this material world. This is confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam:

aruhya krcchrena pararin padarn tatah
patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah
(Bhag. 10.2.32)


--- Page 174 ---
Adi-ila, Chapter 8 173
Because Mayavadi philosophers have no information regarding the transcendental
service of the Lord, even after attaining liberation from material activities and
merging in the Brahman effulgence, they must come down again to this material
world to open hospitals or schools or perform similar philanthropic activities.
TEXT 20
হেন প্রেম Biss দিলা যথা তথা।
জগাই মাধাই পর্যন্ত অস্থধের क। কথা ॥ ২০ ॥
hena prema $/1-00/00/1%0 dila yatha tatha
Jagai madhai paryanta—anyera ka katha
SYNONYMS
hena—such; prema—love of Godhead; sri-caitanya— Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dila—has given; yatha—anywhere; tatha—everywhere; jagai—of the name Jagai;
madhai—of the name Madhai; paryanta—up to them; anyera—of others; ka—what
to speak; katha—words.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has freely given this love of Krsna everywhere and
anywhere, even to the most fallen, such as Jagai and Madhai. What then to speak of
those who are already pious and elevated?
PURPORT
The distinction between Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s gift to human society and the
gifts of others is that whereas so-called philanthropic and humanitarian workers
have given some relief to human society as far as the body is concerned, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu offers the best facilities for going back home, back to Godhead, with
love of Godhead. If one seriously makes a comparative study of the two gifts,
certainly if he is at all sober he will give the greatest credit to Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. It was with this purpose that Kaviraja Gosvami said:
Sri-krsna-caitanya-daya karaha vicara
vicara karile citte pabe camatkara
“If you are indeed interested in logic and argument, kindly apply it to the mercy
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. If you do so, you will find it to be strikingly wonder-
ful.” (Cc. Adi 8.15)
Srila Narottama dasa Thakura says:
dina-hina yata chila,
hari-name uddharila,
tara saksi jagai madhai


--- Page 175 ---
174 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
The two brothers | 2821 and Madhai epitomize the sinful population of this age of
Kali. They were most disturbing elements in society because they were meat eaters,
drunkards, women hunters, rogues and thieves. Yet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu de-
livered them, to say nothing of others who were sober, pious, devoted and con-
scientious. Bhagavad-gita also confirms (kith punar brahmanah punya bhakta rajar-
sayas 10100) that to say nothing of the brahminically qualified devotees and rajarsis,
anyone who by the association of a pure devotee comes to Krsna consciousness
becomes eligible to go back home, back to Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord
declares:
marn hi partha vyapasritya
ye ‘pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas 10100 sudras
te ‘pi yanti param gatim
“O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower birth—
women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sudras [workers] —can approach the supreme
destination.” (Bg. 9.32)

Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered the two fallen brothers Jagai and Madhai,
but the entire world is presently full of | 28215 and Madhais, or, in other words,
women hunters, meat eaters, gamblers, thieves and other rogues, who create all
kinds of disturbance in society. The activities of such persons have now become
common practices. It is no longer considered abominable to be a drunkard, woman
hunter, meat eater, thief or rogue, for these elements have been assimilated by
human society. That does not mean, however, that the abominable qualities of such
persons will help free human society from the clutches of maya. Rather, they will
entangle humanity more and more in the reactions of the stringent laws of material
nature. One's activities are all performed under the influence of the modes of
material nature (prakrteh kriyamanani 00001 karmani sarvasah). Because people
are now associating with the modes of ignorance (tamo-guna) and, to some extent,
passion (rajo-gupa), with no trace of goodness (sattva-gupa), they are becoming
increasingly greedy and lusty, for that is the effect of associating with these modes.
Tada rajas-tamo-bhavah kama-lobhadayas ca ye: ‘‘By associating with the two
lower qualities of material nature, one becomes lusty and greedy.” (Bhag. 1.2.19)
Actually, in modern human society, everyone is greedy and lusty, and therefore
the only means for deliverance is Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s sarkirtana movement,
which can promote all the Jagais and Madhais to the topmost position of sattva-
guna, or brahminical culture.

Srimad-Bhagavatam states:

nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityarn bhagavata-sevaya

bhagavaty uttama-sloke
bhaktir bhavati naisthikl


--- Page 176 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 175
tada rajas-tamo-bhavah

kama-lobhadayas ca ye

(Bhag. 1.2.18-19)
Considering the chaotic condition of human society, if one actually wants peace
and tranquility, one must take to the Krsna consciousness movement and engage
always in bhagavata-dharma. Engagement in bhagavata-dharma dissipates all igno-
rance and passion, and when ignorance and passion are dissipated one is freed from
greed and lust. When freed from greed and lust, one becomes brahminically qualified,
and when a brahminically qualified person makes further advancement, he becomes
situated on the Vaisnava platform. It is only on this Vaisnava platform that it is
possible to awaken one’s dormant love of Godhead, and as soon as one does so, his

life is successful.

At present, human society is specifically cultivating the mode of ignorance
(tamo-guna), although there may also be some symptoms of passion (rajo-guna).
Full of kama and Jlobha, lust and greed, the entire population of the world consists
mostly of sudras and a few vaisyas, and gradually it is coming about that there are
Sudras only. Communism is a movement of sudras, and capitalism is meant for
vaisyas. In the fighting between these two factions, the sudras and vaisyas, gradually,
due to the abominable condition of society, the communists will emerge trium-
phant, and as soon as this takes place, whatever is left of society will be ruined. The
only possible remedy that can counteract the tendency toward communism is the
Krsna consciousness movement, which can give even communists the real idea of
communist society. According to the doctrine of communism, the state should be
the proprietor of everything. But the Krsna consciousness movement, expanding this
same idea, accepts God as the proprietor of everything. People can’t understand
this because they have no sense of God, but the Krsna consciousness movement
can help them to understand God and to understand that everything belongs to
God. Since everything isthe property of God, and all living entities—not only human
beings but even animals, birds, plants and so on—are children of God, everyone
has the right to live at the cost of God with God consciousness. This is the sum
and substance of the Krsna consciousness movement.

TEXT 21
wom ঈশ্বর প্রেম-নিগুঢ়ভাণ্ডার।
বিলাইল যারে তারে, नां কৈল বিচার ॥ ২১ ॥
svatantra iSvara prema-nigudha-bhandara
bilaila yare tare, na kaila vicara
SYNONYMS

svatantra—fully independent; iSvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;

prema—love of God; nigudha—very confidential; bhandara—stock; bilaila—dis-


--- Page 177 ---
176 $ri-Caitanya-cari tamrta
tributed; yare—to anyone; tare—to everyone; nd—not; kaila—did; vicara—con-
sideration.
TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, is
fully independent. Therefore, although it is the most confidentially stored benedic-
tion, He can distribute love of Godhead to anyone and everyone without con-
sideration.

PURPORT

This is the benefit of Lord Caitanya’s movement. If one somehow or other
comes in contact with the Hare Krsna movement, without consideration of his
being a $idra, vaisya, )agai, Madhai or even lower, he becomes advanced in spiritual
consciousness and immediately develops love of Godhead. We now have actual
experience that throughout the entire world this movement is making many such
persons lovers of God simply by the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
Actually, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has appeared as the spiritual master of the
entire world. He does not discriminate between offenders and the innocent. Krsna-
prema-pradaya te: He liberally gives love of Godhead to anyone and everyone.
This can be actually experienced, as stated in the next verse.

TEXT 22
অস্ভাপিহ দেখ চৈতন্ত-নাম (यहे লয়।
কৃষ্ণ-প্রেমে পুলকাক্র-বিহবল সে হয় ॥ ২২ ॥
adyapiha dekha caitanya-nama yei laya
krsna-preme pulakasru-vihvala se haya
SYNONYMS

adyapiha—even up to date; dekha—you see; caitanya-nama—tord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s name; yei—anyone; /aya—who takes; Rrspa-preme—love of Krsna;
pulaka-asru—tears in ecstasy; vihvala—overwhelmed; se—he; haya—becomes.

TRANSLATION

Whether he is offensive or inoffensive, anyone who even now chants sri-krsna-
caitanya prabhu nityananda is immediately overwhelmed with ecstasy, and tears
fill his eyes.

PURPORT

The prakrta sahajiyas who chant nitai gaura radhe Syama have very little knowl-
edge of the Bhdgavaia conclusion, and they hardly follow the Vaisiiava rules and
regulations, and yet because they chant bhaja nitai gaura, their chanting immediately


--- Page 178 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 177
invokes tears and other signs of ecstasy. Although they do not know the principles
of Vaisnava philosophy and are not very advanced in education, by these symptoms
they attract many men to become their followers. Their ecstatic tears will of course
help them in the long run, for as soon as they come in contact with a pure devotee
their lives will become successful. Even in the beginning, however, because they
are chanting the holy names of nitai-gaura, their swift advancement on the path of
love of Godhead is very prominently visible.

TEXT 23
“নিত্যানম্দ বলিতে হয় কুষ্ণপ্রেমোদয়।
আউল্ায় সকল অঙ্গ, অশ্রু-গজ৷ বয় ॥ ২৩ ॥
‘nityananda’ balite haya krsna-premodaya
aulaya sakala ahga, asru-ganga vaya
SYNONYMS
nityananda balite— while talking of Nityananda Prabhu; haya—it so becomes;
krsna-prema-udaya—awakening of love of Krsna; aulaya—agitated; sakala—all; afga—
limbs of the body; asru-ganga—tears like the Ganges waters; vaya—flow down.

TRANSLATION

Simply by talking of Nityananda Prabhu one awakens his love for Krsna. Thus all
his bodily limbs are agitated by ecstasy, and tears flow from his eyes like the waters
of the Ganges.

TEXT 24
‘FRAY করে অপরাধের {ia
কৃষ্ণ বলিলে অপরাধীর না৷ হয় বিকার ॥ २8 ॥
‘krsna-nama’ kare aparadhera vicara
krsna balile aparadhira na haya vikara
SYNONYMS

krsna-nama—the holy name of Lord Krsna; kare—takes; aparadhera—of offenses;
vicara—consideration; krsna—Lord Krsna; balile—if one chants; aparadhira—of the
offenders; na—never; haya—becomes; vikara—changed.

TRANSLATION

There are offenses to be considered while chanting the Hare Krsna mantra.

Therefore simply by chanting Hare Krsna one does not become ecstatic.


--- Page 179 ---
178 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
PURPORT

It is very beneficial to chant the names Sri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda
before chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra because by chanting these two holy
names Sri-Rrspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda one immediately becomes ecstatic, and
if he then chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra he becomes free of offenses.

There are ten offenses to avoid in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. The
first offense is to blaspheme great personalities who are engaged in distributing the
holy name of the Lord. It is said in the astra (Cc. Antya. 7.11), krsna-Sakti vind
nahe tara pravartana: one cannot distribute the holy names of the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra unless he is empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore one should not criticize or blaspheme a devotee who is thus engaged.

Sri Padma Purana states:

satarh ninda namnah paramam aparadharh vitanute
yatah Rhyatirh yatarm katham u sahate tad-vigarham
To blaspheme the great saintly persons who are engaged in preaching the glories of
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is the worst offense at the lotus feet of the holy
name. One should not criticize a preacher of the glories of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. 11 one does so, he is an offender. The Nama-prabhu, who is identical with
Krsna, will never tolerate such blasphemous activities, even from one who passes as
a great devotee.
The second namaparadha is described as follows:
Sivasya sri-visnor ya iha guna-namadi-sakalarn
dhiya bhinnarh pasyet sa khalu hari-namahita-karah
In this material world, the holy name of Visnu is all-auspicious. Visnu’s name, form,
qualities and pastimes are all transcendental absolute knowledge. Therefore, if one
tries to separate the Absolute Personality of Godhead from His holy name or His
transcendental form, qualities and pastimes, thinking them to be material, that is
offensive. Similarly, to think the names of demigods such as Lord Siva to be as good
as the name of Lord Visnu—or, in other words, to think Lord Siva and the other
demigods to be other forms of God and therefore equal to Visnu—is also blasphe-
mous. This is the second offense at the lotus feet of the Lord.

The third offense at the lotus feet of the holy name, which is called guror avajia,
is to consider the spiritual master to be material and therefore envy his exalted
position. The fourth offense (Sruti-sastra-nindanam) is to blaspheme Vedic litera-
tures such as the four Vedas and the Puranas. The fifth offense (tathartha-vadah) is
to consider the glories of the holy name to be exaggerations. Similarly, the sixth
offense (hari-namni kalpanam) is to consider the holy name of the Lord to be
imaginary.

The seventh offense is described as follows:

namno balad yasya hi papa-buddhir
na vidyate tasya yamair hi Suddhih


--- Page 180 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 179
To think that since the Hare Krsna mantra can counteract all sinful reactions one
may therefore go on with his sinful activities and at the same time chant the Hare
Krsna mantra to neutralize them is the greatest offense at the lotus feet of hari-nama.
The eighth offense is stated thus: dharma-vrata-tyaga-hutadi-sarva-subha-kriya-
samyam api pramadah. It is offensive to consider the chanting of the Hare Krsna
mantra to be a religious ritualistic ceremony. Performing religious ceremonies,
following vows and practicing renunciation and sacrifice are all materialistic aus-
picious activities. The chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra must not be com-
pared to such materialistic religiosity. This is an offense at the lotus feet of the Lord.
The ninth offense is described as follows:
asraddadhane vimukhe 'py asrnvati
yas copadesah siva-namaparadhah
It is an offense to preach the glories of the holy name among persons who have no
intelligence or no faith in the subject matter. Such people should be given the
chance to hear the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra, but in the beginning they
should not, be instructed about the glories of the spiritual significance of the holy
name. By constant hearing of the holy name, their hearts will be purified, and then
they will be able to understand the transcendental position of the holy name.
The tenth offense is as follows:
Srute 'pi nama-mahatmye yah priti-rahito narah
aham-mamadi-paramo namni so 'py aparadha-krt
If one has heard the glories of the transcendental holy name of the Lord but never-
theless continues in a materialistic concept of life, thinking, “| am this body and
everything belonging to this body is mine [aharih mameti],” and does not show
respect and love for the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, that is an offense.
TEXT 25
SRATIAL হৃদয়ং বতেদং, যদ্গৃহমাধৈর্রিনামধ্য়েঃ |
न বিক্রিয়েতাথ যদা বিকারে,নেত্রে জলং গাত্ররুহেষু হর্যঃ ॥
tad asma-sararn hrdayarn batedarn
yad grhyamanair hari-nama-dheyaih
na vikriyetatha yada vikaro
netre jalarn gatra-ruhesu harsah
SYNONYMS
tat—that; asma-saram—as hard as iron; hrdayam—heart; bata—O; idam—this; yat—
which; grhyamanpaih—in spite of taking the chanting; hari-nama-dheyaih— meditating
on the holy name of the Lord; na—does not; vikriyeta—change; atha—thus; yada—


--- Page 181 ---
180 SA-Caitanya-caritamrta
when; vikarah—transformation; netre—in the eyes; jalam—tears; gatra-ruhesu—in the
pores of the body; harsah—ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
“If one’s heart does not change, tears do not flow from his eyes, his body does
not shiver, nor his hairs stand on end as he chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, it
should be understood that his heart is as hard as iron. This is due to his offenses at
the lotus feet of the Lord’s holy name.”
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, commenting on this verse, which is a
quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.24), remarks that sometimes a maha-
bhagavata, or very advanced devotee, does not manifest such transcendental symp-
toms as tears in the eyes, although sometimes a kanistha-adhikari, neophyte devotee,
displays them artificially. This does not mean, however, that the neophyte is more
advanced than the maha-bhagavata devotee. The test of the real change of heart
that takes place when one chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is that one becomes
detached from material enjoyment. This is the real change. Bhaktir parasyanubhavo
viraktir anyatra syat. 11 one is actually advancing in spiritual life, he must become
very much detached from material enjoyment. If it is sometimes found that a
kanistha-adhikari (neophyte devotee) shows artificial tears in his eyes while chant-
ing the Hare Krsna mantra but is still completely attached to material things, his
heart has not really changed. The change must be manifested in terms of one’s real
activities.
TEXT 26
“OF কৃষ্ণনামে করে সর্বপাপ নাশ |
প্রেমের কারণ ভক্তি করেন প্রকাশ ॥ ২৬ ॥
‘eka’ krsna-name kare sarva-papa nasa
premera Rarapa bhakti karena prakasa
SYNONYMS
eka—one; krsna-name—by chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna; kare—makes;
sarva—all; papa—sinful life; nasa—exhausted; premera—of love of Godhead; karapa—
cause; bhakti—devotional service; karena—becomes; prakasa—manifest.
TRANSLATION
Simply chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra without offenses vanquishes all
sinful activities. Thus pure devotional service, which is the cause of love of God-
head, becomes manifest.


--- Page 182 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 181
PURPORT
One cannot be situated in the devotional service of the Lord unless one is free
from sinful life. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
yesarn tv anta-gatarn paparn
Jjananarin punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante marn drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions
are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion, engage
themselves in My service with determination.” (Bg. 7.28) A person who is already
cleansed of all tinges of sinful life engages without deviation or duality of purpose
in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. In this age, although people are
greatly sinful, simply chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra can relieve them from
the reactions of their sins. Eka krsma-name: only by chanting Krsna’s name is this
possible. This is also confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (kirtanad eva krspasya).
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has also taught us this. While passing on the road, He used
to chant:
krsra krsma Rrsna Rrsna Rrsna krsna krsna he
krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna he
krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krspa raksa mam
krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna Rrsna pahi mam
rama raghava rama raghava rama raghava raksa mam
krsna kesava krsna kesava krsna kesava pahi mam
If one always chants the holy name Krsna, gradually one is freed from all reactions
of sinful life, provided he chants offenselessly and does not commit more sinful
activities on the strength of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. In this way one is
purified, and his devotional service causes the arousal of his dormant love of God.
Simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra and not committing sinful activities
and offenses, one’s life is purified, and thus one comes to the fifth stage of perfec-
tion, or engagement in the loving service of the Lord (prema pumartho mahan).
TEXT 27
প্রেমের উদয়ে হয় প্রেমের विकच |
স্বেদ-কম্প-পুলকাদি গছ্গদাশ্রধার ॥ ২৭ ॥
premera udaye haya premera vikara
sveda-kampa-pulakadi gadgadasrudhara
SYNONYMS
premera—of love of Godhead; udaye—when there is awakening; haya—it becomes
so; premera—of love of Godhead; vikara—transformation; sveda— perspiration; kam-


--- Page 183 ---
182 S$ri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
pa—trembling; pulaka-adi—throbbing of the heart; gadgada—faltering; asru-dhara—
tears in the eyes.
TRANSLATION
When one’s transcendental loving service to the Lord is actually awakened, it
generates transformations in the body such as perspiration, trembling, throbbing
of the heart, faltering of the voice and tears in the eyes.
PURPORT
These bodily transformations are automatically manifested when one is actually
situated in love of Godhead. One should not artificially imitate them. Our disease is
desire for that which is material; even while advancing in spiritual life, we want
material acclaim. One must be freed from this disease. Pure devotion must be
anyabhilasita-sunyam, without desire for anything material. Advanced devotees
manifest many bodily transformations which are symptoms of ecstasy, but one
should not imitate them to achieve cheap adoration from the public. When one
actually attains the advanced stage, the ecstatic symptoms will appear automatically;
one does not need to imitate them.
TEXT 28
অনায়াসে SIFT, কৃষ্ণের जयन्‌ |
এক কৃষ্ণনামের ফলে পাই এত धन ॥ ২৮ ॥
anayase bhava-ksaya, krsnera sevana
eka krsna-namera phale pai eta dhana
SYNONYMS
angyase—without hard labor; bhava-ksaya—stoppage of repetition of birth and
death; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; sevana—service; eka—one; krsna-namera—chanting
the name of Krsna; phale—as a result of; pai—we achieve; eta—so much; dhana—
wealth.
TRANSLATION
As a result of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, one makes such great ad-
vancement in spiritual life that simultaneously his material existence terminates and
he receives love of Godhead. The holy name of Krsna is so powerful that by chant-
ing even one name, one very easily achieves these transcendental riches.
TEXTS 29-30
হেন কৃষ্ণনাম যদি লয় বছবার।
তবু যদি প্রেম নহে, নহে অশ্রুধার ॥ ২৯ ॥


--- Page 184 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 183
তবে জানি, অপরাধ তাহাতে প্রচুর |
কৃষ্ণনাম-বীজ SITE না করে EI ॥ ৩০ ॥
hena krsna-nama yadi laya bahu-bara
tabu yadi prema nahe, nahe asrudhara
tabe jani, aparadha tahate pracura
krsna-nama-bija tahe na kare ankura
SYNONYMS
hena—such; krspa-nama—holy name of the Lord; yadi—if; laya—one takes; bahu-
bara—again-and again; tabu—still; yadi—if; prema—love of Godhead; nahe—is not
visible; nahe asru-dhara—there are no tears in the eyes; tabe—then; jani—| under-
stand; aparadha—offense; tahate—there (in that process); pracura—enough; krsna-
nama—the holy name of Krsna; bijja—seed; tahe—in those activities; na—does not;
kare—doj; ankura—sprout.
TRANSLATION
If one chants the exalted holy name of the Lord again and again and yet his love
for the Supreme Lord does not develop and tears do not appear in his eyes, it is
evident that because of his offenses in chanting, the seed of the holy name of Krsna
does not sprout.
PURPORT
If one chants the Hare Krsna mantra offensively, one does not achieve the desired
result. Therefore one should carefully avoid the offenses which have already been
described in connection with verse 24.
TEXT 31
চৈতন্ত-নিত্যানম্দে নাহি এসব বিচার ।
নাম লৈতে প্রেম দেন, বহে SEI ॥ ৩১ |
caitanya-nityanande nahi 65080 vicara
nama laite prema dena, bahe asrudhara
SYNONYMS
caitanya-nityanande—when chanting the holy names of Lord Caitanya and
Nityananda; nahi—there are not; esaba—all these; vicara—considerations; nama—the
holy name; /aite—simply by chanting; prema—love of Godhead; dena—they give;
bahe—there is a flow; asru-dhara—tears in the eyes.
TRANSLATION
But if one only chants, with some slight faith, the holy names of Lord Caitanya
and Nityananda, very quickly he is cleansed of all offenses. Thus as soon as he chants
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, he feels the ecstasy of love for God.


--- Page 185 ---
184 Sri-Caitanya-carita mrta
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks in this connection that if one
takes shelter of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda, follows Their in-
structions to become more tolerant than the tree and humbler than the grass, and in
this way chants the holy name of the Lord, very soon he achieves the platform of
transcendental loving service to the Lord, and tears appear in his eyes. There are
offenses to be considered in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, but there are no
such considerations in chanting the names of Gaura-Nityananda. Therefore, if one
chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra but his life is still full of sinful activities, it will
be very difficult for him to achieve the platform of loving service to the Lord. But if
in spite of being an offender one chants the holy names of Gaura-Nityananda, he is
very quickly freed from the interactions of his offenses. Therefore, one should first
approach Lord Caitanya and Nityananda, or worship Guru-Gaurariga, and then come
to the stage of worshiping Radha-Krsna. In our Krsna consciousness movement, our
students are first advised to worship Guru-Gaurariga, and then, when they are some-
what advanced, the Radha-Krsna Deity is installed, and they are engaged in the wor-
ship of the Lord.
One should first take shelter of Gaura-Nityananda in order to reach, ultimately,
Radha-Krsna. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura sings in this connection:
gauranga balite ha’be pulaka sarira
hari hari balite nayane ba’be nira
ara kabe nitaicandera karuna ha-ibe
sarnsara-vasand mora kabe tuccha habe
visaya chadiya kabe suddha habe mana
kabe hama heraba sri-vrndavana
In the beginning one should very regularly chant Sri Gaurasundara’s holy name and
then chant the holy name of Lord Nityananda. Thus one’s heart will be cleansed of
impure desires for material enjoyment. Then one can approach Vrndavana-dhama to
worship Lord Krsna. Unless one is favored by Lord Caitanya and Nityananda, there
is no need to go to Vrndavana, for unless one’s mind is purified, he cannot see
Vrndavana, even if he goes there. Actually going to Vrndavana involves taking shelter
of the six Gosvamis by reading Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Vidagdha-madhava, Lalita-
madhava and the other books that they have given. In this way one can understand
the transcendental loving affairs between Radha and Krsna. Kabe hama bujhaba se
yugala-piriti. The conjugal love between Radha and Krsna is not an ordinary human
affair; it is fully transcendental. In order to understand Radha and Krsna, worship
Them and engage in Their loving service, one must be guided by Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and the six Gosvamis, Lord Caitanya’s direct disciples.
For an ordinary man, worship of Sri Caitanya and Nityananda Prabhu or the
Paiica-tattva is easier than worship of Radha and Krsna. Unless one is very fortunate,
he should not be induced to worship Radha-Krsna directly. A neophyte student who
is not sufficiently educated or enlightened should not indulge in the worship of Sri
Radha and Krsna or the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. Even if he does so, he


--- Page 186 ---
01413, Chapter 8 185
cannot get the desired result. One should therefore chant the names of Nitai-Gaura
and worship Them without false prestige. Since everyone within this material world
is more or less influenced by sinful activities, in the beginning it is essential that one
take to the worship of Guru-Gauranga and ask their favor, for thus despite all his
disqualifications one will very soon become qualified to worship the Radha-Krsna
vigraha.

It should be noted in this connection that the holy names of Lord Krsna and
Gaurasundara are both identical with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There-
fore one should not consider one name to be more potent than the other. Consider-
ing the position of the people of this age, however, the chanting of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s name is more essential than the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the most magnanimous incarnation and
His mercy is very easily achieved. Therefore one must first take shelter of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu by chanting Sri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nityananda Sri-advaita
gadadhara Srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. By serving Gaura-Nityananda one is freed
from the entanglements of material existence and thus becomes qualified to worship
the Radha-Krsna Deity.

TEXT 32
স্বতন্ন ঈশ্বর প্রভু অত্যন্ত উদার।
তারে না Sores কভু না হয় নিস্তার ॥ ৩২ ॥
svatantra i$vara prabhu atyanta udara
tanre na bhajile kabhu na haya nistara
SYNONYMS

svatantra i$vara—the fully independent Supreme Lord; prabhu—the Lord;
atyanta—very much; udara—magnanimous; tanre—unto Him; na—without; bhajile—
worshiping; kabhu na—never at any time; haya—becomes so; nistara—liberation.

TRANSLATION

1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the independent Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
greatly magnanimous. Unless one worships Him, one can never be liberated.

PURPORT

Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura here remarks that one should not give up
the worship of Radha-Krsna to worship Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. By worshiping
either Radha-Krsna or Lord Caitanya alone, one cannot become advanced. One
should not try to supersede the instructions of the six Gosvamis, for they are acaryas
and very dear to Lord Caitanya. Therefore Narottama dasa Thakura sings:

rapa-raghunatha-pade haibe akuti
kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti


--- Page 187 ---
186 S$ri-Caitanya-carita mrta
One must be a submissive student of the six Gosvamis, from Srila Ripa Gosvami to
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. Not following their instructions but’ imagining how to
worship Gaurasundara and Radha-Krsna is a great offense, as a result of which one
clears a path to hell. If one neglects the instructions of the six Gosvamis and yet be-
comes a so-called devotee of Radha-Krsna, he merely criticizes the real devotees of
Radha-Krsna. As a result of speculation, he considers Gaurasundara to be an ordinary
devotee and therefore cannot make progress in serving the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Radha-Krsnpa.
TEXT 33
ওরে মুঢ় লোক, শুন চৈতদ্তমঙ্গল |
চৈতন্-মছিমা যাতে জানিবে সকল ॥ ৩৩ ॥
ore madha loka, Suna caitanya-mangala
caitanya-mahima yate janibe sakala
SYNONYMS
ore—O all of you; muadha—foolish; loka—people; suna—just hear; caitanya-
mangala—the book of this name; caitanya—Lord Caitanya's; mahima—glories; yate—
in which; janibe—you will know; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
O fools, just read Caitanya-mangala! By reading this book you can understand all
the glories of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
Sri Vrndavana dasa [17310013315 Caitanya-bhagavata was originally entitled Caitanya-
mangala, but when Srila Locana dasa Thakura later wrote another book named
Caitanya-mangala, Srila Vindavana dasa Thakura changed the name of his own book,
which is now therefore known as Caitanya-bhagavata. The life of Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu is very elaborately described in Caitanya-bhagavata, and Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami has already informed us that in his Sri-Caitanya~caritamrta he has
described whatever Vrndavana dasa Thakura has not mentioned. This acceptance of
Sri-Caitanya-bhagavata by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami indicates his acceptance of
the disciplic succession. A writer of transcendental literature never tries to surpass
the previous dcaryas.
TEXT 34
কৃষ্ণলীল৷ ভাগবতে FTE বেদব্যাস |
চৈতদ্ত-লীলার व ग - বৃন্দাবন-্দাস ॥ ৩৪ ॥
krsna-lila bhagavate kahe veda-vyasa
caitanya-Iilara vyasa—vrndavana-dasa


--- Page 188 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 187
SYNONYMS
krspa-fili—the pastimes of Lord Krsna; bhdgavate—in the book Srimad-
Bhagavatam; kahe—tells; veda-vydsa—Vyasadeva, the editor of the Vedic literatures;
caitanya-lilara—of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya; vyasa—compiler; vrndavana-dasa—
is Vrndavana dasa.
TRANSLATION
As Vyasadeva has compiled all the pastimes of Lord Krsna in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Thakura Vpndavana dasa has depicted the pastimes of Lord Caitanya.
TEXT 35
বৃন্দাবন-দাস কৈল “চৈতন্যমঙ্গল”।
যাহার শ্রবণে নাশে সর্ব অমঙ্গল ॥ ৩৫ ॥
vrndavana-dasa kaila ‘caitanya-mangala’
Yyanhara Sravape nase sarva amangala
SYNONYMS
vrndavana-dasa—of the name Vrndavana dasa; kaila—compiled; caitanya-marngala—
the book named Caitanya-mangala; yanhara—of which; $ravape—by hearing; nase—
annihilated; sarva—all; amangala—inauspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
Thakura Vyndavana dasa has composed Caitanya-mangala. Hearing this book will
annihilate all misfortune.
TEXT 36
চৈতদ্ত-নিতাইর যাতে জানিয়ে মহিমা |
যাতে জানি কৃষ্ণতক্তি সিদ্ধান্তের সীম ॥ ৩৬ ॥
caitanya-nitaira yate janiye mahima
yate jani krsna-bhakti-siddhantera sima
SYNONYMS
caitanya-nitdira—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu;
yate—in which; janiye—one can know; mahima—all glories; yate—in which; jani—|
can understand; krspa-bhakti—of devotion to Lord Krsna; siddhantera—of the con-
clusion; sima—limit.
TRANSLATION
By reading Caitanya-mangala one can understand all the glories or truths of Lord
Caitanya and Nityananda and come to the ultimate conclusion of devotional service
to Lord Krsna.


--- Page 189 ---
188 Sri-Caitanya-carita mrta
PURPORT
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the authoritative reference book from which to understand
devotional service, but because it is very elaborate, few men can understand its
purpose. S$rimad-Bhagavatam is the original commentary on Vedanta-satra, which
is called nyaya-prasthana. It was written to enable one to understand the Absolute
Truth through infallible logic and argument, and therefore its natural commentary,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, is extremely elaborate. Professional reciters have created the
impression that Srimad-Bhagavatam deals only with Krsna’s rase-/fla, although
Krsna's rasa-/ila is only described in the Tenth Canto (Chapters 29-35). They have
in this way presented Krsna to the Western world as a great woman hunter, and
therefore we sometimes have to deal with such misconceptions in preaching. An-
other difficulty in understanding Sritnad-Bhagavatam is that the professional re-
citers have introduced Bhagavata-saptaha, or seven-day readings of the Bhagavatam.
They want to finish Srimad-Bhagavatam in a week, although it is so sublime that
even one verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam, if properly explained, cannot be completed
in three months. Under these circumstances, it is a great aid for the common man to
read Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura’s Caitanya-bhagavata, for thus he can actually
understand devotional service, Krsna, Lord Caitanya and Nityananda. Srila Ripa
Gosvami has said:
sruti-smrti-puranadi-pancaratra-vidhirm ving
aikantiRT harer bhaktir utpatayaiva kalpate
“Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like
the Upanisads, Puranas, Narada-paricaratra, etc., is simply an unnecessary distur-
bance in society.” Due to misunderstanding Sritmad-Bhagavatam, people are misled
regarding the science of Krsna. However, by reading Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura’s
book one can very easily understand this science.
TEXT 37
ভাগবতে যত ভক্তিসিদ্ধান্তের সার।
CJ
লিখিয়াছেন दे"ङ। জানি” করিয়৷ উদ্ধার 1 ৩৭ ॥
bhagavate yata bhakti-siddhantera sara
likhiyachena inha jani’ kariya uddhara
SYNONYMS
bhagavate—in the Srimad-Bhagavatam; yata—all; bhakti-siddhantera—in under-
standing devotional service; sara—essence; likhiyachena—has written; inha—this;
jani’—| know; kariya—making; uddhara— quotation.
TRANSLATION
In Caitanya-mangala [later known as Sri-Caitanya-bhagavata] Srila Vyndavana
dasa Thakura has given the conclusion and essence of devotional service by quoting
the authoritative statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam.


--- Page 190 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 189
TEXT 38
চৈতদ্তযনল” শুনে যদি পাবগ্তী, सवम |
CTE মহাবৈষ্ণব হয় ততক্ষণ ॥ ৩৮ ॥
‘caitanya-mangala’ Sune yadi pasandr, yavana
seha mahd-vaigspava haya tataksana
SYNONYMS
caitanya-mangala—the book named Caitanya-mangala; Sune—anyone hears; yadi—
if; pdsandi—great atheist; yavana—a disbeliever in the Vedic culture; seha—he also;
maha-vaispava—great devotee; haya—becomes; tataksana—immediately.
TRANSLATION
If even a great atheist hears Caitanya-mangala, he immediately becomes a great
devotee.
TEXT 39
मम রচিতে নারে এঁছে গ্রন্থ ध |
বৃষ্দাবনদাস-মুখে বক্ত। Boy ॥ ৩৯ ॥
manusye racite nare aiche grantha dhanya
vrndavana-dasa-mukhe vakta sri-caitanya
SYNONYMS
manusye—a human being; racite—compiled; nare—cannot; aiche—such; grantha—
book; dhanya—so glorious; vrndavana-dasa—the author, Srila Vrndavana dasa
Thakura; mukhe—from his mouth; vakta—speaker; sri-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The subject matter of this book is so sublime that it appears that Sri Caitanya,
Mahaprabhu has personally -spoken through the writings of Sri Vrndavana dasa
Thakura.
PURPORT
Srila Sanatana Gosvami has written in his Hari-bhakti-vildsa:
avaisnava-mukhodgirparn patari hari-kathamrtam
Sravanarh naiva kartavyarn sarpocchistarn yatha payah
Transcendental literature that strictly follows the Vedic principles and the con-
clusion of the Puranas and Paricaratrika-vidhi can be written only by a pure devotee.


--- Page 191 ---
190 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
It is not possible for a common man to write books on bhakti, for his writings will
not be effective. He may be a very great scholar and expert in presenting literature
in flowery language, but this is not at all helpful in understanding transcendental
literature. Even if transcendental literature is written in faulty language, it is ac-
ceptable if it is written by a devotee, whereas so-called transcendental literature
written by a mundane scholar, even if it is a very highly polished literary presenta-
tion, cannot be accepted. The secret in a devotee’s writing is that when he writes
about the pastimes of the Lord, the Lord helps him; he does not write himself. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita, dadami buddhi-yogarn 10/77 yena mam upayanti te (Bg. 10.
10). Since a devotee writes in service to the Lord, the Lord from within gives him
so much intelligence that he sits down near the Lord and goes on writing books.
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami confirms that what Vrndavana dasa Thakura wrote
was actually spoken by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he simply repeated it. The
same holds true for Caitanya-caritamrta. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami wrote Caitanya-
caritamrta in his old age in an invalid condition, but it is such a sublime literature
that Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja used to say, “The time will
come when the people of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri-Caitanya-
caritamrta.” We are trying to present Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta in English and do not
know how successful it will be, but if one reads the original Caitanya-caritamrta in
Bengali he will relish increasing ecstasy in devotional service.
TEXT 40

বৃদ্দাবনদাস-পদে কোটি নমস্কার |

এঁছে अ করি' তেঁহে। Sie সংসার ॥ 8० ॥

vrndavana-dasa-pade koti namaskara

aiche grantha Kari’ tenho tarila sarhsara

SYNONYMS
vrndavana-dasa-pade—on the lotus feet of Srila Vyndavana dasa Thakura; koti—
millions; namaskara—obeisances; aiche—such; grantha—book; kari’—compiling;
tenho—he; tarila—delivered; sarhsara—all the world.
TRANSLATION
1 offer millions of obeisances unto the lotus feet of Vrndavana dasa Thakura. No
one else could write such a wonderful book for the deliverance of all fallen souls.
TEXT 41
নারায়ণী- চৈতদ্থের উচ্ছিষ্ট-ভাজন।
তাঁর গর্ভে জন্মিল। লীদান-বৃন্দাবন ॥ ৪১ ॥


--- Page 192 ---
Adi-Ila, Chapter 8 191
narayani— caitanyera ucchista-bhajana
tafira garbhe janmila sri-dasa-vrndavana
SYNONYMS
narayapi—of the name Narayani; caitanyera—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
ucchista-bhajana—eater of the remnants of foodstuff; tanra—of her; garbhe—in the
womb; janmila—took birth; $ri-dasa-vrndavana—Srila Vindavana dasa Thakura.
TRANSLATION
, Narayan eternally eats the remnants of the foodstuffs of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura was born of her womb.
PURPORT
In Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, a book written by Kavikarpapira that describes all
the associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and who they previously were, there is
the following statement regarding Narayan:
ambikayah svasa yasin namna srila-kilimbika
krsnocchistam prabhunjana seyam narayani mata
When Lord Krsna was a child, He was nursed by a woman named Ambika who had
a younger sister named Kilimbika. During the time of Lord Caitanya’s incarnation,
the same Kilimbika used to eat the remnants of foodstuffs left by Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. That Kilimbika was Narayani, who was a niece of Srivasa Thakura’s.
Later on, when she grew up and married, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura was born
from her womb. A devotee of Lord Sri Krsna is celebrated in terms of devotional
service rendered to the Lord; thus we know Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura as the
son of Narayani. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura notes in this connection
that there is no reference to his paternal ancestry because there is no need to
understand it.
TEXT 42
তার कि ভন্কুত চৈতস্কচরিত বর্ণন।
যাহার खैदट१ শুদ্ধ কৈল [AGIA ॥ 8२ ॥
tafira ki adbhuta caitanya-carita-varpana
yahara sravane suddha Raila tri-bhuvana
SYNONYMS
tanra—Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura's; ki—what; adbhuta—wonderful; caitanya-
carita—of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; varpana—description; yahara—


--- Page 193 ---
192 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
of which; Sravane—by hearing; Suddha—purified; kaila—made; tri-bhuvana—the
three worlds.
TRANSLATION
What a wonderful description he has given of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya!
Anyone in the three worlds who hears it is purified.
TEXT 43
অতএব खुल, লোক, চৈতন্ত-নিত্যানচ্ছ।
খণ্ডিবে সংসার-তুঃখ, পাবে প্রেমানন্দ ॥ ৪৩ ॥
ataeva bhaja, loka, caitanya-nityananda
khandibe sarnsara-duhkha, pabe premananda
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; bhaja—worship; loka—O people in general; caitanya—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityananda—Nityananda Prabhu; khapdibe—will vanquish;
samsara-duhkha—miserable condition of material existence; pabe—he will get;
premananda—the transcendental bliss of devotional service.
TRANSLATION
| fervently appeal to everyone to adopt the method of devotional service given
by Lord Caitanya and Nityananda and thus be freed from the miseries of material
existence and ultimately achieve the loving service of the Lord.
TEXT 44
বৃষ্দাবন-ছাস কৈল ञ्क्र-मननः' |
তান্াতে চৈতম্ক-লীলা! বিল সকল ॥ 88 ॥
vrndavana-dasa kaila ‘caitanya-mangala’
tahate caitanya-Ifla varnpila sakala
SYNONYMS
vrndavana-dasa— Srila Vindavana dasa Thakura; kaila—did; caitan, ya-maigala—the
book of the name Caitanya-mangala; tahate—in that book; caitanya-lila—the pastimes
of Lord Caitanya; varpila—described; sakala—everything.
TRANSLATION
Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has written Caitanya-mangala and therein described
in all respects the pastimes of Lord Caitanya.


--- Page 194 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 193
TEXT 45
সুত্র করি' সব लोन করিল গ্রন্থন।
পাছে বিস্তারিয়৷ তাহার কৈল বিবরণ ॥ ৪৫ ॥
sutra kari’ 5080 lila karila granthana
pache vistariya tahara kaila vivarana
SYNONYMS
sutra kari’—-making a synopsis; saba—all; [lla—pastimes; karila—did; granthana—
writing in the book; pache—Ilater; vistariya—vividly describing; tahara—all of them;
kaila—did; vivarana—description.
TRANSLATION
He first summarized all the pastimes of the Lord and later described them vividly
in detail.
TEXT 46
চৈতন্যচন্দ্রের লীল। Tag अगोत्र |
বর্ণিতে বর্ণিতে গ্রন্থ হইল বিস্তার ॥ ৪৬ ॥
caitanya-candrera [ila ananta apara
varnite varnite grantha ha-ila vistara
SYNONYMS
caitanya-candrera—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; /ila—pastimes; ananta—un-
limited; apara—unfathomable; varnite—describing; varpite—describing; grantha—the
book; ha-ila—became; vistara— expansive.
TRANSLATION
The pastimes of Lord Caitanya are unlimited and unfathomable. Therefore, in
describing all those pastimes, the book became voluminous.
TEXT 47
বিস্তার দেখিয়| কিছু दकए एन मम |
मूड (कान লীল৷ न। কৈল বর্ণন ॥ ৪৭ ॥
vistara dekhiya kichu sankoca haila mana
sutra-dhrta kona lila na kaila varnana


--- Page 195 ---
194 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
vistara—expansive; dekhiya--seeing; Richu—some; sankoca—with hesitation;
haila—became; mana—mind; satra-dhrta—taking the codes; kona—some; [ila—
pastimes; na—did not; kaila—make; varpana—description.
TRANSLATION
He saw them to be so extensive that he later felt that some had not been properly
described.
TEXT 48
নিত্যানম্দ-লীলা-বর্ণনে হইল আবেশ।
চেততন্বের শেষ-লীল৷ রহিল অবশেষ ॥ ৪৮ ॥
/77/07/710/70-10-/0/00/76 ha-ila avesa
caitanyera Sesa-Iila rahila avasesa
SYNONYMS
nityananda—Lord Nityananda; /ila—pastime; varpane—in the matter of descrip-
tion; ha-ila—there was; avesa—ecstasy; caitanyera—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
Sesa-llla—pastimes in the last portion of His life; rahila—remained; avasesa—
supplement.
TRANSLATION
He ecstatically described the pastimes of Lord Nityananda, but the later pastimes
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained untold.
TEXT 49
সেই जव লীলার শুনিতে বিবরণ।
বৃদ্দাবনবাসী ভক্তের উৎকণ্ঠিত মন ॥ ৪৯ ॥
sei 5080 [ilara Sunite vivarana
vrndavana-vasi bhaktera utkapthita mana
SYNONYMS
sei—those; saba—all; filara— of the pastimes; sunite—to hear; vivarana—description;
vrndavana-vasi—the inhabitants of Vrndavana; bhaktera—of devotees; utkanthita—in
anxiety; mana—minds.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of Vrndavana were all very anxious to hear those pastimes.


--- Page 196 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 8 195
TEXT 50
TH FHC सदर्भ-जबन |
মহা-যোগপীঠ তাহ; রত্ম-সিংহাসন ॥ ৫০ ॥
vrndavane kalpa-drume suvarna-sadana
maha-yogapitha tahan, ratna-sirnhasana
SYNONYMS
vrndavane—in Vrndavana; kalpa-drume—under the desire trees; suvarpa-sadana—
golden throne; maha—great; yoga-pitha—pious temple; tahari—there; ratna—bedecked
with jewels; sirmhasana—throne.
TRANSLATION
In Vrndavana, in a great place of pilgrimage underneath the desire trees, is a gol-
den throne bedecked with jewels.
TEXT 51
তাতে AW আছে সদ। ব্রজেন্দ্রনমম্দন।
‘RCNA’ নাম সাক্ষাৎ মদন ॥ ৫১ ॥
tate vasi’ ache sada vrajendra-nandana
‘Sri-govinda-deva’ nama saksat madana
SYNONYMS
tate—on that throne; vasi’—sitting; ache—there is; sada—always; vrajendra-
nandana—the son of Maharaja Nanda; sri-govinda-deva—whose name is Govinda;
nama—name; saksat—direct; madana—transcendental cupid.
TRANSLATION
On that throne sits the son of Nanda Maharaja, $ri Govindadeva, the transcenden-
tal cupid.
TEXT 52
রাজ-সেবা হয় ङ] বিচিত্র প্রকার |
দিব্য সামগ্রী, দিব্য वल्ल, অলঙ্কার ॥ ৫২ ॥
raja-seva haya tanha vicitra prakara
divya samagri, divya vastra, alankara


--- Page 197 ---
196 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
SYNONYMS
raja-seva—majestic service; haya—render; tanha—there; vicitra—varieties; prakara—
all kinds of; divya—spiritual; samagri—ingredients; divya—spiritual; vastra—garments;
alankara—ornaments.
TRANSLATION
Varieties of majestic service are rendered to Govinda there. His garments, orna-
ments and paraphernalia are all transcendental.
TEXT 53
मङ्ख সেবক সেবা করে अङक |
সহঅ-বদনে সেবা না যায় वर्भन ॥ ৫৩ ॥
sahasra sevaka seva kare anuksana
sahasra-vadane seva na yaya varpiana
SYNONYMS
sahasra—many thousands; sevaka—servitors; seva—service; Rare—render; anuksa-
na—always; sahasra—thousands; vadane—mouths; seva—process of service; na—
not possible; yaya—goes on; varnana—description.
TRANSLATION
In that temple of Govindaji, thousands of servitors always render service to the
Lord in devotion. Even with thousands of mouths, one could not describe this
service.
TEXT 54
সেবার অধ্যক্ষ _&ীপণ্ডিত হরিদাস |
তাঁর যশ১-ওণ সর্বজগতে প্রকাশ ॥ ৫৪ ॥
sevara adhyaksa—sSri-pandita haridasa
tanra yasah-guna sarva-jagate prakasa
SYNONYMS
sevara—of the service; adhyaksa—commander; Sri-pangdita haridasa—Haridasa
Pandita; tanra—of his; yasah—fame; guna—quality; sarva-jagate—all over the world;
prakasa— known.
TRANSLATION
In that temple the chief servitor was Sri Haridasa Pandita. His qualities and fame
are known all over the world.


--- Page 198 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 197
PURPORT
Sri Haridasa Pandita was a disciple of Sri Ananta Acarya, who was a disciple of
Gadadhara Pandita.
TEXT 55
hw, Af, শান্ত, WW, গম্ভীর ।
মধুব-বচন, মধুবৰ-চেষ্ট, মহাযীর ॥ ৫৫ ॥
susila, sahispu, santa, vadanya, gambhira
madhura-vacana, madhura-cesta, maha-dhira
SYNONYMS
susila—well behaved; sahispu—tolerant; santa—peaceful; vadanya—magnanimous;
gambhira—grave; madhura-vacana—sweet words; madhura-cesta—sweet endeavor;
maha-dhira—completely sober.
TRANSLATION
He was gentle, tolerant, peaceful, magnanimous, grave, sweet in his words and
very sober in his endeavors.
TEXT 56
সবার সন্মান-কর্তা, করেন সবার TS ।
কোৌটিল্য-মাৎসর্য-হিংসা ना জানে त्र চিত ॥ ৫৬ ॥
sabara sammana-karta, karena sabara hita
kautilya-matsarya-hirsa na jane tanra cita
SYNONYMS
sabara—of all; sammana-karta— respectful; karena—does; sabara—everyone’s; hita—
benefit; kautilya—diplomatic; matsarya—jealousy; himsa—envy; na jane—does not
know; tanra—his; cita—heart.
TRANSLATION
He was respectful to everyone and worked for the benefit of all. Diplomacy, envy
and jealousy were unknown to his heart.
TEXT 57
কৃষ্ণের যে সাধারণ i Gl পঞ্চাশ |
সে সব গুণের ভার শরীরে নিবাস ॥ ৫৭ ॥


--- Page 199 ---
198 $ri-Caitanya-carita mrta
krsnera ye sadharana sad-guna parnicasa
se saba gunera tafira Sarire nivasa
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Lord Krsna; ye—that; sadharana—general; sat-guna—good qualities;
paricasa—fifty; se—those; saba—all; gunera—qualities; tafira—his; Sarire—in the body;
nivasa—were always present.
TRANSLATION
The fifty qualities of Lord Krsna were all present in his body.
PURPORT
In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, the transcendental qualities of $ri Krsna are men-
tioned. Among these, fifty are primary (ayarih neta suramyangah, etc.), and in
minute quantity they were all present in the body of Sri Haridasa Pandita. Since
every living entity is a part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all fifty of these
good qualities of $ri Krsna are originally minutely present in every living being. Due
to his contact with material nature, these qualities are not visible in the con-
ditioned soul, but when one becomes a purified devotee, they all automatically
manifest themselves. This is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.18.12), as mentioned
in the text below.
TEXT 58
सा छि ভক্তির্ভগবত্যকিঞ্চনা
AED IVT সমাসতে TAT: |
হুরাবভক্তস্ত FCS! মহদ্‌প্ডণা
মনোরথেনাসতি ধাবতো বহিঃ ॥ ৫৮ ॥
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah
harav abhaktasya kuto mahad-guna
mano-rathenasati dhavato bahih
SYNONYMS
yasya—one who; asti—has; bhaktih—devotional service; bhagavati—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; akificana—without motive; sarvaih—all; gunaih—
qualities; tatra—there; samasate—become manifested; surah—with all the demigods;
harau—unto the Supreme Personality; abhaktasya—one who is nota devotee; kutah—
where; mahat-gunah—high qualities; manah-rathena—concoction; asati—the material
existence; dhavatah—run on; bahih—externally.


--- Page 200 ---
Adi-a, Chapter 8 199
TRANSLATION
“In one who has unflinching devotional faith in Krsna, all the good qualities of
Krsna and the demigods are consistently manifested. However, one who has no
devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead has no good qualifications be-
cause he is engaged by mental concoction in material existence, which is the exter-
nal feature of the Lord.”
TEXT 59
পণ্ডিত-গোসাঞ্ঞির শিষ্য- অনন্ত আচার্থ।
কৃষ্ণগ্রেমনয়-তনদু, উদার, সর্ব-আর্য ॥ ৫৯ ॥
pandita-gosanira $isya—ananta acarya
krsna-premamaya-tanu, udara, sarva-arya
SYNONYMS
pandita-gosaiira—of Gadadhara Pandita; Sisya—disciple; ananta acarya—of the
name Ananta Acarya; krspa-premamaya—always overwhelmed by love of God;
tanu—body; udara—magnanimous; sarva—in all respects; arya—advanced.
TRANSLATION
Ananta Acarya was a disciple of Gadadhara Pandita. His body was always ab-
sorbed in love of Godhead. He was magnanimous and advanced in all respects.
TEXT 60
তাহার অনন্ত গুণ কে করু AT |
তার প্রিয় শিল্য ই-হ- পণ্ডিত হরিদাস ॥ ৬০ ॥
tanhara ananta guna ke karu prakasa
tanra priya $isya inha— pandita haridasa
SYNONYMS
tanhara—his; ananta—unlimited; guna—qualities; ke—who; karu—can; prakasa—
display; tanra—his; priya—dear; sisya—disciple; inha—this person; pandita haridasa—
of the name Haridasa Pandita.
TRANSLATION
Ananta Acarya was a reservoir of all good qualities. No one can estimate how
great he was. Pandita Haridasa was his beloved disciple.


--- Page 201 ---
200 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
PURPORT
Sri Ananta Acarya is one of the eternal associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Previously, during the advent of Lord Sri Krsna, Ananta Acarya was Sudevi, one of
the eight gopis. This is stated in the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 165, as follows:
anantacarya-gosvami ya sudevi pura vraje. ‘‘Ananta Acarya Gosvami was formerly
Sudevi-gopi in Vraja [Vrndavana].” In Jagannatha Puri, or Purusottama-ksetra,
there is a monastery known as Ganga-mata Matha that was established by Ananta
Acarya. In the disciplic succession of the Gariga-mata Matha, he is known as
Vinoda-mafijari. One of his disciples was Haridasa Pandita Gosvami, who is also
known as Sri Raghu Gopala and as Sri Rasa-manjari. His disciple Laksmipriya was
the maternal aunt of Gariga-mata, a princess who was the daughter of the King of
Putiya. Ganga-mata brought a Deity of the name Sri Rasika Raya from Krsna Misra
of Jaipur and installed Him in the house of Sarvabhauma in Jagannatha Puri. The
disciple in the fifth generation after Sri Ananta Acarya was Sri Vanamali; in the
sixth generation, Sri Bhagavan dasa, who was a Bengali; in the seventh generation,
Madhusiidana dasa, who was an Oriya; in the eighth generation, Nilambara dasa; in
the ninth generation, Sri Narottama dasa; in the tenth generation, Pitimbara dasa;
and in the eleventh generation, Sri Madhava dasa. The disciple in the twelfth genera-
tion is presently in charge of the Gariga-mata monastery.
TEXT 61
চেতন্ত-নিত্যানম্দে Sia পরম বিশ্বাস।
চৈতন্ত-চরিতে তার পরম উল্লাস ॥ ৬১ ॥
caitanya-nityanande tafira parama visvasa
caitanya-carite tanra parama ullasa
SYNONYMS
caitanya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityanande—in Lord Nityananda; tdfra—his;
parama—very great; visvasa—faith; caitanya-carite—in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya;
tanra—his; parama—great; ullasa—satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
Pandita Haridasa had great faith in Lord Caitanya and Nityananda. Therefore he
took great satisfaction in knowing about Their pastimes and qualities.
TEXT 62
বৈষ্ণবের গুণগ্রাহী, না HATH দোষ।
কায়মনোবাক্যে করে বৈষ্ণব-সন্তোষ ॥ ৬২ ॥


--- Page 202 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 8 201
vaispavera guna-grahi, na dekhaye dosa
kaya-mano-vakye kare vaisnava-santosa
SYNONYMS
vaisnavera—of devotees; guna-grahi—accepting good qualities; na—never; dekhaye—
sees; dosa—any fault; kaya-manah-vakye—with heart and soul; kare—does; vaispava—
devotee; santosa—pacification.
TRANSLATION
He always accepted the good qualities of Vaisnavas and never found fault in them.
He engaged his heart and soul only to satisfy the Vaisnavas.
PURPORT
It is a qualification of a Vaigpava that he is adosa-darsi; he never sees others’
faults. Of course, every human being has both good qualities and faults. Therefore
it is said, sajjana gunam icchanti dosam icchanti pamarah: everyone has a combina-
tion of faults and glories. But a Vaisnava, a sober man, accepts only a man’s glories
and not his faults, for flies seek sores whereas honeybees seek honey. Haridasa
Pandita never found fault with a Vaispava but considered only his good qualities.
TEXT 63
নিরন্তর শুনে (Stal emma |
তাঁহার প্রসাদে শুনেন বৈষ্ণবলকল ॥ ৬৩ ॥
nirantara sune 1९/10 ‘caitanya-mangala’
tanhara prasade sunena vaisnava-sakala
SYNONYMS
nirantara—always; sune—hears; tenho—he; caitanya-mangala—the book Caitanya-
mangala; tanhara—by his; prasade—mercy; sunena—hear; vaispava-sakala—all other
Vaisnavas.
TRANSLATION
He always heard the reading of Sri Caitanya-mangala, and all the other Vaisnavas
used to hear it by his grace.
TEXT 64
কথায় সভা উজ্জ্বল করে যেন পুর্ণচন্দ্র ৷
নিজ-গুণামৃতে বাড়ায় বৈষ্ণব-আনন্দ ॥ ৬৪ ॥


--- Page 203 ---
202 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
kathaya sabha ujjvala kare yena purna-candra
nija-gunamyte bagaya vaisnava-ananda
SYNONYMS
kath@ya—by words; sabha—assembly; ujjvala—illuminated; kare—does; yena—as;
puarna-candra—full moon; nija— own; guna-amrte—nectar of qualities; bagaya—in-
creases; vaisnava—of the devotees; ananda—pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Like the full moon, he illuminated the entire assembly of the Vaisnavas by speak-
ing Caitanya-mangala, and by the nectar of his qualities he increased their transcen-
dental bliss.
TEXT 65
cal অতি কৃপা করি” আজ্ঞ! কৈল। মোরে |
গৌরাঙ্কের শেষলীল৷ বর্ণিবার ভরে ॥ ve ॥
tenho ati krpa kari’ 0/00 kaila more
gaurangera Sesa-Ifla varnibara tare
SYNONYMS
tenho—he; ati—very much; krpa—mercy; kari’—showing; gjiia—order; kaila—made
it; more—unto me; gaurangera—of Lord Caitanya; Sesa-filla—last portion of the
pastimes; varpibara—describing; tare—for the matter of.
TRANSLATION
By his causeless mercy he ordered me to write about the last pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 66
কাশণীশ্বর গোসাঞ্চির শিষ্য_ (भो दिन्त গোসাঞ্ি।
(भौ विन्न প্রিয়সেবক Sa সম aitfee ॥ ৬৬ ॥
kasisvara gosanira $isya—govinda gosani
govindera priya-sevaka tanra sama nai
SYNONYMS
kasTsvara gosanira—of Kasisvara Gosvami; $isya—disciple; govinda—of the name
Govinda; gosani—spiritual master; govindera—of Govinda; priya-sevaka—most con-
fidential servitor; tanra—his; sama—equal; nani—is none.


--- Page 204 ---
01413, Chapter 8 203
TRANSLATION
Govinda Gosaiii, the priest engaged in the service of Lord Govinda in Vrndavana,
was a disciple of Kasisvara Gosaii. There was no servant more dear to the Govinda
Deity.
PURPORT
Kasisvara 05501, also known as Kasisvara Pandita, was a disciple of I$vara Pur?
and son of Vasudeva Bhattacarya, who belonged to the dynasty ০11৫3711313 Kanu.
His surname was Caudhuri. His nephew, his sister’s son, who was named Rudra
Pandita, was the original priest of Vallabhapura, which is situated about one mile
from the Sriramapura railway station in the village of Catara. Installed there are the
Deities of Radha-Govinda and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Kasisvara Gosani
was a very strong man, and therefore when Lord Caitanya visited the temple of
Jagannatha, he used to protect the Lord from the crowds. Another of his duties was
to distribute prasada to the devotees after kirtana. He was also one of the con-
temporaries of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu who was with the Lord in Jagannatha Puri.
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura also visited this temple at Vallabhapura.
At that time the person in charge was a Saivite, Sri Sivacandra Caudhuri, who was
a descendant of Kasisvara Gosani’s brother. In Vallabhapura there was a permanent
arrangement to cook nine kilos of rice, vegetables and other foodstuffs, and near
thevillage there is sufficient land, which belongs to the Deity, on which this rice was
grown. Unfortunately, the descendants of Kasisvara Gosani’s brother have sold a
major portion of this land, and therefore the Deity worship has now been hampered.
It is said in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika that the servant of Krspa in Vrndavana
named Bhrngara descended as Kasisvara Gosani during the pastimes of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In our householder life we also sometimes visited this temple of
Vallabhapura and took prasada there at noon. The Deities of this temple, Sri Sri
Radha-Govinda and the Gauranga vigraha, are extremely beautiful. Near Vallabha-
pura is another beautiful temple of Jagannatha. We sometimes used to take prasdda
in this Jagannatha Temple also. These two temples are situated within a one-
mile radius of the Sriramapura railway station near Calcutta.
TEXT 67
যাদবাচার্য (शजो णि প্রীরূপের সঙ্গী |
চৈতন্যচরিতে (STE অতি বড় FN ॥ ৬৭ ॥
yadavacarya gosani sri-ripera 50707
caitanya-carite tenho ati bada rangi
SYNONYMS
, yadavacarya—of the name Yadavacarya; gosani—spiritual master; Sri-riupera—of
Srila Rapa Gosvami; sarigi—associate; caitanya-carite—in the pastimes of Lord
Caitanya; tenho—he;ati—very much; bada—great; rangi—enthusiastic.


--- Page 205 ---
204 S$ri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
TRANSLATION
Sri Yadavacirya (05871, a constant associate of Srila Ripa Gosvami, was also very
enthusiastic in hearing and chanting about Lord Caitanya’s pastimes.
TEXT 68
পণ্ডিত-গোসাঞ্জির শিষ্য दू9 (भोजो |
६
গৌরকথা विना আর মুখে অন্য নাই ॥ ৬৮ ॥
pandita-gosahira sisya—bhugarbha gosani
gaura-katha vina ara mukhe anya nai
SYNONYMS
pandita-gosanira—of Pandita Gosahi (Pandita Haridasa); sisya—disciple; bhugarbha
gosani—of the name Bhugarbha Gosaiii; gaura-katha—topics of Lord Caitanya;vina—
without; ara—else; mukhe—in 1115 mouth; anya nai—nothing else.
TRANSLATION
Bhugarbha Gosaiii, a disciple of Pandita Gosani, was always engaged in topics re-
garding Lord Caitanya, knowing nothing else.
TEXT 69
ভার শিষ্য - গোবিন্দ পুজক চৈতন্যদাস |
মুকুন্দানন্ চক্রবর্তী, (थनौ কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ৬৯ ॥
tanra sisya—agovinda pajaka caitanya-dasa
mukundananda cakravarti, premi krsnpa-dasa
SYNONYMS
tanra Sisya—his disciple; govinda—the Govinda Deity; pajaka—priest; caitanya-
dasa—of the name Caitanya dasa; mwukundananda cakravarti—of the name
Mukundananda Cakravarti; premi—a great lover; krspa-dasa—of the name Krsnadasa.
TRANSLATION
Among his disciples were Caitanya dasa, who was a priest of the Govinda Deity,
as well 25 Mukundananda Cakravarti and the great devotee Krsnadasa.
TEXT 70
আচার্যগোসাঞ্ঞির শিষ্য - চক্রবর্তী শিবানন্দ।
নিরবধি তাঁর চিত্তে চৈতন্তয-নিত;যনিম্দ ॥ ৭০ ॥


--- Page 206 ---
Adi-Ila, Chapter 8 205
acarya-gosanira Sisya—cakravarti Sivananda
niravadhi tanra citte caitanya-nityananda
SYNONYMS
acarya-gosanira—of Acarya Gosani; $isya—the disciple; cakravartT $ivananda—of
the name Sivananda Cakravarti; niravadhi—always; tafnra—his; citte—in the heart;
caitanya-nityananda—Lord Caitanya and Nityananda are situated.
TRANSLATION
Among the disciples of Ananta Acarya was Sivananda Cakravarti, in whose heart
dwelled constantly Lord Caitanya and Nityananda.
TEXT 71
আর যত বৃন্দাবনে (ICH STH |
শেষ-লীলা শুনিতে সবার হৈল भन ॥ ৭১ ॥
ara yata ৮/[7700৮/76 baise bhakta-gana
Sesa-lila unite sabara haila mana
SYNONYMS
dra yata—there are many others; vndavane—in Vrndavana; baise—residents;
bhakta-gapa—great devotees; Sesa-/ili—the last portions of Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
pastimes; Sunite—to hear; sabara—of everyone; haila—became; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
In Vrndavana there were also many other great devotees, all of whom desired to
hear the last pastimes of Lord Caitanya.
TEXT 72
মোরে আজ্ঞা! করিল সবে কক্লণা করিয়া।
ভা-সবার বোলে লিখি নির্লজ্জ 2831 ॥ ৭২ ॥
more 0700 karila sabe karuna kariya
tan-sabara bole likhi nirlajja ha-iya
SYNONYMS
more—unto me; ajia—order; karila—gave; sabe—all; karupa—merciful; kariya—
doing 50; tan-sabara—of all of them; bole—by the order; likhi—| write; nirlajja—
without shame; ha-iya—becoming.


--- Page 207 ---
206 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
By their mercy, all these devotees ordered me to write of the last pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Because of their order only, although | am shameless, | have
attempted to write this Caitanya-caritamrta.
PURPORT
To write about the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Personality of God-
head is not an ordinary endeavor. Unless one is empowered by the higher authori-
ties, or advanced devotees, one cannot write transcendental literature, for all such
literature must be above suspicion, or, in other words, it must have none of the
defects of conditioned souls, namely, mistakes, illusions, cheating and imperfect
sense perceptions. The words of Krsna and the disciplic succession that carries the
orders of Krsna are actually authoritative. To be empowered to write transcenden-
tal literature is a privilege in which a writer can take great pride. As a humble
Vaisnava, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, being thus empowered, felt very much
ashamed that it was he who was to narrate the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu.
TEXT 73
বৈষ্ণবের আজ্ঞা পাঞ। চিস্তিত-অস্তরে।
মদনগোপালে গেলাঙ আজ্ঞা মাগিবারে ॥ ৭৩ ॥
vaispavera 0/0 pana cintita-antare
madana-gopale gelan 2/0 magibare
SYNONYMS
vaispavera—of all the Vaispava devotees; gjig—order; pana—receiving; cintita-
antare—anxiety within myself; madana-gopale—to the temple of Sri Madana-mohana;
gelan—| went; gjna—order; magibare—to receive.
TRANSLATION
Having received the order of the Vaispavas but being anxious within my heart,
| went to the temple of Madana-mohana in Vrndavana to ask His permission also.
PURPORT
A Vaisnava always follows the order of guru and Krsna. Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
was written by Krspadasa Kaviraja Gosvami by their mercy. Krspadasa Kaviraja
Gosvami considered all the devotees that have been mentioned to be his preceptor
gurus or spiritual masters, and Madana-gopala (Sri Madana-mohana vigraha) is Krsna
Himself. Thus he took permission from both of them, and when he received the
mercy of both guru and Krsna, he was able to write this great literature, Sri-Caitanya-
caritamrta. This example should be followed. Anyone who attempts to write about


--- Page 208 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 8 207
Krsna must first take permission from the spiritual master and Krsna. Krsna is
situated in everyone's heart, and the spiritual master is His direct external repre-
sentative. Thus Krsna is situated antar-bahif, within and without. One must first
become a pure devotee by following the strict regulative principles and chanting
sixteen rounds daily, and when one thinks that he is actually on the Vaisnava plat-
form, he must then take permission from the spiritual master, and that permission
must also be confirmed by Krsna from within his heart. Then, if one is very sincere
and pure, he can write transcendental literature, either prose or poetry.
TEXT 74
দরশন করি FY চরণ TA |
(शमो कौज wR করে চরণ-সেবন ॥ ৭৪ ॥
darasana kari kailun carana vandana
gosani-dasa pujari kare carapa-sevana
SYNONYMS
darasana—by visiting; kari—doing; kailuh—made; carapa—lotus feet; vandana—
worship; gosani-dasa—of the name Gosarii dasa; pajari—priest; kare—does; carana—
lotus feet; sevana—service.
TRANSLATION
When | visited the temple of Madana-mohana, the priest Gosaiii dasa was serving
the feet of the Lord, and | also prayed at the Lord’s lotus feet.
TEXT 75
প্রভুর চরণে যদি আজ্ঞা মাগিল।
প্রভুক$ হৈতে মালা wml পড়িল ॥ ৭৫ ॥
prabhura carane yadi aja magila
prabhu-kantha haite mala khasiya padila
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; carane—lotus feet; yadi—when; ajia—order; magila—re-
quested; prabhu-kantha—the neck of the Lord; haite—from; mala—garland; khasiya—
slipped; padila—fell down.
TRANSLATION
When | prayed to the Lord for permission, a garland from His neck immediately
‘slipped down.


--- Page 209 ---
208 S$ri-Caitanya-carita mrta
TEXT 76
সব বৈষ্ণবগণ হরিধ্বনি निन ।
গোসাঞ্িদাস আনি” ater মোর গলে দিল ॥ ৭৬ ॥
saba vaisnava-gana hari-dhvani dila
gosani-dasa ani’ mala mora gale dila
SYNONYMS
 saba—all; vaispava—devotees; gapa—group; hari-dhvani—chanting Hare Krsna;
dila—made; gosani-dasa—of the name Gosani dasa; ani’—bringing; mala—garland;
mora—my; gale—on the neck; dila—gave it.
TRANSLATION
As soon as this happened, the Vaisnavas standing there all loudly chanted,
‘““Haribol!”” and the priest, Gosaiii dasa, brought me the garland and put it around
my neck.
TEXT 77
আজ্ঞামাল৷ ses আমার হইল we |
তাহাই করিন্ু এই গ্রন্থের আরম্ভ ॥ ११॥
0/0-770/ pana amara ha-ila ananda
tahani karinu ei granthera arambha
SYNONYMS
ajna-mala—the garland of order; pana—receiving; amara—my; ha-ila—became;
ananda—great pleasure; tahani—then and there; karinu—attempted; ei—this; gran-
thera—of Caitanya-caritamyta; arambha-beginning.
TRANSLATION
| was greatly pleased to have the garland signifying the order of the Lord, and then
and there | commenced to write this book.
TEXT 78
এই গ্রন্থ লেখায় মোরে “মদনমোহন” |
আমার লিখন যেন শুকের পঠন ॥ ৭৮ ॥
ei grantha lekhaya more ‘madana-mohana’
amara likhana yena sukera pathana


--- Page 210 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 8 209
SYNONYMS
ei—this; grantha—great literature; lekhaya—causes me to write; more—unto me;
madana-mohana—the Deity; amara—my; likhana— writing; yena—|like; Sukera—of the
parrot; pathana—responding.
TRANSLATION
Actually S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta is not my writing but the dictation of Sri
Madana-mohana. My writing is like the repetition of a parrot.
PURPORT
This should be the attitude of all devotees. When the Supreme Personality of
Godhead recognizes a devotee, He gives him intelligence and dictates how he may
go back home, back to Godhead. This is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavad-gita:
tesarn satata-yuktanarn
bhajatarh priti-purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogarn tari
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, | give the under-
standing by which they can come to Me.”’ (Bg. 10.10) The opportunity to engage in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord is open to everyone because every
living entity is constitutionally a servant of the Lord. To engage in the service of
the Lord is the natural function of the living entity, but because he is covered by
the influence of maya, material energy, he thinks it to be a very difficult task. But
if he places himself under the guidance of a spiritual master and does everything
sincerely, immediately the Lord, who is situated within everyone's heart, dictates
how to serve Him (dadami buddhi-yogarn tam). The Lord gives this direction, and
thus the devotee’s life becomes perfect. Whatever a pure devotee does is done by
the dictation of the Supreme Lord. Thus it is confirmed by the author of Caitanya-
caritamrta that whatever he wrote was written under the direction of the Sri*
Madana-mohana Deity.
TEXT 79
সেই লিখি, মদনগোপাল যে লিখায়।
FICE পুত্তলী যেন কুহকে নাচায় ॥ ৭৯ ॥
sei likhi, madana-gopala ye likhaya
kasthera puttalf yena kuhake nacaya
SYNONYMS
sei likhi—| write that; madana-gopala—the Deity Madana-gopala; ye—whatever;
likhaya—dictates to me; kasthera—wooden; puttali—a doll; yena—like; kuhake—the
enchanter; nacaya—causes to dance.


--- Page 211 ---
210 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
As a wooden doll is made to dance by a magician, | write as Madana-gopala orders
me to do so.
PURPORT
This is the position of a pure devotee. One should not take any responsibility on
his own but should be a soul surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who will then give him dictation as caitya-guru, or the spiritual master within. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased to guide a devotee from within and
without. From within He guides him as the Supersoul, and from without He guides
him as the spiritual master.
TEXT 80
কুলাধিদেবতা মোর-_-মদনমোহন।
যার সেবক- রঘুনাথ, রূপ, সনাতন ॥ ৮০ |
kuladhidevata mora—madana-mohana
yanra sevaka—raghunatha, ripa, sanatana
SYNONYMS
kula-adhidevata—the family Deity; mora—mine; madana-mohana—Lord Madana-
mohana; yafra—whose; sevaka—servitor; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
rtpa—Rupa Gosvami; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
I accept as my family Deity Madana-mohana, whose worshipers are Raghunatha
dasa, Sri Rapa and Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 81
বৃন্দাবন-দাসের পাদপদ্প করি” gia)
তার আজ্ঞা न] লিখি যাহাতে কল্যাণ ॥ ৮১ ॥
vrndavana-dasera pada-padma kari’ dhyana
tanra ajnd (4/0 likhi yahate kalyana
SYNONYMS
vrndavana-dasera—of Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura; pada-padma—lotus feet;
kari'—doing; dhyana—meditation; tafnra—his; ajfia—order; laha—receiving; likhi—|
write; yahate—in which permission; kalyapa—all auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
| took permission from 51112 Vrndavana dasa Thakura by praying at his lotus
feet, and upon receiving his order | have attempted to write this auspicious literature.


--- Page 212 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 8 211
PURPORT
Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami took permission not only from the Vaisnavas
and Madana-mohana but also from Vrndavana dasa Thakura, who is understood to
be the Vyasa of the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 82
চেতদ্তলীলাতে “ব্যাস- বৃন্দাবন-দাস।
তার কৃপা विन। অন্যে না হয় প্রকাশ ॥ ৮২ ॥
caitanya-lilate ‘vyasa’—yvrndavana-dasa
tahra krpa vina anye na haya prakasa
caitanya-lilate—in describing the pastimes of Lord Caitanya; vyasa—Vyasadeva;
vrndavana-dasa—is Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura; tanra—his; krpa—mercy; vina—
without; anye—other; na—never; haya—becomes; prakasa—manifest.
TRANSLATION
Srila Vyndavana dasa Thakura is the authorized writer on the pastimes of Lord
Caitanya. Without his mercy, therefore, one cannot describe these pastimes.
TEXT 83
মুর্য, নীচ, ज मू বিষয়-লালস।
বৈষ্ণবাজ্ঞা-বলে করি এতেক সাহস ॥ ৮৩ ॥
murkha, nica, ksudra muhi visaya-lalasa
vaisnavajna-bale kari eteka sahasa
SYNONYMS
mirkha—foolish; nica—lowborn; ksudra—very insignificant; muni—\; visaya—
material; /alasa—desires; vaispava—of the Vaisnavas; ajna—order; bale—on the strength
of; kari—| do; eteka—so much; sahasa—energy.
TRANSLATION
I am foolish, lowborn and insignificant, and | always desire material enjoyment;
yet by the order of the Vaisnavas | am greatly enthusiastic to write this transcenden-
tal literature.
TEXT 84
প্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-চরণের এই वम्‌ ।
যার JCS সিদ্ধ হয় বাস্ছিতসকল ॥ ৮৪ ॥


--- Page 213 ---
212 S$ri-Caitanya-carita mrta
Sri-rdpa-raghunatha-carapera ei bala
yanra smyte siddha haya varichita-sakala
SYNONYMS
$ri-riipa— Ripa Gosvami; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; carapera—of
the lotus feet; ei—this; bala—strength; yanra—whose; smrte—by remembrance; sid-
dha—successful; haya—becomes; varnichita-sakala—all desires.
TRANSLATION
The lotus feet of $ri Riipa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami are my source
of strength. Remembering their lotus feet can fulfill all one’s desires.
TEXT 85
শপ্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চেতন্যচরিতাষমৃত কহে কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ৮৫ ॥
$/1-70/20-700/70701/700-006 yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe Rrsnpadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rupa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunitha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; ydra—whose; dSa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—the
book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspa-ddsa—Srila Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rapa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring their
mercy, |, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their footsteps.
Thus ends the Caitanya-caritamrta, Eighth Chapter, Adi-/fla, in the matter of the
author’s receiving the orders of the authorities, Krsna and guru.


--- Page 214 ---
Aili
A summary of Chapter Nine has been given as follows by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. In the Ninth Chapter the author of Caitanya-
caritamrta has devised a figurative example by describing the “plant of bhakti.” He
considers Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is known as Visvambhara, to be the
gardener of this plant because He is the main personality who has taken charge of it.
As the supreme enjoyer, He enjoyed the flowers Himself and distributed them 25
well. The seed of the plant was first sown in Navadvipa, the birthsite of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and then the plant was brought to Purusottama-ksetra
(Jagannatha Puri) and then to Vrndavana. The seed fructified first in Srila
Madhavendra Puri and then his disciple Sri [5५212 Puri. It is figuratively described
that both the tree itself and the trunk of the tree are Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
The devotees, headed by Paramananda Puri and eight other great sannyasrs, are like
the spreading roots of the tree. From the main trunk there extend two special
branches, Advaita Prabhu and Sri Nityananda Prabhu, and from those branches
grow other branches and twigs. The tree surrounds the entire world, and the flowers
of the tree are to be distributed to everyone. In this way the tree of Lord Caitanya
Mahzprabhu intoxicates the entire world. It should be noted that this is a figurative
example meant to explain the mission of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 1
তং প্রীমৎকৃষ্ণচেতন্যদেবং বন্দে জগদ্পুরুম্‌ |

FYI স্বাপি মহান্ধিং সম্ভরেও সুখম্‌॥ ১॥

1८/77 Srimat-krsna-caitanya-devari vande jagad-gurum

yasyanukampaya svapi mahabdhirn santaret sukham

SYNONYMS
tam—unto Him; $rimat—with all opulence; krspa-caitanya-devam—unto Lord
Krsna Caitanyadeva; vande—| offer obeisances; jagat-gurum—spiritual master of the
world; yasya—whose; anukampaya—by the mercy of; $৮৭ api—even a dog; maha-
abdhim—great ocean; santaret—can swim; sukham—without difficulty.
213


--- Page 215 ---
214 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the spiritual master of the entire
world, Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by whose mercy even a dog can swim
across a great ocean.
PURPORT
Sometimes it is to be seen that a dog can swim in the water for a few yards and
then come back to the shore. Here, however, it is stated that if a dog is blessed by
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he can swim across an ocean. Similarly, the author of
Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, placing himself in a helpless con-
dition, states that he has no personal power, but by the desire of Lord Caitanya,
expressed through the Vaispavas and Madana-mohana vigraha, it is possible for him
to cross a transcendental ocean to present Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় Eaten (शौ रट |
জয় gies জয় জয় নিত্যানন্দ IEW]
jaya jaya sri-kRrspa-caitanya gauracandra
jaya jayadvaita jaya jaya nityananda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; Sri-krsna-caitanya—to Lord Set Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
gauracandra—whose name is Gaurahari; jaya jaya—all glories; advaita—to Advaita
Gosani; jaya jaya—all glories; nityananda—to Nityananda.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Krsna Caitanya, who is known 25 Gaurahari! All glories to
Advaita and Nityananda Prabhu!
TEXT ও
জয় জয় Baile গৌরভক্তগণ |
সর্বাভীষ্ট-পূর্তি-হেতু যাহার স্মরণ ॥ ৩ ॥
jaya jaya srivasadi gaura-bhakta-gana
sarvabhista-parti-hetu yanhdra smarana
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; $rivasa-adi—to Srivasa and others; gaura-bhakta-gapa—all
devotees of Lord Caitanya; sarva-abhista—all ambition; pdrti—satisfaction; hetu—
for the matter of; yanhara—whose; smarana—remembrance.


--- Page 216 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 215
TRANSLATION
All glories to the devotees of Lord Caitanya, headed by Srivasa Thakura! In order
to fulfill all my desires, | remember their lotus feet.
PURPORT
The author here continues to follow the same principles of worship of the Parica-
tattva that were described in the Seventh Chapter of Adi-/ila.
TEXT 4
छक्र, সনাতন, ভট্ট AYA |
विलोक, (भागान, দাস-রধঘুনাথ ॥ 8 ॥
Srirdpa, sanatana, bhatta raghunatha
srijiva, gopala-bhatta, dasa-raghunatha
SYNONYMS
$rirripa—Srila २००३ Gosvamf; sanatana—Srila Sanatana Gosvami; bhatta raghu-
natha—Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami; $risjiva—Sri Jiva Gosvami; gopala-bhatta—Sri
Gopala Bhatta Gosvami; dasa-raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
| also remember the six Gosvamis—R pa, Sanatana, Bhatta Raghunatha, Sri Jiva,
Gopala Bhatta and Dasa Raghunatha.
PURPORT
This is the process for writing transcendental literature. A sentimentalist who has
no Vaisnava qualifications cannot produce transcendental writings. There are many
fools who consider Krspa-/ila-to be a subject of art and write or paint pictures
about the pastimes of Lord Krsna with the gopis, sometimes depicting them in a
manner practically obscene. These fools take pleasure in material sense gratification,
but one who wants to make advancement in spiritual life must scrupulously avoid
their literature. Unless one is a servant of Krsna and the Vaisnavas, as Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami presents himself to be in offering respects to Lord Caitanya, His
associates and His disciples, one should not attempt to write transcendental literature.
TEXTS
এসব-প্রসাদে লিখি दएडनः-नोना ७ |
জানি বা না জানি, করি আপন-শোধন en


--- Page 217 ---
216 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
esaba-prasade likhi caitanya-lilaguna
jani va na jani, kari apana-Sodhana
SYNONYMS
esaba—all these; prasade—by the mercy of; likhi—| write; caitanya—of Lord
Caitanya; /flaguna—pastimes and quality; jani—know; va—or; na—not; jani—know;
kari—do; apana— self; Sodhana—purification.
TRANSLATION
It is by the mercy of all these Vaisnavas and gurus that | attempt to write about
the pastimes and qualities of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Whether | know or know
not, it is for self-purification that | write this book.
PURPORT
This is the sum and substance of transcendental writing. One must be an autho-
rized |Vaisnava, humble and pure. One should write transcendental literature to
purify oneself, not for credit. By writing about the pastimes of the Lord, one
associates with the Lord directly. One should not ambitiously think, “| shall become
a great author. | shall be celebrated as a writer.” These are material desires. One
should attempt to write for self-purification. It may be published, or it may not be
published, but that does not matter. If one is actually sincere in writing, all his
ambitions will be fulfilled. Whether one is known as a great author is incidental.
One should not attempt to write transcendental literature for material name and
fame.
TEXT 6
मालो क्रः স্বয়ং কৃষ্ণপ্রেমামরতরুঃ স্বয়ম্‌ |
দাতা ভোক্ত। তৎফলানাং যস্তং চৈতন্যমাশ্রয়ে ॥ ৬ ॥
malakarah svayarn Rrspa-premamara-tarub svayam
data bhokta tat-phalanarn yas tarn caitanyam asraye
SYNONYMS
malakarah—gardener; svayam—Himself; krspa—Lord Krsna; prema—love; amara—
transcendental; taruh—tree; svayam—Himself; data—giver; bhokta—enjoyer; tat-
phalanam—of all the fruits of that tree; yah—one who; tam—unto Him; caitanyam—
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asraye—| take shelter.
TRANSLATION
| take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who Himself is the tree of transcendental love of Krsna, its gardener and also the
bestower and enjoyer of its fruits.


--- Page 218 ---
Adi-lla, Chapter 9 217
TEXT 7
প্রভু কহে, আমি “বিশ্বস্তর' নাম ধরি।
নাম সার্থক হয়, যদি প্রেমে বিশ্ব ভরি ॥१॥
prabhu kahe, ami ‘visSvambhara’ nama dhari
nama sarthaka haya, yadi preme visva bhari
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord said; 2/2/- 1; viSvambhara—Visvambhara; nama—named;
dhari—accept; nama—the name; sarthaka—complete; haya—becomes; yadi—if;
preme—in love of God; visva—the whole universe; bhari—fulfilled.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya thought: “My name is Visvambhara, ‘one who maintains the
entire universe.” Its meaning will be actualized if | can fill the whole universe with
love of Godhead.”
TEXT 8
এত চিস্তি' লৈল।৷ প্রভু মালাকার-ধর্ম।
নবদ্বীপে আরম্ভিল| ফলোভান-কর্ম ॥ ৮ ॥
eta cinti’ laila prabhu malakara-dharma
navaavipe arambhila phalodyana-karma
SYNONYMS
eta cinti’—thinking like this; /aila—took; prabhu—the Lord; malakara-dharma—
the business of a gardener; navadvipe—in Navadvipa; arambhila—began; phala-
udyana—garden; karma—activities.
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way, He accepted the duty of a planter and began to grow a
garden in Navadvipa.
TEXT 9
জীচৈতন্য मानां कोत्र পৃথিবীতে আনি'।
ভক্তি-কল্পতরু রোপিলা সিঞ্চি' ইচ্ছা-পানি ॥ ৯ ॥
Sri-caitanya malakara prthivite ani’
bhakti-kalpataru ropila sifici’ iccha-pani


--- Page 219 ---
218 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
S$ri-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; malakara—gardener; prthivite—on
this planet; ani’—bringing; bhakti-kalpataru—the desire tree of devotional service;
ropila—sowed; sifici’—watering; iccha—will; pani—water.
TRANSLATION
Thus the Lord brought the desire tree of devotional service to this earth and be-
came its gardener. He sowed the seed and sprinkled upon it the water of His will.
PURPORT
In many places devotional service has been compared to a creeper. One has
to sow the seed of the devotional creeper, bhakti-lata, within his heart. As he regularly
hears and chants, the seed will fructify and gradually grow into a mature plant and
then produce the fruit of devotional service, namely, love of Godhead, which the
gardener (malakara) can then enjoy without impediments.
TEXT 10
জয় জ্রীমাধবপুরী কৃষ্ণঞ্রেমপুৰ |
ভক্তি কম্ভতরুর তেঁহো প্রথম অঙ্কুর ॥ ১০ ॥
jaya sri madhavapurT krspa-prema-pura
bhakti-kalpatarura tenho prathama ankura
SYNONYMS.
jaya—all glories; sri madhavapuri—unto Madhavendra Puri; krspa-prema-ptra—
a storehouse of all love of Godhead; bhakti-kalpatarura—of the desire tree of de-
votional service; teiho—he is; prathama—first; ankura—fructification.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Madhavendra Puri, the storehouse of all devotional service unto
Krsna! He is a desire tree of devotional service, and it is in him that the seed of
devotional service first fructified.
PURPORT
Sri Madhavendra Puri, also known as Sri Madhava Puri, belonged to the disciplic
succession from Madhvacarya and was a greatly celebrated sannyasi. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was the third disciplic descendant from € Madhavendra Puri. The
process of worship in the disciplic succession of Madhvacarya was full of ritualistic
ceremonies, with hardly a sign of love of Godhead; $ri Madhavendra Puri was the
first person in that disciplic succession to exhibit the symptoms of love of Godhead
and the first to write a poem beginning with the words ৫%/ dina-dayardra-natha, *‘O


--- Page 220 ---
01413, Chapter 9 219
supremely merciful Personality of Godhead.” In that poetry is the seed of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s cultivation of love of Godhead.

TEXT 11

প্রীঈশ্বরপুরী-রূপে सक्र পুষ্ট হৈল।

আপনে চৈতন্যমালী স্কন্ধ উপজিল ॥ ১১ ॥

Sri-iSvarapuri-rupe ankura pusta haila

@pane caitanya-mali skandha upajila

SYNONYMS
Sri-isvara-puri—by the name Sri Isvara Puri; ridpe—in the form of; ankura—the

seed; pusta—cultivated; haila—became; dpane—Himself; caitanya-mali—the gardener
of the name Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; skandha—trunk; upajila—expanded.

TRANSLATION

The seed of devotional service next fructified in the form of Sri [5५०12 Puri, and
then the gardener Himself, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, became the main trunk of the
tree of devotional service.

PURPORT

Sri [5५213 Puri was a resident of Kumara-hatta, where there is now a railroad
station known as Kamarhatty. Nearby there is also another station named Halisahara,
which belongs to the eastern railway that runs from the eastern section of Calcutta.
Isvara Puri appeared in a brahmana family and was the most beloved disciple of
Srila Madhavendra Puri. In the last portion of Caitanya-caritamrta, Chapter Eight,
verses 26-29, it is stated:

iSvara-puri kare sri-pada sevana
sva-haste karena mala-matradi marjana
nirantara Rrsna-nama karaya smarana
krsna-nama krsna-lila sSunaya anuksana
tusta haha puri tanre Raila alingana
vara dila krsne tomara ha-uk prema-dhana
sei haite Tsvara-purT premera sagara
“At the last stage of his life Sri Madhavendra Puri became an invalid and was com-
pletely unable to move, and Tsvara Puri so completely engaged himself in his service
that he personally cleaned up his stool and urine. Always chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra and reminding Sri Madhavendra Puri about the pastimes of Lord Krsna
in the last stage of his life, Isvara Puri gave the best service among his disciples. Thus
Madhavendra Puri, being very pleased with him, blessed him, saying, ‘My dear boy,


--- Page 221 ---
220 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

1 can only pray to Krsna that He will be pleased with you.’ Thus Ivara Puri, by the
grace of his spiritual master, Sri Madhavendra Puri, became a great devotee in the
ocean of love of Godhead.” Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti states in his Gurvastaka
prayer, yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto’pi: ‘By the
mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Krsna. Without the
grace of the spiritual master one cannot make any advancement.” It is by the mercy
of the spiritual master that one becomes perfect, as vividly exemplified here. A
Vaisnava is always protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if he
appears to be an invalid, this gives a chance to his disciples to serve him. Tsvara Puri
pleased his spiritual master by service, and by the blessings of his spiritual master
he became such a great personality that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted him as
His spiritual master. ,

Srila Tsvara Puri was the spiritual master of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but before
initiating Lord Caitanya he went to Navadvipa and lived for a few months in the
house of Gopinatha Acarya. At that time Lord Caitanya became acquainted with
him, and it is understood that he served Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by reciting his
book, Krspa-lilamrta. This is explained in Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, Seventh
Chapter.

, To teach others by example how to be a faithful disciple of one’s spiritual master,
SrT Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, visited the birth-
place of Tévara Puri at Kamarhatty and collected some earth from his birthsite. This
He kept very carefully, and He used to eat a small portion of it daily. This is stated
in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Chapter Twelve. It has now become customary for
devotees, following the example of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to go there and collect
some earth from that place.
TEXT 12

নিজাচিন্ত্যশক্ত্যে মালী sal क হয়।

সকল শাখার সেই FE FIST ॥ ১২ ॥

nijacintya-saktye mali hand skandha haya

sakala sakhara sei skandha malasraya

SYNONYMS

nija—His own; acintya—inconceivable; saktye—by potency; mali—gardener;hana—
becoming; skandha—trunk; haya—became; sakala—all; sakhara—of other branches;
sei—that; skandha—trunk; mala-asraya—original support.

TRANSLATION
By His inconceivable powers, the Lord became the gardener, the trunk and the
branches simultaneously.
TEXTS 13-15
পরমযানম্দ পুরী, আর কেশব ভারতী |
FTIR পুরী, আর JWT ভারতী ॥ ১৩ ॥


--- Page 222 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 221
fae, (कमैव गजौ, AN কৃষ্ণানন্দ ৷
জীনৃসিংহতীর্থ্য আর পুরী সুখানন্দ ॥ ১৪ ॥
এই नद মূল নিকসিল বৃক্ষমূলে |
এই নব মুলে বৃক্ষ করিল নিশ্চলে ॥ ১৫ ॥
paramananda puri, ara Resava bharati
brahmananda puri, ara brahmananda bharati
visnu-puri, kesava-puri, puri Rrsnananda
sri-nrsimhatirtha, ara puri sukhananda
ei nava mula nikasila vrksa-male
ei nava male vrksa karila niscale
SYNONYMS
paramananda puri—of the name Paramananda Puri; ara—and; kesava bharati—of
the name Kesava Bharati; brahmananda puri—of the name Brahmananda Puri; ara—
and; brahmananda bharati—of the name Brahmananda Bharati; visnu-puri—of the
name Visnu Puri; kesava-puri—of the name Kesava Puri; puri krsnananda—of the
name Krsnananda Purf; sri-nrsirnhatirtha—of the name Set Nrsimhatirtha; ara—and;
puri sukhananda—of the name Sukhananda PurT; ei nava—of these nine; mirla—roots;
nikasila—fructified; vrksa-miile—in the trunk of the tree; ९/ nava mdle—in these nine
roots; vrksa—the tree; karila niscale—became very steadfast.
TRANSLATION
, Paramananda Puri, Kesava Bharati, Brahmananda Puri and Brahmananda Bharati,
Sri Visnu Puri, Kesava Puri, Krsnananda Puri, Sri Nrsimhatirtha and Sukhananda
Puri—these nine sannyasi roots all sprouted from the trunk of the tree. Thus the
tree stood steadfastly on the strength of these nine roots.
PURPORT
Paramananda Puri. Paramananda Puri belonged to a brahmana family of the
Trihut district in Uttara Pradesh. Madhavendra Puri was his spiritual master. In
relationship with Madhavendra Puri, Paramananda Puri was very dear to Set Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Eleven, there is the
following statement:
sannyasira madhye iSvarera priya-patra
ara nahi eka puri gosani se matra
damodara-svarapa paramananda-puri
sannyasi-parsade ei dui adhikari
niravadhi nikate thakena dui-jana
prabhura sannyase kare dandera grahana
puri dhyana-para damodarera kirtana


--- Page 223 ---
222 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
yata-priti isvarera puri-gosafire
damodara-svarupere-o tata priti kare
“Among his sannyasi disciples, I$vara Puri and Paramananda Puri were very dear to
Madhavendra Puri. Thus Paramananda Puri, like Svardpa Damodara, who was also a
sannyasi, was very dear to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and was His constant associate.
When Lord Caitanya accepted the renounced order, Paramananda Puri offered Him
the danda. Paramananda Purl was always engaged in meditation, and 911 Svarlpa
was always engaged in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. As Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu offered full respect to His spiritual master, Tévara Puri, He similarly
respected Paramananda Pur and Svartipa Damodara.” It is described in Caitanya-
bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Three, that when SrT Caitanya Mahaprabhu first saw
Paramananda Puri He made the following statement:
aji dhanya locana, saphala aji janma
saphala amara aji haila sarva-dharma
prabhu bale aji mora saphala sannyasa
aji madhavendra more ha-ila prakasa
“My eyes, My mind, My religious activities and My acceptance of the sannyasa order
have now all become perfect because today Madhavendra Puri is manifest before
Me in the form of Paramananda Puri.” Caitanya-bhagavata further states:
kathoksane anyo ‘nye karena prapama
paramananda-puri caitanyera priya-dhama
“Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exchanged respectful obeisances with Paramananda-
Puri, who was very dear to Him.” Paramananda Puri established a small monastery
behind the western side of the Jagannatha Temple, where he had a well dug to
supply water. The water, however, was bitter, and therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
prayed to Lord Jagannatha to allow Ganges water to come into the well to make it
sweet. When Lord Jagannatha granted the request, Lord Caitanya told all the
devotees that from that day hence, the water of Paramananda Puri’s well should be
celebrated as Ganges water, for any devotee who would drink it or bathe init
would certainly get the same benefit as that derived from drinking or bathing in the
waters of the Ganges. Such a person would certainly develop pure love of Godhead:
It is stated in the Caitanya-bhagavata:
prabhu bale ami ye achiye prthivite
niscayai janiha puri-gosanira prite
“Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to say: ‘I am living in this world only on account
of the excellent behavior of $ri Paramananda Puri” The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika,
verse 118, states, puri Sri-paramanando ya asid uddhavah pura: ‘‘Paramananda Puri
is none other than Uddhava.” Uddhava was Lord ।< {5125 friend and uncle, and in


--- Page 224 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 223

the Caitanya-/ila the same Uddhava became the friend of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and His uncle in terms of their relationship in the disciplic succession.
, Kesava: Bharati. The Sarasvati, Bharati and Puri sampradayas belong to the
Sringeri Matha in South India, and Sr Kesava Bharati, who at that time was situated
in a monastery in Katwa, belonged to the Bharati-sampradaya. According to some
authoritative opinions, although Kesava 8113121} belonged to the Sankara-sampradaya,
he was formerly initiated by a Vaisnava. He is supposed to have been a Vaisnava on
account of having been initiated by Madhavendra Puri, for some say that he took
sannyasa from Madhavendra Puri. The temple and Deity worship started by Kesava
Bharati are still existing in the village known as Khatundi, which is under the postal
jurisdiction of Kandara in the district of Burdwan. According to the managers of
that matha, the priests are descendants of Kesava Bharati, and some say that the
worshipers of the Deity are descendants of the sons of Kesava Bharati. In his house-
holder life he had two sons, Nisapati and Usapati, and a brahmana of the name Sri
Nakadicandra Vidyaratna, who was a member of the family of Nisapati, was the
priest in charge at the time that Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati visited this temple.
According to some, the priests of the temple belong to the family of Kesava Bharati’s
brother. Still another opinion is that they descend from Madhava Bharati, who was
another disciple of Kesava Bharati. Madhava Bharati’s disciple Balabhadra, who 2150
later became a sannyasi of the Bharati-sampradaya, had two sons in his family life
named Madana and Gopala. Madana, whose family’s surname was Bharati, lived in
the village of Auriya, and Gopala, whose family’s surname was Brahmacarf, lived in
the village of Denduda. There are still many living descendants of both families.

In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 52, it is said:

mathurdyarn yajfia-satrarn purd Rrsnaya yo munih

dadau sandipanih so 'bhut adya kesava-bharati
“‘Sandipani Muni, who formerly offered the sacred thread to Krsna and Balarama,
later became Kesava Bharati.” It is he who offered sannyasa to Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. There is another statement from the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 117.
Iti kecit prabhasante 'krarah kesava-bharati: ‘‘According to some authoritative
opinions, Kesava Bharati is an incarnation of Akrura.” Kesava Bharati offered the
sannydsa order to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in the year 1432 sakdbda (1510 A.D.)
in Katwa. This is stated in the Vaisnava-manjusa, Part Two.

Brahmananda Pur. Sri Brahmananda Puri was one of the associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu while He was performing kirtana in Navadvipa, and he also joined Lord
Caitanya in Jagannatha Puri. We may note in this connection that the name
Brahmananda is accepted not only by Mayavadi sannyasis but Vaisnava sannyasis
also. One of our foolish Godbrothers criticized our sannyasi Brahmananda Svami,
saying that this was a Mayavadi name. The foolish man did not know that Brahma-
nanda does not always refer to the impersonal. Parabrahman, the Supreme Brahman,
is Krsna. A devotee of Krsna can therefore also be called Brahmananda; this is
evident from the fact that Brahmananda Puri was one of the chief sannyasi associ-
ates of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 225 ---
224 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Brahmananda Bharati, Brahmananda Bharati went to see Sri Krsna Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha-dhama. At that time he used to wear only a deerskin to
cover himself, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu indirectly indicated that He did not
like this deerskin covering. Brahmananda Bharati therefore gave it up and accepted
a loincloth of saffron color as used by Vaisnava sannyasis. For some time he lived
with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 16
মধ্যযূল পরমানন্দ পুরী মহাধীর |
oR দিকে रटे মুল বৃক্ষ কৈল স্থির ॥ ১৬ ॥
madhya-mila paramananda puri maha-dhira
asta dike asta mila vrksa Raila sthira
SYNONYMS
madhya-mula—the middle root; paramananda puri—of the name Paramananda
Puri; maha-dhira—most sober; asta dike—in the eight directions; asta mila—eight
roots; vrksa—the tree; kaila sthira—fixed.
TRANSLATION
With the sober and grave Paramananda Puri as the central root and the other
eight roots in the eight directions, the tree of Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood firmly.
TEXT 17
স্কদ্ধের উপরে বছ শাখা ठनेजिल |
উপরি উপরি শাখা অসংখ্য হইল ॥ ১৭ ॥
skandhera upare bahu sakha upajila
upari upari sakha asankhya ha-ila
SYNONYMS
skandhera upare—upon the trunk; bahu sakha—many branches; upajila- grew;
upari upari—over and above them; sakha—other branches; asafikhya—innumerable;
ha-ila—fructified.
TRANSLATION
From the trunk grew many branches and above them innumerable others.


--- Page 226 ---
Adi-fila, Chapter 9 225
TEXT 18
বিশ বিশ শাখা করি” এক এক মণ্ডল ।
मङ-यङ।-नष। ছাইল ব্রদ্ধাণ্ড সকল ॥ ১৮ ॥
visa visa sakha kari’ eka eka mandala
maha-maha-sakha chaila brahmanda sakala
SYNONYMS
visa visa—twenty, twenty; sakha—branches; kari’—making a group; eka eka
mandala—form a society ; maha-maha-sakha—big branches; chaila—covered; brahman-
da—the whole universe; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
Thus the branches of the Caitanya tree formed a cluster or society, with great
branches covering all the universe.
PURPORT
Our International Society for Krishna Consciousness is one of the branches of
the Caitanya tree.
TEXT 19
এবকৈক শাখাতে উপশাখা শত শত |
যত উপস্বিল শাখা কে গণিবে কত ॥ ১৯ ॥
ekaika sakhate upasakha sata sata
yata upajila sakha ke ganibe kata
SYNONYMS
ekaika—each branch; sakhate—in the branch; upasakha—sub-branches; sata sata—
hundreds and hundreds; yata—all; upajila—grew; sakha—branches; ke—who; ganibe—
can count; kata—how much.
TRANSLATION
From each branch grew many hundreds of sub-branches. No one can count how
many branches thus grew.
TEXT 20
भूष মুখ্য শাখাগণের নাম অগণন।
আগে ত' করিব, শুন বৃক্ষের বর্ণন ॥ ২০ ॥


--- Page 227 ---
226 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
mukhya mukhya $akha-ganera nama aganana
age ta’ kariba, Suna vrksera varnpana
SYNONYMS
mukhya mukhya—the foremost of them all; sakha-ganera—of the branches; nama—
name; aganana—uncountable; age—subsequently; ta’ kariba—| shall do; suna—please
hear; vrksera varpana—the description of the Caitanya tree.
TRANSLATION
I shall try to name the foremost of the innumerable branches. Please hear the
description of the Caitanya tree.
TEXT 21
বৃক্ষের উপরে শাখা হৈল द्वदे छक |
এক “অদ্বৈত” নাম, আর TSH ॥ ২১ ॥
vrksera upare sakha haila dui skandha
eka ‘advaita’ nama, ara ‘nityananda’
SYNONYMS
vrksera—of the tree; upare—on the top; sakha—branch; haila—became; dui—two;
skandha—trunks; eka—one; advaita—Sri Advaita Prabhu; nama—of the name; ara—
and; nityananda—of the name Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
At the top of the tree the trunk branched into two. One trunk was named Sri
Advaita Prabhu and the other Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
TEXT 22
সেই তুইস্কন্ধে বহু শাখ| উপজিল।
তার উপশাখাগণে জগৎ ছাইল ॥ ২২ ॥
sei dui-skandhe bahu sakha upajila
tara upasakha-gane jagat chaila
SYNONYMS
sei—that; dui-skandhe—in" two trunks; bahu—many; sakha—branches; upajila—
grew; tara—of them; upasakha-gane—sub-branches; jagat—the whole world; chaila—
covered.


--- Page 228 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 9 227
TRANSLATION
From these two trunks grew many branches and sub-branches that covered the
entire world.
TEXT 23
वरु শাখা, উপশাখা, তার উপশাখা।
खर উপজিল তার কে করিবে লেখা ॥ ২৩ ॥
800 sakha, upasakha, tara upasakha
yata upajila tara ke karibe lekha
SYNONYMS
bada sakha—the big branches; upasakha—sub-branches; tara—their; upasakha—
sub-branches; tara—their; upasakha—again sub-branches; yata—all that; upajila—
grew; tara—of them; ke—who; karibe—can count; lekha—or write.
TRANSLATION
These branches and sub-branches and their sub-branches became so numerous that
no one can actually write about them.
TEXT 24
শিষ্য, প্রশিষ্য, আর উপশিষ্যগণ |
জগৎ ব্যাপিল তার নাহিক গণন ॥ ২৪ ॥
Sisya, prasisya, ara upasisya-gana
Jagat vyapila tara nahika gapana
SYNONYMS
Sisya—disciples; prasisya—grand-disciples; ara—and; wupasisya-gapna—admirers;
Jjagat—the whole world; vyapila—spread; tara—of that; nahika—there is none;
ganana—enumeration.
TRANSLATION
Thus the disciples and the grand-disciples and their admirers spread throughout
the entire world, and it is not possible to enumerate them all.
TEXT 25
By, wa-3% (यन कृटल সর্ব অঙ্গে ৷
এই মত ভক্তিবৃক্ষে गर्व कन्‌ লাগে ॥ ২৫ ॥


--- Page 229 ---
228 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
udumbara-vrksa yena phale sarva ange
ei mata bhakti-vrkse sarvatra phala lage
SYNONYMS
udumbara-vrksa—a big fig tree; yena—as if; phale—grew fruits; sarva—all; ange—
parts of the body; ei—this; mata—like; bhakti-vrkse—in the tree of devotional service;
sarvatra—all over; phala—fruit; lage—appears.
TRANSLATION
As a big fig tree bears fruits all over its body, each part of the tree of devotional
service bore fruit.
PURPORT
This tree of devotional service is not of this material world. It grows in the spiritual
world, where there is no distinction between one part of the body and another. It
is something like a tree of sugar, for whichever part of such a tree one tastes, it is
always sweet. The tree of bhakti has varieties of branches, leaves and fruits, but they
are all meant for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are
nine different processes of devotional service ($ravaparh kirtanarn vispoh smaranarn
pada-sevanam arcanarn vandanarn dasyarn sakhyam atma-nivedanam), but all of them
are meant only for the service of the Supreme Lord. Therefore whether one hears,
chants, remembers or worships, his activities will yield the same result. Which one
of these processes will be the most suitable for a particular devotee depends upon
his taste.
TEXT 26
মুলস্কন্ধের শাখা আর উপশাখাগণে |
লাগিল৷ যে প্রেমফকল,- অম্বৃতকে জিনে ॥ ২৬ ॥
mula-skandhera $akha ara upasakha-gane
lagila ye prema-phala,—amrtake jine
SYNONYMS
mila-skandhera—of the chief trunk; sakha—branches; ara—and; upasakha-gane—
sub-branches; lagila—as it grew; ye—that; prema-phala—the fruit of love; amrtake
Jjine—such a fruit conquers nectar.
TRANSLATION
Since Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the original trunk, the taste of the
fruits that grew on the branches and sub-branches surpassed the taste of nectar.
TEXT 27
शाकिन যে প্রেমফল অম্ৃত-মধুর |
বিলায় চৈতন্যমালী, নাহি লয় মূল ॥ ২৭ ॥


--- Page 230 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 229
pakila ye prema-phala amrta-madhura
vilaya caitanya-mali, nahi laya mala
SYNONYMS
pakila—ripened; ye—that; prema-phala—the fruit of love of Godhead; amrta—
nectarean; madhura—sweet; vilaya—distributes; caitanya-mali—the gardener, Lord
Caitanya; nahi—does not; /laya—take; mula— price.
TRANSLATION
The fruits ripened and became sweet and nectarean. The gardener, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, distributed them without asking any price.
TEXT 28
ত্রিজগতে ষত আছে ধন-রত্নমণি |
একফলের মূল্য করি” তাহ নাহি গণি ॥ २. ॥
tri-jagate yata ache dhana-ratnamani
eka-phalera malya kari’ taha nahi gani
SYNONYMS
tri-jagate—in the three worlds; yata—as much as;ache—there is;dhana-ratnamani—
wealth and riches; eka-phalera—one fruit’s; mulya—price; kari’—calculated; taha—
that; nahi—do not; gani—count.
TRANSLATION
All the wealth in the three worlds cannot equal the value of one such nectarean
fruit of devotional service.
TEXT 29
মাগে বা না মাগে কেহ, পাত্র বা অপাত্র।
ইহার বিচার নাহি জানে, দেয় মাত্র ॥ ২৯ ॥
mage va na mage Reha, patra va apatra
ihara vicara nahi jane, deya matra
SYNONYMS
mage—begs; va—or; na—not; mage—begs; keha—anyone; patra—candidate; va—or;
apatra—not a candidate; /70/৫- ০01 this; vicara— consideration; nahi—does not; jane—
know; deya—gives; matra—only.


--- Page 231 ---
230 $ri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
TRANSLATION
Not considering who asked for it and who did not, nor who was fit and who unfit
to receive it, Caitanya Mahaprabhu distributed the fruit of devotional service.
PURPORT
This is the sum and substance of Lord Caitanya’s sankirtana movement. There is
no distinction made between those who are fit and those who are not fit to hear or
take part in the saAakirtana movement. It should therefore be preached without
discrimination. The only purpose of the preachers of the safkirtana movement must
be to go on preaching without restriction. That is the way in which Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu introduced this sankirtana movement 10 the world.
TEXT 30
অঞ্জলি অঞ্জলি ভরি” ফেলে চতুর্দিশে।
एत्रिखं কুড়াঞা খায়, মালাকার হাসে ॥ ৩০ ॥
anjali ০8/0// bhari’ phele caturdise
daridra kudana khaya, malakara hase
SYNONYMS
anjali—handful; arijali—handful; bhari’—filling; phele—distributes; caturdise—in all
directions; daridra—poor; kudana—picking up; khaya—eats;- malakara—the gardener;
hase—smiles.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental gardener, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, distributed handful after
handful of fruit in all directions, and when the poor hungry people ate the fruit,
the gardener smiled with great pleasure.
TEXT 31
মালাকার कटर, শুন, বৃক্ষ-পরিবার ।
যূলশাখা-উপশাখা सटरुक প্রকার ॥ ৩১ ॥
malakara kahe,—suna, vrksa-parivara
mulasakha-upasakha yateka prakara
SYNONYMS
malakara—the gardener; kahe—said; suna—hear; vrksa-parivara—the family of this
transcendental tree of devotional service; mula-Sakha—chief branches; upasakha—
sub-branches; yateka—as many; prakara—varieties.


--- Page 232 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 9 231
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya thus addressed the multifarious varieties of branches and sub-
branches of the tree of devotional service:
TEXT 32
অলোকিক gw করে जटर्वच्छिप्न-कर् ।
স্থাবর হইয়| ধরে জজমের ধর্ম ॥ ৩২ ॥
alaukika vrksa kare sarvendriya-karma
sthavara ha-iya dhare jarigamera dharma
SYNONYMS
alaukika—transcendental; vrksa—tree; kare—does;sarva-indriya—all senses; karma—
activities; sthavara—immovable; ha-iya—becoming; dhare—accepts; jangamera— of
the movable; dharma—activities.
TRANSLATION
“Since the tree of devotional service is transcendental, every one of its parts can
perform the action of all the others. Although a tree is supposed to be immovable,
this tree nevertheless moves.
PURPORT
It is our experience in the material world that trees stand in one place, but in the
spiritual world a tree can go from one place to another. Therefore everything in the
spiritual world is called alaukika, uncommon or transcendental. Another feature of
such a tree is that it can act universally. in the material world the roots of a tree go
deep within the earth to gather food, but in the spiritual world the twigs, branches
and leaves of the upper portion of the tree can act as well as the roots.
TEXT 33
এ বৃক্ষের অজ হয় সব সচেতন |
বাড়িয়৷ ব্যাপিল সবে সকল gaan ৩৩ ॥
€ vrksera 01700 haya saba sa-cetana
badiya vyapila sabe sakala bhuvana
SYNONYMS
e—this; vrkgera—of the Caitanya tree; ariga—parts; haya—are; saba—all; sa-cetana—
spiritually cognizant; badiya—increasing; vyapila—overflooded; sabe—all the parts;
sakala—all; bhuvana—the world.


--- Page 233 ---
232 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
“All the parts of this tree are spiritually cognizant, and thus as they grow up they
spread all over the world.
TEXT 34
একলা মালাকার আমি কাই FE যাব।
একলা व কত ফল পাড়িয়া বিলাব ॥ ৩৪ ॥
ekala malakara ami kahan kahan yaba
ekala va kata phala padiya vilaba
SYNONYMS
ekala—alone; malakara—gardener; ami—| am; kahah—where; kahan—where; yaba—
shall | go; ekala—alone; va—or; kata—how many; phala—fruits; padiya— picking;
vilaba—shall distribute.
TRANSLATION
“I am the only gardener. How many places can | go? How many fruits can | pick
and distribute?
PURPORT
Here Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu indicates that the distribution of the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra should be performed by combined forces. Although He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He laments, “How can | act alone? How can | alone pick
the fruit and distribute it all over the world?” This indicates that all classes of
devotees should combine to distribute the Hare Krsna maha-mantra without con-
sideration of the time, place or situation.
TEXT 35
একলা উঠাঞা দিতে হয় পরিশ্রম।
CFE পায়, কেন না পায়, ACE মনে खम ॥ ৩৫ ॥
ekala uthana dite haya parisrama
keha paya, keha na paya, rahe mane bhrama
SYNONYMS
ekala—alone; uthana—picking up; dite—to give; haya—it becomes; parisrama—too
laborious; keha—someone; paya—does get; keha—someone; na—not; paya—does get;
rahe—remains; mane—in the mind; bhrama—suspicion.


--- Page 234 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 233
TRANSLATION
“It would certainly be a very laborious task to pick the fruits and distribute them
alone, and still | suspect that some would receive them and others would not.
TEXT 36
>
অতএব আমি wren দিলু* সবাকারে।
सा তাহা প্রেমফল দেহ” যারে তারে ॥ ৩৬ ॥
ataeva ami 0/00 dilun sabakare
yahan tahan prema-phala deha’ yare tare
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; ami—\; agjaa— order; dilun—give; sabakare—to everyone; yahan—
wherever; tahan—everywhere; prema-phala—the fruit of love of Godhead; deha’—
distribute; yare—anyone; tare—everyone.
TRANSLATION
“Therefore | order every man within this universe to accept this Krsna conscious-
ness movement and distribute it everywhere.
PURPORT
In this connection there is a song sung by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura:
enechi ausadhi maya nasibara lagi’
harinama-mahamantra lao tumi magi’
bhakativinoda prabhu-carane padiya
sei harinama-mantra la-ila magiya
The sankirtana movement has been introduced by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu just
to dispell the illusion of maya, by which everyone in this material world thinks
himself to be a product of matter and therefore to have many duties pertaining to
the body. Actually, the living entity is not his material body; he is a spirit soul. He
has a spiritual need to be eternally blissful and full of knowledge, but unfortunately
he identifies himself with the body, sometimes as a human being, sometimes as an
animal, sometimes a tree, sometimes an aquatic, sometimes a demigod, and so on.
Thus with each change of body he develops a different type of consciousness with
different types of activities and thus becomes increasingly entangled in material
existence, transmigrating perpetually from one body to another. Under the spell of
maya, or illusion, he does not consider the past or future but is simply satisfied with
the short life span that he has gotten for the present. To eradicate this illusion, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has brought the sarnkirtana movement, and He requests every-
one to accept and distribute it. A person who is actually a follower of SriBhakti-


--- Page 235 ---
234 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
vinoda Thakura must immediately accept the request of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
by offering respectful obeisances unto His lotus feet and thus beg from Him the
Hare Krsna maha-mantra. If one is fortunate enough to beg from the Lord this Hare
Krsna maha-mantra, his life is successful.
TEXT 37
একলা মালাকার আমি কত ফল খাৰ।
নাদ্রিয়া বা এই ফল আর কি করিব ॥ ৩৭ ॥
ekala malakara ami kata phala khaba
na diya va ei phala ara ki kariba
SYNONYMS
ekala—alone; malakara—gardener;ami—|; kata—how many; phala—fruits; khaba—
eat; na—without; diya—giving; va—or; ei—this; phala—fruits; ara—else; ki—what;
kariba—shall | do.
TRANSLATION
“l am the only gardener. If | do not distribute these fruits, what shall | do with
them? How many fruits can | alone eat?
PURPORT
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu produced so many fruits of devotional service that
they must be distributed all over the world; otherwise, how could He alone relish
and taste each and every fruit? The original reason that Lord Sri Krsna descended
as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was to understand Srimati Radharani’s love for Krsna
and to taste that love. The fruits of the tree of devotional service were innumerable,
and therefore He wanted to distribute them unrestrictedly to everyone. Srila Rapa
Gosvami therefore writes:
anarpita-cariri cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasarm sva-bhakti-sriyam
harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandipitah
sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanah
There were many precious incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
none were so generous, kind and magnanimous as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for He
distributed the most confidential aspect of devotional service, namely, the conjugal
love of Radha and Krsna. Therefore Sri Rapa Gosvami Prabhupada desires that Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu live perpetually in the hearts of all devotees, for thus they can
understand and relish the loving affairs of Srtmatt Radharani and Krsna.


--- Page 236 ---
Adi-I1la, Chapter 9 235
TEXT 38
আত্ম-ইচ্ছাম্তে বৃক্ষ সিঞ্চি rsa ।
তাহাতে অসংখ্য ফল বৃক্ষের উপর ॥ ৩৮ ॥
atma-icchamrte vrksa sifici nirantara
tahate asankhya phala vrksera upara
SYNONYMS
atma—self; iccha-amrte—by the nectar of the will; vrksa—the tree; sifici—sprinkle;
nirantara—constantly; tahate—there; asankhya—unlimited; phala—fruits; vrksera—on
the tree; upara—upper.
TRANSLATION
“By the transcendental desire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, water has
been sprinkled all over the tree, and thus there are innumerable fruits of love of
Godhead.
PURPORT
God is unlimited, and His desires are also unlimited. This example of unlimited
fruits is factually appropriate even within the material context, for with the good
will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead there can be enough fruits, grains and
other foodstuffs produced so that all the people in the world could not finish them,
even if they ate ten times their capacity. In this material world there is actually no
scarcity of anything but Krsna consciousness. If people become Krsna conscious,
by the transcendental will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead there will be
enough foodstuffs produced so that people will have no economic problems at all.
One can very easily understand this fact. The production of fruits and flowers de-
pends not upon our will but the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead. If He
is pleased, He can supply enough fruits, flowers, etc., but if people are atheistic and
godless, nature, by His will, restricts the supply of food. For example, in several
provinces in India, especially Maharastra, Uttara Pradesh and other adjoining states,
there is sometimes a great scarcity of foodstuffs due to lack of rainfall. So-called
scientists and economists cannot do anything about this. Therefore, to solve all
problems, one must seek the good will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
becoming Krsna conscious and worshiping Him regularly in devotional service.
TEXT 39
অতএব जव ফল দেহ” যারে তারে।
খাইয়া হউক্‌ লোক অজ্র অমরে ॥ ৩৯ ॥


--- Page 237 ---
236 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
ataeva saba phala deha’ yare tare
khaiya ha-uk loka ajara amare
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore;saba—all; phala—fruits; deha’—distribute; yare tare—to everyone
and anyone; khaiya—eating; ha-uk—let them become; /oka—all people; ajara—without
old age; amare—without death.
TRANSLATION
“Distribute this Krsna consciousness movement all over the world. Let people
eat these fruits and ultimately become free from old age and death.
PURPORT
The Krsna consciousness movement introduced by Lord Caitanya is extremely
important because one who takes to it becomes eternal, being freed from birth,
death and old age. People do not recognize that the real distresses in life are the
four principles of birth, death, old age and disease. They are so foolish that they
resign themselves to these four miseries, not knowing the transcendental remedy
of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra
one can become free from all misery, but because they are enchanted by the
illusory energy, people do not take this movement seriously. Therefore those who
are actually servants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu must seriously distribute this
movement all over the world to render the greatest benefit to human society. Of
course, animals and other lower species are not capable of understanding this move-
ment, but if even a small number of living beings take it seriously, by their chanting
loudly, all living entities, including even trees, animals and other lower species, will
be benefited. When 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from Haridasa Thakura how
he was to benefit living entities other than humans, Srila Haridasa Thakura replied
that the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is so potent that if it is chanted loudly, everyone
will benefit, including the lower species of life.
TEXT 40
জগৎ ব্যাপিয়| মোর হবে পুণ্য থ্যাতি।
সখী হইয়া লোক মোর গাহিবেক কীত্তি ॥ 8০ ॥
Jagat vyapiya mora habe punya khyati
Sukhi ha-iya loka mora gahibeka Kirti
SYNONYMS
Jagat vyapiya—spreading all over the world; mora—My; habe—there will be; punya—
pious; khyati—reputation; sukhi—happy; ha-iya—becoming; loka—all the people;
mora—My; gahibeka—glorify; kirti—reputation.


--- Page 238 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 9 237
TRANSLATION

“If the fruits are distributed all over the world, My reputation as a pious man will

be known everywhere, and thus all people will glorify My name with great pleasure.
PURPORT

This prediction of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is now actually coming to pass.
The Krsna consciousness movement is being distributed all over the world through
the chanting of the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, and people
who were leading confused, chaotic lives are now feeling transcendental happiness.
They are finding peace in sankirtana, and therefore they are acknowledging the
supreme benefit of this movement. This is the blessing of Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. His prediction is now factually being fulfilled, and those who are sober and
conscientious are appreciating the value of this great movement.

TEXT 41
ভারত-ভমিতে হৈল মন্ুষ্য-জন্ম सात्र |
জন্ম সার্থক করি” কর পর-উপকাঁর ॥ ৪১ ॥
bharata-bhumite haila manusya-janma yara
Jjanma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
SYNONYMS

bharata—of India; bhdmite—in the land; haila—has become; manusya—human
being; janma—birth; yara—anyone;janma— such 2 birth; sarthaka—fulfillment; kari’—
doing so; kara—do; para— others; upakara—benefit.

TRANSLATION

“One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India [Bharata-

varsa] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all other people.
PURPORT

The magnanimity of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is expressed in this very impor-
tant verse. Although He was born in Bengal and Bengalis therefore have a special
duty toward Him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is addressing not only Bengalis but all
the inhabitants of India. It is in the land of India that actual human civilization can
be developed.

Human life is especially meant for God realization, as stated in the Vedanta-sutra
(athato brahma-jijiiasa). Anyone who takes birth in the land of India (Bharata-varsa)
has the special privilege of being able to take advantage of the instruction and guid-
ance of the Vedic civilization. He automatically receives the basic principles of
spiritual life, for 99.9% of the Indian people, even simple village farmers and others


--- Page 239 ---
238 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

who are neither educated nor sophisticated, believe in the transmigration of the
soul, believe in past and future lives, believe in God and naturally want to worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His representative. These ideas are the
natural inheritance of a person born in India. India has many holy places of pilgrim-
age such as Gaya, Benares, Mathura, Prayag, Vrndavana, Haridvar, Ramesvaram and
Jagannatha 2011, and still people go there by the hundreds and thousands. Although
the present leaders of India are influencing the people not to believe in God, not to
believe in a next life and not to believe in a distinction between pious and impious
life, and they are teaching them how to drink wine, eat meat and become supposedly
civilized, people are nevertheless afraid of the four activities of sinful life—namely,
illicit sex, meat eating, intoxication and gambling—and whenever there is a religious
festival, they gather together by the thousands. We have actual experience of this.
Whenever the Krsna consciousness movement holds a sankirtana festival in a big
city like Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Ahmedabad or Hyderabad, thousands of people
come to hear. Sometimes we speak in English, but even though most people do not
understand English, they nevertheless come to hear us. Even when imitation incar-
nations of Godhead speak, people gather in thousands, for everyone who is born in
the land of India has a natural spiritual inclination and is taught the basic principles
of spiritual life; they merely need.to be a little more educated in the Vedic princi-
ples. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-
upakara: if an Indian is educated in the Vedic principles, he is able to perform the
most beneficial welfare activity for the entire world.

At present, for want of Krsna consciousness or God consciousness, the entire
world is in darkness, having been covered by the four principles of sinful life—meat
eating, illicit sex, gambling and intoxication. Therefore there is a need for vigorous
propaganda to educate people to refrain from sinful activities. This will bring peace
and prosperity; the rogues, thieves and debauchees will naturally decrease in number,
and all of human society will be God conscious.

The practical effect of our spreading the Krsna consciousness movement all over
the world is that now the most degraded debauchees are becoming the most elevated
saints. This is only one Indian's humble service to the world. If all Indians had taken
to this path, as advised by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, India would have given a
unique gift to the world, and thus India would have been glorified. Now, however,
India" is known as a poverty-stricken country, and whenever anyone from America
or another opulent country goes to India, he sees many people lying by the foot
paths for whom there are not even provisions for two meals a day. There are also
institutions collecting money from all parts of the world in the name of welfare
activities for poverty-stricken people, but they are spending it for their own sense
ratification. Now, on the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Krsna conscious-
ness movement has been started, and people are benefiting from this movement.
Therefore it is now the duty of the leading men of India to consider the importance
of this movement and train many Indians to go outside of India to preach this cult.
People will accept it, there will be cooperation among the Indian people and among
the other people 01 the world, and the mission of Sfi Caitanya Mahaprabhu will
then be fulfilled. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will then be glorified all over the world,


--- Page 240 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 239
and people will naturally be happy, peaceful and prosperous, not only in this life
but also in the next, for as stated in Bhagavad-gita, anyone who understands Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will very easily get salvation, or freedom from
the repetition of birth and death, and go back home, back to Godhead. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu therefore requests every Indian to become a preacher of His cult to
save the world from disastrous confusion.

This is not only the duty of Indians but the duty of everyone, and we are very
happy that American and European boys and girls are seriously cooperating with
this movement. One should know definitely that the best welfare activity for all of
human society is toawaken man’s God consciousness, or Krsna consciousness. There-
fore everyone should help this great movement. This is confirmed in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Tenth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter, verse 35, which is next quoted
in Caitanya-caritamrta.

TEXT 42
এতাবক্জন্মসাফল্যং দেহিনামিহ iF)
প্রাণৈরধৈধিয়া বাচা শ্রেয়আচরণং ART ॥ ৪২ ॥
etavaj janma-saphalyarn dehinam iha dehisu
pranair arthair dhiya vaca sreya-acaragarn sada
SYNONYMS

etavat—up to this; janma—of birth; saphalyam—perfection; dehinam—of every
living being; iha—in this world; dehisu—toward those who are embodied; pranaih—
by life; arthaih—by wealth; dhiya—by intelligence; vaca—by words; sreyah—eternal
good fortune; acarapam—acting practically; sada—always.

TRANSLATION
‘“‘It is the duty of every living being to perform welfare activities for the benefit
of others with his life, wealth, intelligence and words.’
PURPORT

There are two kinds of general activities—sreyas, or activities which are ultimate-
ly beneficial and auspicious, and preyas, or those which are immediately beneficial
and auspicious. For example, children are very fond of playing. They don’t want to
go to school to receive an education, and they think that to play all day and night
and enjoy with their friends is the aim of life. Even in the transcendental life of
Lord Krsna, we find that when He was a child He was very fond of playing with
His friends of the same age, the cowherd boys. He would not even go home to take
His dinner. Mother Yasoda would have to come out to induce Him to come home.
Thus it is a child’s nature to engage all day and night in playing, not caring even for
his health and other important concerns. This is an example of preyas, or immediate-


--- Page 241 ---
240 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

ly beneficial activities, but there are also sreyas, or activities which are ultimately
auspicious. According to Vedic civilization, a human being must be God conscious.
He should understand what God is, what this material world is, who he is and what
their interrelationships are. This is called sreyas, or ultimately auspicious activity.

In this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that one should be interested in
Sreyas. To achieve the ultimate goal of sreyas, or good fortune, one should engage
everything, including his life, wealth and words, not only for himself but for others
also. However, unless one is interested in Sreyas in his own life, he cannot preach of
Sreyas for the benefit of others.

This verse cited by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu applies to human beings, not to
animals. As indicated in the previous verse by the words manusya-janma, these in-
junctions are for human beings. Unfortunately, human beings, although they have
the bodies of men, are becoming less than animals in their behavior. This is the fault
of modern education. Modern educators do not know the aim of human life; they
are simply concerned with how to develop the economic condition of their countries
or of human society. This is also necessary; the Vedic civilization considers all aspects
of human life, including dharma (religion), artha (economic development), kama
(sense gratification) and moksa (liberation). But humanity’s first concern should be
religion. To be religious, one must abide by the orders of God, but unfortunately
people in this age have rejected religion, and they are busy in economic development.
Therefore they will adopt any means to get money. For economic development one
does not need to get money by hook or by crook; one needs only sufficient money
to maintain his body and soul. However, because modern economic development is
going on with no religious background, people have become lusty, greedy and mad
after money. They are simply developing the qualities of rajas (passion) and tamas
(ignorance), neglecting the other quality of nature, sattva (goodness), and the
brahminical qualifications. Therefore the entire society is in chaos.

The Bhagavatam says that it is the duty of an advanced human being to act in
such a way as to facilitate human society’s attainment of the ultimate goal of life.
There is a similar verse in the Vispu Purana, Part Three, Chapter Twelve, verse 45,
which is quoted in this chapter of Caitanya-caritamrta as verse 43.

TEXT 43
প্রাণিনামুপকারায় যদেবেহ AA চ।
कर्मने] মনসা বাচা তদেব মতিমান্‌ ভজেৎ ॥ ৪৩ ॥
praninam upakaraya yad eveha paratra ca
karmana manasa vaca tad eva matiman bhajet
SYNONYMS

praninam—of all living entities; upakaraya—for the benefit; yat—whichever; eva—
certainly; /ha—in this world or in this life; paratra—in the next life; ca—and;
karmanpa—by work; manasa—by the mind; vaca—by words; tat—that; eva—certainly;
matiman—an intelligent man; bhajet—must act.


--- Page 242 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 9 241
TRANSLATION

“‘By his work, thoughts and words, an intelligent man must perform actions

which will be beneficial for all living entities in this life and in the next.’
PURPORT

Unfortunately, people in general do not know what is to take place in the next
life. To prepare oneself for his next life is common sense, and it is a principle of
the Vedic civilization, but presently people throughout the world do not believe in
a next life. Even influential professors and other educators say that as soon as the
body is finished, everything is finished. This atheistic philosophy is killing human
civilization. People are irresponsibly performing all sorts of sinful activities, and
thus the privilege of the human life is being taken away by the educational propa-
ganda of the so-called leaders. Actually it is a fact that this life is meant for prepara-
tion for the next life; by evolution one has come through many species or forms,
and this human form of life is an opportunity to promote oneself to a better life.
This is explained in Bhagavad-gita:

yanti deva-vrata devan
pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
bhutani yanti bhutejya
yanti mad-yajino’pi mam
“Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who
worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who worship
ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with Me.” (Bg.
9.25) Therefore, one may promote himself to the higher planetary systems which
are the residence of the demigods, one can promote himself to the Pitrloka, one
can remain on earth, or one can also go back home, back to Godhead. This is
further confirmed by Bhagavad-gita (4.9): tyaktva deharn punar janma naiti mam
eti so 'rjuna. After giving up the body, one who knows Krsna in truth does not
come back again to this world to accept a material body, but he goes back home,
back to Godhead. This knowledge is in the $astras, and people should be given the
opportunity to understand it. Even if one is not able to go back to Godhead in one
life, the Vedic civilization at least gives one the opportunity to be promoted to the
higher planetary systems where the demigods live and not glide down again to
animal life. At present, people do not understand this knowledge, although it con-
stitutes a great science, for they are uneducated and trained not to accept it. This is
the horrible condition of modern human society. As such, the Krsna consciousness
movement is the only hope to direct the attention of intelligent men to a greater
benefit in life.
TEXT 44
মালী मस्र আদার নাহি রাজ্য-বল।
ফল-ফুল भित्र করি” পুণ্য উপার্জন ॥ ৪৪ ॥


--- Page 243 ---
242 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
mali manusya amara nahi rajya-dhana
phala-phula diya kari’ punya uparjana
SYNONYMS

mali—gardener; manusya—man; amara—My ; nahi—there is none; rajya—kingdom;
dhana—wealth; phala—fruit; phula—flowers; diya—giving; kari’'—do; punya—piety;
uparjana—achievement.

TRANSLATION

“I am merely a gardener. | have neither a kingdom nor very great riches. | simply

have some fruits and flowers that | wish to utilize to achieve piety in My life.
PURPORT

In performing welfare activities for human society, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
presents Himself as being not very rich, thus indicating that a man need not be rich
or opulent to act for the welfare of humanity. Sometimes rich men are very proud
that they can perform beneficial activities for human society whereas others cannot.
A practical example is that when there is a scarcity of food in India on account of
meager rainfall, some members of the richer class very proudly distribute foodstuffs,
making huge arrangements with the help of the government, as if merely by such
activities people will be benefited. Suppose there were no food grains. How would
the rich men distribute food? Production of grains is completely in the hands of God.
If there were no rain, there would be no grains, and these so-called rich men would
be unable to distribute grains to the people.

The real purpose of life, therefore, is to satisfy the Supreme Personality of God-
head. 51112 1২003 Gosvami describes in his Bhakti-rasamyta-sindhu that devotional
service is so exalted that it is beneficial and auspicious for every man. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu also declared that to propagate the bhakti cult of devotional service in
human society, one does not need to be very rich. Anyone can do it and thus render
the highest benefit to humanity if he knows the art. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
takes the part of a gardener because although a gardener is naturally not a very rich
man, he has some fruits and flowers. Any man can collect some fruits and flowers
and satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotional service, as recom-
mended in Bhagavad-gita:

patrarh puspari phalari toyarn
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aharih bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
(Bg. 9.26)
One cannot satisfy the Supreme Lord by his riches, wealth or opulent position, but
anyone can collect a iittle fruit or flower and offer it to the Lord. The Lord says
that if one brings such an offering in devotion, He will accept it and eat it. When


--- Page 244 ---
Adi-fila, Chapter 9 243
Krsna eats, the entire world becomes satisfied. There is the story in the Mahabharata.
illustrating how by Krsna’s eating, the 60,000 disciples of Durvasa Muni were all
satisfied. Therefore it is a fact that if by our life (prapait), by our wealth (arthaih),
‘by our intelligence (dhiya) or by our words (vaca) we can satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, naturally the entire world will become happy. Therefore
our main duty is to satisfy the Supreme Godhead by our actions, our money and
our words. This is very simple. Even if one does not have money, he can preach the
Hare Krsna mantra to everyone. One can go everywhere, to every home, and request
everyone to chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Thus the entire world situation will be-
come very happy and peaceful.
TEXT 45
जालो হঞ। বৃক্ষ হইলাঙ এই ' TRITS |
সর্বপ্রামীর উপকার ছয় Tw হৈতে ॥ ৪৫ ॥
mali 7070 vrksa ha-ilan ei ta’ icchate
sarva-pranira upakara haya vrksa haite
SYNONYMS
mali hafia—although | am the gardener; vrksa ha-ilan—| am also the tree; e/ ta’—
this is; icchate—by My will; sarva-pranira—of all living entities; upakara—welfare;
haya—there is; vrksa—the tree; haite—from.
TRANSLATION
“Although | am acting as a gardener, | also want to be the tree, for thus | can
bestow benefit upon all.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the most benevolent personality in human society
because His only desire is to make people happy. His sankirtana movement is
especially meant for the purpose of making people happy. He wanted to become
the tree Himself because a tree is supposed to be the most benevolent living entity.
In the following verse, which is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.22.33), Krsna Himself
highly praised the existence of a tree.
TEXT 46
অহো এবাং ৰরং জন্ম AE १ न्तौ विनम्‌ |
JUATIT CNM বৈ বিমুখা बाख নাখিনঃ ॥ ৪৬ ॥
aho 658/7 vararn janma sarva-prany-upajivinam
sujanasyeva yesari vai vimukha yanti narthinah


--- Page 245 ---
244 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS

aho—oh, just see; esam—of these trees; varam—superior; janma—birth; sarva—all;
prani—living entities; wpajivindgm—one who provides maintenance; sujanasya iva—
like the great personalities; yesam—from whose; vai—certainly; vimukhah—disap-
pointed; yanti—goes away; na—never; arthinah—one who is asking for something.

TRANSLATION

“‘Just see how these trees are maintaining every living entity! Their birth is
successful. Their behavior is just like that of great personalities, for anyone who
asks anything from a tree never goes away disappointed.’

PURPORT

According to Vedic civilization, ksatriyas are considered to be great personalities
because if anyone goes to a ksatriya king to ask for charity, the king will never
refuse. The trees are compared to those noble ksatriyas because everyone derives
all kinds of benefits from them—some people take fruit, others take flowers, others
take leaves, others take twigs, and others even cut the tree, and yet the tree gives to
everyone without hesitation.

Unnecessarily cutting trees without consideration is another example of human
debauchery. The paper industry cuts many hundreds and thousands of trees for its
mills, and with the paper so much rubbish literature is published for the whimsical
satisfaction of human society. Unfortunately, although these industrialists are now
happy in this life by dint of their industrial development, they do not know that
they will incur the responsibility for killing these living entities who are in the forms
of trees. ,

This verse, quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam, was spoken by Lord Krsna to His
friends when He was taking rest underneath a tree after His pastime of stealing the
clothes of the 40/75 (vastra-harana-Iila). By quoting this verse, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
teaches us that we should be tolerant like trees and also beneficial like trees, which
give everything to the needy persons who come underneath them. A needy person
may derive many advantages from trees and also from many animals, but in modern
civilization people have become so ungrateful that they exploit the trees and
animals and kilt them. These are some of the sinful activities of modern civilization.

TEXT 47
এই আজ্ঞা! কৈল যদ্বি চৈতন্য-মালাকার |
পরম আনন্দ পাইল বৃক্ণ-পরিবার ॥ ৪৭ ॥
ei 0/7 kaila yadi caitanya-malakara
parama ananda paila vrksa-parivara


--- Page 246 ---
Adi-IT1a, Chapter 9 245
SYNONYMS
ei—this; ajia—order; kaila—gave; yadi— when; caitanya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
malakara—as a gardener; parama—the greatest; ananda—pleasure; paila—got; vrksa—
of the tree; parivara—descendants.
TRANSLATION
The descendants of the tree [the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu] were
very glad to receive this order directly from the Lord.
PURPORT
It is the desire of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that the benevolent activities of
the sankirtana movement which was inaugurated 500 years ago in Navadvipa be
spread all over the world for the benefit of all human beings. Unfortunately, there
are many so-called followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu who are satisfied simply to
construct a temple, make a show of the Deities, collect some funds and utilize
them for eating and sleeping. There is no question of their preaching the cult of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world, but even though they are unable to do
so, if anyone else does it they become envious. This is the condition of the modern
followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The age of Kali is so strong that it affects even
the so-called followers of Lord Caitanya. At least the followers of Caitanya Maha-
prabhu must come out of India to preach His cult all over the world, for this is the
mission of Lord Caitanya. The followers of Lord Caitanya must execute His will
with heart and soul, being more tolerant than the trees and humbler than the straw
in the street.
TEXT 48
যেই WE Sid काम করে প্রেমফল।
JAMIE মত্ত লোক হইল সকল ॥ ৪৮ ॥
yei yahan tahan dana kare prema-phala
phalasvade matta loka ha-ila sakala
SYNONYMS
yei—anyone; yahan—wherever; tahan—anywhere; dana—charity; kare—gives in;
prema-phala—the fruit of love of Godhead; phala—fruit; asvade—by tasting; matta—
intoxicated; loka—people; ha-ila—become; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
The fruit of love of God is so tasteful that wherever a devotee distributes it, those
who relish the fruit, anywhere in the world, immediately become intoxicated.


--- Page 247 ---
246 $r-Caitanya-caritimrta
PURPORT
Here the wonderful fruit of love of Godhead distributed by Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu is described. We have practical experience that anyone who accepts this
fruit and sincerely tastes it immediately becomes mad after it and gives up all his
bad habits, being intoxicated by Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s gift, the Hare Krsna rmaha-
mantra. The statements of Caitanya-caritamrta are so practical that anyone can test
them. As far as we are concerned, we are most confident of the success of the dis-
tribution of the great fruit of love of Godhead through the medium of chanting of
the maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 49
মহা-মাছক প্রেমফল পেট खत्रि' থায়।
মাতিল সকল লোক- হাসে, নাচে, গায় ॥ ৪৯ ॥
maha-madaka prema-phala peta bhari’ khaya
matila sakala loka— hase, nace, gaya
SYNONYMS
maha-madaka—great intoxicant; prema-phala—this fruit of love of God; peta—
belly; bhari’—filling; khaya—let them eat; matila—became mad; sakala loka—all the
people in general; hase—laugh; nace—dance; gaya—chant.
TRANSLATION
The fruit of love of Godhead distributed by Caitanya Mahaprabhu is such a great
intoxicant that anyone who eats it, filling his belly, immediately becomes maddened
by it, and automatically he chants, dances, laughs and enjoys.
TEXT 50
CIE গড়াগড়ি যায়, কেহ ত' TWA |
দেখি আনন্দিত कथ হাসে যালাকার ॥ ৫০ ॥
keha gadagadi yaya, keha ta’ hunkara
dekhi’ anandita hana hase malakara
SYNONYMS
keha—some of them; gadagadi yaya—roll on the floor; keha—some of them; 107
certainly; hunkara—hum very loudly; dekhi’—seeing this; anandita—gladdened;
hana—becoming so; hase—smiles; malakara—the great gardener.


--- Page 248 ---
Adi-hla, Chapter 9 247
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the great gardener, sees that people are chanting,
dancing and laughing and that some of them are rolling on the floor and some are
making loud humming sounds, He smiles with great pleasure.
PURPORT
This attitude of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is very important for persons engaged
in the Hare Krsna movement of Krsna consciousness. In every center of our institu-
tion, ISKCON, we have arranged for a love feast every Sunday,and when we actually
see people come to our center, chant, dance, take prasada, become jubilant and
purchase books, we know that certainly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always present
in such transcendental activities, and He is very pleased and satisfied. Therefore the
members of ISKCON must increase this movement more and more, according to
the principles that we are presently trying to execute. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, thus
being pleased, will smilingly glance upon them, bestowing His favor, and the move-
ment will be successful.
TEXT 51
এই মালাকার খায় এই (यकन |
নিরবধি মত্ত Ive, বিবশ-বিহ্বল ॥ ৫১ ॥
ei malakara khdya ei prema-phala
niravadhi matta rahe, vivasa-vihvala
SYNONYMS
ei—this; maldkara—great gardener; khaya—eats; ei—this; prema-phala—fruit of
love of Godhead; niravadhi—always; matta—maddened; rahe—remains; vivasa—as if
helpless; vihvala—as if bewildered.
TRANSLATION
The great gardener, Lord Caitanya, personally eats this fruit, and as a result He
constantly remains mad, as if helpless and bewildered.
PURPORT
It is the mission of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to act Himself and teach the people.
He says, apani acari’ bhakti karila pracara (Cc. Adi. 4.41). One must first act him-
self and then teach. This is the function of a real teacher. Unless one is able to
understand the philosophy that he speaks, it will not be effective. Therefore one
should not only understand the philosophy of the Caitanya cult but also implement
it practically in one’s life. R
While chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sometimes
fainted and remained unconscious for many hours. He prays in His Siksastaka:


--- Page 249 ---
248 $r-Caitanya-caritimrta
yugayitarin nimesena caksusa pravrsayitam
sunyayitarn jagat sarvarn govinda-virahepa me
“O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, | am considering a moment to be like twelve
years or more. Tears are flowing from My eyes like torrents of rain, and | am feeling
all vacant in the world in Your absence.” (Siksastaka 7) This is the perfectional
stage of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra and eating the fruit of love of Godhead, as
exhibited by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One should not artificially imitate this stage,
but if one is serious and sincerely follows the regulative principles and chants the
Hare Krsna mantra, the time will come when these symptoms will appear. Tears
will fill his eyes, he will be unable to chant distinctly the maha-mantra, and his
heart will throb in ecstasy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that one should not
imitate this, but a devotee should long for the day to come when such symptoms
of trance will automatically appear in his body.
TEXT 52
সর্বলোকে মস্ত কৈল৷ আপম-সমান |
প্রেমে মত্ত লোক বিনা নাহি দেখি আন ॥ ৫২ ॥
sarva-loke matta kaila apana-samana
preme matta loka vina nahi dekhi ana
SYNONYMS
sarva-loke—all people; matta—maddened; kaila—He made; apana—Himself; sam-
ana—like; preme—in love of God; matta—maddened;/oka—people in general; vina—
without; nahi—do not; dekhi—we see; ana—anything else.
TRANSLATION
With His sankirtana movement the Lord made everyone mad like Himself. We do
not find anyone who was not intoxicated by His sankirtana movement.
TEXT 53
যে যে পূর্বে নিন্দ৷ কৈল, বলি' মাতোয়াল।
সেছে৷ ফল খায়, নাচে, বলে-_ ভাল, ভাল ॥ ৫৩ ॥
ye ye 207৮6 ninda kaila, bali’ matoyala
seho phala khaya, nace, bale—bhala bhala
SYNONYMS
ye ye—persons who; purve—before; ninda—blasphemy ; kaila— made; bali’—saying;
matoyala--drunkard; seho—such persons; phala—fruit; khaya—takes; nace—dance;
bale—say; bhala bhala—very good, very good.


--- Page 250 ---
Adi-1ila, Chapter 9 249
TRANSLATION
Persons who had formerly criticized Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, calling Him a
drunkard, also ate the fruit and began to dance, saying, ‘Very good! Very good!”
PURPORT
When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu started the sankirtana movement, even He was
unnecessarily criticized by Mayavadis, atheists and fools. Naturally we are also
criticized by such men. They will always remain and will always criticize anything
that is actually good for human society, but the preachers of the safkirtana move-
ment should not be deterred by such criticism. Our method should be to convert
such fools gradually by asking them to come and take prasada and chant and dance
with us. This should be our policy. Anyone who comes to join us, of course, must
be sincere and serious regarding spiritual advancement in life; then such a person,
simply by joining us, chanting with us, dancing with us and taking prasada with us,
will gradually also come to say that this movement is very good. But one who joins
with an ulterior purpose, to get material benefit or personal gratification, will never
be able to grasp the philosophy of this movement.
TEXT 54
এই ত' কহিলু: প্রেমফকল-বিভরণ |
এবে শুন, ফলদাত যে যে শাখাগণ ॥ ৫৪ ॥
ei ta’ kahilun prema-phala-vitarana
ebe Suna, phala-data ye ye sakha-gana
SYNONYMS
ei—this; ta’—however; kahilun—| have explained; prema-phala—the fruit of love
of Godhead; vitarapa—distribution; ebe—now; suna—hear; phala-data—the giver of
the fruit; ye ye—who and who; sakha-gana—branches.
TRANSLATION
After describing the Lord’s distribution of the fruit of love of Godhead, | now
wish to describe the different branches of the tree of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 55
জীরূপ-রখঘুলাধ-পদে যার আশ |
চেতন্যচরিতাম্ৃত কহে কৃষ্ণণাস ॥ ৫৫ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa


--- Page 251 ---
250 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS

$ri-riipa—Srila 1২003 Gosvami; raghundtha—Srila Raghunitha 0353 Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—the
book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspa-dasa—Srila Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami.

TRANSLATION

Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rapa.and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring their
mercy, |, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their footsteps.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-lila,
Ninth Chapter, describing the tree of devotional service.


--- Page 252 ---
47৫
This chapter describes the branches of the tree named Sri Caitanya 43173013017 0.
TEXT 1
জীচৈতজ্তপদান্তোজ-মধুপেন্ড্যে। नटम। ममः |
क्कि प्रात्‌ যেব।ং স্বাপি তদ্গগন্ধন্ভাগ্‌ভবেৎ ॥১॥
Sricaitanya-padambhoja-madhupebhyo namo namah
(९1/40 ८/4 asrayad yesari svapi tad-gandha-bhag bhavet
SYNONYMS

$ri-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; padambhoja—the lotus feet; madhu—
honey; pebhyah—unto those who drink; namah—respectful obeisances; namah—
respectful obeisances; katharicit—a little of it; asrayat—taking shelter of; yesam—of
whom; $va—dog; api—also; tat-gandha—the aroma of the lotus flower; bhak—share-
holder; bhavet—may become.

TRANSLATION

Let me repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances unto the beelike devotees who
always taste the honey of the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. If even a
doggish nondevotee somehow takes shelter of such devotees, he enjoys the aroma
of the lotus flower.

PURPORT

The example of a dog is very significant in this connection. A dog naturally does
not become a devotee at any time, but still it is sometimes found that a dog of a
devotee gradually becomes a devotee also. We have actually seen that a dog has no
respect even for the tw/asi plant. Indeed, a dog is especially inclined to pass urine
on the tulasi plant. Therefore the dog is the number one nondevotee. But Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s sarikirtana movement-is so strong that even a doglike
nondevotee can gradually become a devotee by the association of a devotee of
Lord Caitanya. Srila Sivananda Sena, a great householder devotee of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, attracted a dog on the street while going to Jagannatha Puri. The dog

251


--- Page 253 ---
252 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
began to follow him and ultimately went to see Caitanya Mahaprabhu and was
liberated. Similarly, cats and dogs in the household of Srivasa Thakura were also
liberated. Cats and dogs and other animals are not expected to become devotees,
but in the association of a pure devotee they are also delivered.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় ল্রীকৃষ্চৈতন্য-নিত্যানন্দ।
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্জ্ঞ জয় গৌরভ্তব্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya-nityananda
Jjayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; sri-krspa-caitanya—to Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
nityananda—Lord Nityananda; jaya advaitacandra—all glories to Advaita Prabhu;
Jjaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Lord Caitanya, headed by
Srivasa.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Nityananda! All glories to
Advaita Prabhu and all glories to the devotees of Lord Caitanya, headed by Srivasa!
TEXT 3
এই FT - এই বৃক্ষের অকথ্য कथन |
এবে শুন মুখ্যশাখার নাম-বিবরণ ॥ ৩ ॥
ei. malira—ei vrksera akathya kathana
ebe Suna mukhya-sakhara nama-vivarana
SYNONYMS
ei malira—of this gardener; ei vrksera—of this tree; akathya kathana—inconceiv-
able description; ebe—now; suna—hear; mukhya—chief; sakhara—branches; nama—
of the names; vivarapa—description.
TRANSLATION
The description of Lord Caitanya as the gardener and the tree is inconceivable.
Now hear with attention about the branches of this tree.
TEXT 4
চৈতন্য-গোসাঞ্ঞির যত পারিষদচয়।
শুরু-লঘু-ভাব তার না হয় নিশ্চয় ॥ ৪ ॥


--- Page 254 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 10 253
caitanya-gosanira yata parisada-caya
guru-laghu-bhava tanra na haya niscaya
SYNONYMS
caitanya—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gosariira—of the supreme spiritual master;
yata—all; parisada-caya—groups of associates; guru-laghu-bhava—conceptions of high
and low; tarira—of them; na—never; haya—become; niscaya—ascertained.
TRANSLATION
The associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu were many, but none of them should
be considered lower or higher. This cannot be ascertained.
TEXT 5
যত যত AEG LIN] SHRM গণন।
(क করিবারে নারে (का-नपू-म ॥ 0 ॥
yata yata mahanta kaila tari-sabara gapana
keha karibare nare jyestha-laghu-krama
SYNONYMS
yata yata—as many as there are; mahanta—great devotees; kaila—made; tan-
sabara—of all of them; ganana—counting; keha—all of them; karibare nare—cannot
do; jyestha—elder; laghu—younger; krama—chronology.
TRANSLATION
All the great personalities in the line of Lord Caitanya enumerated these
devotees, but they could not distinguish between the greater and the lesser.
TEXT 6
অতএব তা-সবারে করি” TAWA |
ন৷ম-মাত্্র করি, দোষ না লবে আমার ॥ ৬॥
ataeva tan-sabare kari’ namaskara
nama-matra kari, dosa na labe amara
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; tar-sabare—to all of them; kari’—doing; namaskara—offer my
obeisances; nama-matra—that is also a token; kari—| do; dosa—fault; na—ido not;
labe—take; amara—of me.


--- Page 255 ---
254 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances unto them as a token of respect. | request them not to con-
sider my offenses.
TEXT 7
বন্দে জীকক্চৈতল্য-প্রেমাষরতরোঃ Ferme ৷
শাখারূপাল্‌ ভক্তগণাল্‌ কৃষ্ণপ্রেষকলপ্রদান্‌ ॥ १॥
vande Srikrsnacaitanya-premamarataroh priyan
Sakha-rupan bhakta-ganan Rrspa-prema-phala-pradan
SYNONYMS
vande—| offer my obeisances; srrkrsna-caitanya—to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
prema-amara-taroh—of the eternal tree full of love of Godhead; priyan—those who
are devotees; sakha-ripan—represented as branches; bhakta-ganan—all the devotees;
krsna-prema—of love of Krsna; phala—of the fruit; pradan—the givers.
TRANSLATION
| offer my obeisances to all the dear devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
eternal tree of love of Godhead. | offer my respects to all the branches of the tree,
the devotees of the Lord who distribute the fruit of love of Krsna.
PURPORT
Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami sets the example of offering obeisances to all the
preacher devotees of Lord Caitanya, without distinction as to higher and lower. Un-
fortunately, at present there are many foolish so-called devotees of Lord Caitanya
who make such distinctions. For example, the title “Prabhupada” is offered to a
spiritual master, especially to a distinguished spiritual master such as Srila ‘Rapa
Gosvami Prabhupada, Srila Jivai Gosvami Prabhupada or Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami Prabhupada. When our disciples similarly wanted to address their
spiritual master as Prabhupada, some foolish people became envious. Not consider-
ing the propaganda work of the Hare Krsna movement, simply because these.
disciples addressed their spiritual master as Prabhupada they became so envious that
they formed a faction along with other such envious persons just to minimize the
value of the Krsna consciousness movement. To chastise such fools, ।< {572५253
Kaviraja Gosvami very frankly says, keha karibare nare jyestha-laghu-krama. Any-
one who is a bona fide preacher of the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu must be
respectful to the real devotees of Lord Caitanya; one should not be envious, con-
sidering one preacher to be very great and another to be very lowly. This is a
material distinction and has no place on the platform of spiritual activities.
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami therefore offers equal respect to all the preachers of
the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who are compared to the branches of the tree.
ISKCON is one of these branches, and it should therefore be respected by all sin-
cere devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 256 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 255
TEXT 8
Kat পণ্ডিত, আর Bara sifes |
দুই ভাই _ দুই শাখা, জ্গতে विभि ॥ ৮ ॥
$/1৮050 pandita, ara $/140/770 pandita
dui bhai—dui $akha, jagate vidita
SYNONYMS
Srivasa papdita—of the name Srivasa Pandita; ara—and; $ri-rama papdita—of the
name Sri Rama Pandita; dui bhai—two brothers; dui sakha—two branches; jagate—
in the world; vidita—well known.
TRANSLATION
The two brothers Srivasa Pandita and Sri Rama Pandita started two branches that
are well known in the world.
PURPORT
In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 90, Srivasa Pandita is described to be an
incarnation of Narada Muni, and Sri Rama Pandita, his younger brother, is said to
be an incarnation of Parvata Muni, a great friend of ६३120215. Srivasa Pandita’s wife,
Malini, is celebrated as an incarnation of the nurse Ambika, who fed Lord Krsna
with her breast milk, and as already noted, his niece Narayani, the mother of
Thakura Vyndavana dasa, the author of Caitanya-bhagavata, was the sister of
Ambika in ‘ksspa-fila. We also understand from the description of Caitanya-
bhagavata that after Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s acceptance of the sannyasa order,
Srivasa Pandita left Navadvipa, possibly because of feelings of separation, and
domiciled at Kumarahatta.
TEXT9
नरि, छनिरि- তার তুই সহোদর।
চারি ভাইর ছাস-দাসী, গৃহ-পরিকর ॥ > ॥
Sripati, Srinidhi—tanra dui sahodara
cari bhaira dasa-dasi, grha-parikara
SYNONYMS
Sripati—of the name Sripati; Srinidhi—of the name Srinidhi; tanra—their; dui—
two; sahodara—own brothers; cari—four; bhaira—brothers; dasa-dasi—family mem-
bers, manservants and maidservants; grha-parikara—all counted in one family.
TRANSLATION
Their two brothers were named Sripati and Srinidhi. These four brothers and
their servants and maidservants are considered one big branch.


--- Page 257 ---
256 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 10
তুই শাখার উপশাখায় তঁ-সবার भगेन |
सौत्र গৃহে মহাপ্রভুর স্ব সংকীর্তম ॥ ১০ ॥
dui sakhara upasakhaya tan-sabara gapana
yanra grhe mahaprabhura sada sankirtana
SYNONYMS
dui $akhara—of the two branches; upasakhaya—on the sub-branches; tan-sabara—
of all of them; gapana—counting; yanra grhe—in whose house; mahaprabhura—of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sada—always; safkirtana—congregational chanting.
TRANSLATION
There is no counting the sub-branches of these two branches. Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu held congregational chanting daily at the house of Srivasa Pandita.
TEXT 11
চারি ভাই সবংশে করে চৈতম্যের CAA |
গৌরচন্দ্র বিনা নাছি জানে দেবী-দেবা ॥ ১১ ॥
cari bhai sa-varnse kare caitanyera 56৮0
gauracandra vina nahi jane devi-deva
SYNONYMS
cari bhai—four brothers; sa-varnse— with all family members; kare—do;caitanyera—
of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; seva—service; gauracandra—Gaurasundara (Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu); vina—except; nahi jane—they do not know; devi—goddess;
deva--or god.
TRANSLATION
These four brothers and their family members fully engaged in the service of
Lord Caitanya. They knew no other god or goddess.
PURPORT
Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has said, anya-devasraya nai, tomare kahinu bhai,
ei bhakti parama-karapa:;if one wants to become a pure, staunch devotee, one
should not take shelter of any of the demigods or goddesses. Foolish Mayavadis
say that worshiping demigods is as good as worshiping the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but that is not a fact. This philosophy misleads people to atheism. One


--- Page 258 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 257
who has no idea what God actually is thinks that any form he imagines or any rascal
he accepts can be God. This acceptance of cheap gods or incarnations of God is
actually atheism. It is to be concluded, therefore, that those who worship demigods
or self-proclaimed incarnations of God are all atheists. They have lost their knowl-
edge, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita. Kamais tais tair hrta-jfianah prapadyante 'nya-
devatah: “Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods.” (Bg. 7.20) Unfortunately, those who do not cultivate Krsna conscious-
ness and do not properly understand the Vedic knowledge accept any rascal to be
an incarnation of God, and they are of the opinion that one can become an incar-
nation simply by worshiping ademigod. This philosophical hodge-podge exists under
the name of the Hindu religion, but the Krsna consciousness movement does not
approve of it. Indeed, we strongly condemn it. Such worship of demigods and so-
called incarnations of God should never be confused with the pure Krsna conscious-
ness movement.

TEXT 12
“আচার্যরত্ব' নাম ধরে IG अक শাখা।
তার পরিকর, তার শাখা-উপশাখা ॥ ১২ ॥
‘acaryaratna’ nama dhare bada eka sakha
tanra parikara, tanra sakha-upasakha
SYNONYMS
acaryaratna—of the name Acaryaratna; nama—name; dhare—he accepts; bada—
big; eka—one; sakha—branch; tanra—his; parikara—associates; tanra—his; sakha—
branch; upasakha—sub-branches.
TRANSLATION
Another big branch was Acaryaratna, and his associates were sub-branches.
TEXT 13
আচার্যরত্বের নাম “প্রীচন্দ্রশেখর”।
যার ঘরে দেবী-ভাবে নাচিলা ঈশ্বর ॥ ১৩ ॥
acaryaratnera nama ‘Sri-candrasekhara’—
yanra ghare devi-bhave nacila iSvara
SYNONYMS
acaryaratnera—of Acaryaratna; nama—name; Sri-candrasekhara—of the name Sri
Candrasekhara; yanra—of whom; ghare—in the home; devi-bhave—as the goddess;
nacila—danced; iSvara—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 259 ---
258. Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION

Acaryaratna was also named Sri Candrasekhara Acarya. In a drama in his house,

Lord Caitanya played the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT

Dramatic performances were also enacted during the presence of $ri Caitanya
Mah@prabhu, but the players who took part in such dramas were all pure devotees;
no outsiders were allowed. The members of ISKCON should follow this example.
Whenever they stage dramatic performances about the lives of Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu or Lord Krsna, the players must be pure devotees. Professional players and
dramatic actors have no sense of devotional service, and therefore although they
can perform very artistically, there is no life in such performances. Srila Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura used to refer to such an actor as yatra-dale narada,.
which means “farcical Narada.” Sometimes an actor in a drama plays the part of
Narada Muni, although in his private life he is not at all like Narada Muni because
he is not a devotee. Such actors are not needed in dramatic performances about the
lives of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Krsna. ,

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to perform dramas with Advaita Prabhu, 911५252
Thakura and other devotees in the house of Candrasekhara. The place where Candra-
sekhara’s house was situated is now known as Vrajapattana. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura established a branch of his Sri Caitanya Matha at this place. When
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu decided to accept the renounced order of life, Candra-
sekhara Acarya was informed of this by Sri Nityananda Prabhu, and therefore he
was also present when Lord Caitanya accepted sannyasa from Kesava Bharati in
Katwa. It is he who first spread word in Navadvipa of Lord Caitanya’s accepting
sannyasa. Sri Candrasekhara Acarya was present during many important incidents
in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He therefore forms the second
branch of the tree of Lord Caitanya.

TEXT 14
পুণ্ডরীক বিভানিথি_ বড়শাখা जानि |
যার নাম नैश প্রভু wif আপনি ॥ ১৪ ॥
pundarika ৮/০%0/77/00/---800-$01000 jani
yanra nama lana prabhu kandila apani
SYNONYMS

pundarika vidyanidhi—of the name Pundarika Vidyanidhi; bada-Sakha—another
big branch; jani—| know; yanra nama—whose name; lana—taking; prabhu—the
Lord; kandila—cried; apani—Himself.


--- Page 260 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 259
TRANSLATION

Pundarika Vidyanidhi, the third big branch, was so dear to Lord Caitanya Maha-

prabhu that in his absence Lord Caitanya Himself would sometimes cry.
PURPORT

In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika Srila Pundarika Vidyanidhi is described to be the
father of Srimati Radharani in `९(${00-/110. Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore treated
him as His father. Pundarika Vidyanidhi’s father was known as Banesvara or,accord-
ing to another opinion, Suklambara Brahmacari, and his mother’s name was
Gangadevi. According to one opinion, Banesvara was a descendent of Sri Sivarama
Gangopadhyaya. The original home of Pundarika Vidyanidhi was in East Bengal in
a village near Dacca named Baghiya which belonged to the Varendra group of
brahmana families. Sometimes these Varendra brahmapas were at odds with another
group known as Radhiya brahmanas, and therefore Pungdarika Vidyanidhi’s family
was ostracized and at that time was not living as a respectable family. Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati informs us that one of the members of this family is living in Vrndavana
and is named Sarojananda Gosvami. One special characteristic of this family is that
each of its members had only one son or no son at all, and therefore the family was
not very expansive. There is a place in the district of Cattagrama in East Bengal that
is known as Hatahajari, and a short distance from this place is a village known as
Mekhala-grama in which Pundarika Vidyanidhi’s forefathers lived. One can
approach Mekhala-grama from Cattagrama either on horseback, by bullock cart or
by steamer. The steamer station is known as Annapirnara-ghata. The birthplace of
Pundarika Vidyanidhi is about two miles southwest of Annapirpara-ghata. The
temple constructed there by Pundarika Vidyanidhi is now very old and much in
need of repair. Without repair, the temple may soon crumble. There are two in-
scriptions on the bricks of that temple, but they are so old that one cannot
read them. There is another temple, however, about 200 yards south of this one,
and some people say that this is the old temple constructed by Pundarika
Vidyanidhi.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called Pundarika Vidyanidhi “father,” and He gave him
the title Premanidhi. Pungdarika Vidyanidhi later became the spiritual master of
Gadadhara Pandita and an intimate friend of 5%31003 Damodara. Gadadhara Pandita
at first misunderstood Pundarika Vidyanidhi to be an ordinary pounds and shillings
man, but later, upon being corrected by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he became lhis
disciple. Another incident in the life of Pundarika Vidyanidhi involves his criticizing
the priest of the Jagannatha temple, for which Jagannatha Prabhu chastised him
personally [by slapping his cheeks. This is described in Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-
fila, Chapter Seven. Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura informs us that there
are still two living descendants of the family of Pundarika Vidyanidhi, who
are named Sri Harakumara Smrtitirtha and Sri Krsnakirikara Vidyalarikara.
For further information one should refer to the dictionary known as Vaispava-
manjusa.


--- Page 261 ---
260 $r-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 15
বড় गोष, -গদাধর পণ্ডিত-গোসাঞ্জিঃ |
তেঁহো লক্ষ্মীরূপা, त्र সম কেহ নাই ॥ ১৫ ॥
8000 sakha,—gadadhara pandita-gosani
tenho laksmi-rapa, tanra sama keha nai
SYNONYMS
bada sakha—big branch; gadadhara pandita-gosani—the descendants or disciplic
succession of Gadadhara Pandita; 160/0- 0০303017313 Pandita; laksmi-ripa—incarna-
tion of the pleasure potency of Lord Krsna; tafnra—his; sama—equal; keha— anyone;
nai—there is none.
TRANSLATION
Gadadhara Pandita, the fourth branch, is described as an incarnation of the
pleasure potency of Sri Krsna. No one, therefore, can equal him.
PURPORT
In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verses 147 through 153, it is stated: “The pleasure
potency of Sri Krsna formerly known as Vrndavanesvari is now personified in the
form of Sri Gadadhara Pandita in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sri
Svariipa Damodara Gosvami has pointed out that in the shape of Laksmi, the pleasure
potency of Krsna, she was formerly very dear to the Lord as Syamasundara-vallabha.
The same Syamasundara-vallabha is now present as Gadadhara Pandita. Formerly,
as Lalita-sakhi, she was always devoted to Srimati Radharani. In the Twelfth
Chapter of this part of Caitanya-caritamrta there is a description of the descendants
or disciplic succession of Gadadhara Pandita.
TEXT 16
তার गिङ-छनेमिंक,- Sta উপশাখা।
এইমত जव শাখা-উপশাখার লেখা ॥ ১৬ ॥
tanra Sisya-upasisya,—tanra upasakha
eimata saba $akhd-upasakhara lekha
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; Sisya—disciples; wupasisya—grand-disciples and admirers; tdnra—his;
upasakha—sub-branches; eimata—in this way; saba—all; Sadkha—branches; upasakhara
—sub-branches; /ekhd—to describe by writing.


--- Page 262 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 261
TRANSLATION
His disciples and grand-disciples are his sub-branches. To describe them all would
be difficult.
TEXT 17
বক্রেম্বর পণ্ডিত een বড় প্রিয় ভৃত্য ৷
এক-ভাবে চবিবশ প্রহর যার নৃত্য ॥ ১৭ ॥
vakresvara /£2000/10---0/08/70/0 8000 priya bhrtya
eka-bhave cabbisa prahara yanra nrtya
SYNONYMS
vakresvara pandita—of the name Vakresvara Pandita; prabhura—of the Lord;
bada—very much; priya—dear; bhrtya—servant; eka-bhave—continuously in the
same ecstasy; cabbisa—twenty-four; prahara—a duration of time comprising three
hours; yanra—whose; nrtya—dancing.
TRANSLATION
Vakresvara Pandita, the fifth branch of the tree, was a very dear servant of Lord
Caitanya’s. He could dance with constant ecstasy for seventy-two hours.
PURPORT
In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 71, it is stated that Vakresvara Pandita was
an incarnation of Aniruddha, one of the quadruple expansions of Visnu (Vasudeva,
Sarikarsana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna). He could dance wonderfully for seventy-
two continuous hours. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu played in dramatic per-
formances in the house of Srivasa Pandita, Vakresvara Pandita was one of the chief
dancers, and he danced continually for that length of time. Sri Govinda dasa, an
Oriya devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, has described the life of Vakresvara
Pandita in his book Gaura-Krspodaya. There are many disciples of Vakresvara
Pandita in Orissa, and they are known as Gaudiya Vaisnavas although they are
Oriyas. Among these disciples are Sri Gopalaguru and his disciple Sri Dhyanacandra
Gosvami.
TEXT 18
আপনে মহাপ্রভু গায় যার নৃত্যকালে |
প্রভুর চরণ ধরি' বক্রেশ্বর বলে ॥ ১৮ ॥
apane mahaprabhu gaya yanra nrtya-kale
prabhura carana dhari’ vakresvara bale


--- Page 263 ---
262 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
dpane—personally; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gaya—sang; yanra—
whose; nrtya-kale—at the time of dancing; prabhura—of the Lord; carapa—lotus
feet; dhari’—embracing; vakresvara—Vakresvara Pandita; ba/e—said.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally sang while Vakresvara Pandita danced, and
thus Vakresvara Pandita fell at the lotus feet of the Lord and spoke as follows.
TEXT 19
এদশসহজ গদ্ধর্ব মোরে দেহ” চন্দ্রমুখ |
তারা গায়, মু নাচে -তবে মোর TY ॥ ১৯ ॥
dasa-sahasra gandharva more deha’ candramukha
tara gaya, muni nacoh—tabe mora sukha
SYNONYMS
dasa-sahasra—ten thousand; gandharva—residents of Gandharvaloka; more—unto
me; deha’—please deliver; candramukha—O 17001773060 one; tara gaya—let them sing;
muni nacon—let me dance; tabe—then; mora—my; sukha—happiness.
TRANSLATION
"0 Candramukha! Please give me 10,000 Gandharvas. Let them sing as | dance,
and then | will be greatly happy.”
PURPORT
The Gandharvas, who are residents of Gandharvaloka, are celebrated as celestial
singers. Whenever singing is needed in the celestial planets, the Gandharvas-are
invited to sing. The Gandharvas can sing continuously for days, and therefore
Vakresvara Pandita wanted to dance as they sang.
TEXT 20
প্রভু বলে--তুমি মোর পক্ষ এক শাখা।
আকাশে উড়িতাম ষদি गोड আর পাখা ॥ ২০ ॥
prabhu bale—tumi mora paksa eka sakha
akase uditama yadi pan ara pakha
SYNONYMS
prabhu bale—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; tumi—you; mora—My;
paksa—wing; eka—one; sakha—one-sided; akase—in the sky; wditama—1 could fly;
yadi—if; pan—| could get; ara—another; pakha—wing.


--- Page 264 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 263
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya replied: “1 have only one wing like you, but if | had another,
certainly | would fly in the sky!”
TEXT 21
পণ্ডিত জগদানম্দ প্রভুর প্রাণরূপ।
লোকে খ্যাত ধেঁহে৷ সত্যভামার THA ॥ ২১ ॥
pandita jagadananda prabhura prana-rupa
loke khyata yenho satyabhamara svarupa
SYNONYMS
pandita jagadananda—of the name Pandita Jagadananda; prabhura—of the Lord;
prana-rupa—life and soul; /oke—in the world; khyata—celebrated; yenho—who;
satyabhamara—of Satyabhama; svarupa—personification.
TRANSLATION
Pandita Jagadananda, the sixth branch of the Caitanya tree, was celebrated as the
life and soul of the Lord. He is known to have been an incarnation of Satyabhama
[one of the chief queens of Lord Krsna].
PURPORT
There are many dealings of Jagadananda Pandita with Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Most importantly, he was the [01015 constant companion and
especially took part in all the pastimes of the Lord in the houses of Srivasa Pandita
and Candrasekhara Acarya.
TEXT 22
ओट করিতে চাহে প্রভুর লালন-পালন |
বৈরাগ্য-লোক-ভয়ে প্রভু न মানে কখন ॥ ২২ ॥
pritye karite cahe prabhura lalana-palana
vairagya-loka-bhaye prabhu na mane kakhana
SYNONYMS
pritye—in intimacy or affection; karite—to do; cahe—wanted; prabhura—the
Lord's; lalana-palana—maintenance; vairagya—renouncement; /oka-bhaye—fearing
the public; prabhu—the Lord; na—did not; mane—accept; kakhana—any time.
TRANSLATION
Jagadananda Pandita [as an incarnation of Satyabhama] always wanted to see
to the comfort of Lord Caitanya, but since the Lord was a sannyasi He did not
accept the luxuries that Jagadananda 0204112 offered.


--- Page 265 ---
264 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 23
দুইজনে খট্‌মটি লাগায় কোন্দল |
তার প্রীত্যের কথা আগে কহিব সকল ॥ ২৩ ॥
dui-jane khatmati lagaya kondala
tarira prityera katha age kahiba sakala
SYNONYMS
dui-jane—two persons; khatmati—fighting over trifles; /Jagaya—continued; kondala—
quarrel; tanra—his; prityera—affection; katha—narration; age—ahead; kahiba—| shall
speak; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
They sometimes appeared to fight over trifles, but these quarrels were based on
their affection, of which | shall speak later.
TEXT 24
রাখঘব-পণ্ডিত — প্রভুর জআন্ভ-অনুচর |
তার এক শাখা মুখ্য, मक्न्र्षवज কর ॥ ২৪ ॥
raghava-pandita— prabhura adya-anucara
tanra eka sakha mukhya—makaradhvaja kara
SYNONYMS
raghava pandita—of the name Raghava Pandita; prabhura—of the Lord; adya—
original; anucara—follower; tanra—his; eka—one; sakha—branch; mukhya—chief;
makaradhvaja—of the name Makaradhvaja; kara—surname.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s original follower, is understood
to have been the seventh branch. From him proceeded another sub-branch, headed
by Makaradhvaja Kara.
PURPORT
Kara was the surname of Makaradhvaja. At present this surname is generally
found in the Kayastha community. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 44, states:
dhanistha bhaksya-samagrim krsnayadad vraje 'mitam
saiva sampratarn gauranga-priyo raghava-panditah


--- Page 266 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 265
Raghava Pandita was formerly a confidential gop7 in Vraja during the time of Lord
Krsna’s pastimes, and his former name was Dhanistha. This gopi, Dhanistha, always
engaged in preparing foodstuffs for Krsna.
TEXT 25
তাহার ভগিনী দময়ন্তী প্রভুর প্রিয় कामो |
প্রভুর ভোগসাষঞ্জী বে করে বারমাসি ॥ ২৫ ॥
tanhara bhagini damayanti prabhura priya ০৫57
prabhura bhoga-samagri ye kare vara-masi
SYNONYMS
tanhara—his; bhagini—sister; damayanti—of the name Damayanti; prabhura—of the
Lord; priya—dear; dasi—maidservant; prabhura—of the Lord; bhoga-samagri—cook-
ing materials; ye—who; kare—does; vara-masi—throughout the whole year.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita’s sister Damayanti was the dear maidservant of the Lord. She
always collected various ingredients with which to cook for Lord Caitanya.
PURPORT
In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 167, it is mentioned, gupamala vraje yasid
damayanti tu tat-svasa: “1176 gopi named Gunamala has now appeared as his sister
Damayanti.” On the East Bengal railway line beginning from the Sealdah
station in Calcutta, there is a station named Sodapura which is not very far
from Calcutta. Within one mile of this station, toward the western side of the
Ganges, is a village known as Panihati in which the residential quarters of Raghava
Pandita still exist. On Raghava Pandita’s tomb is a creeper on a concrete platform.
There is also a Madana-mohana Deity in a broken-down temple nearby. This temple
is managed by a local Zamindar of the name Sri Sivacandra Raya (20011111.
Makaradhvaja Kara was also an inhabitant of Panihati.
TEXT 26
সে সব সামগ্রী बड ঝালিতে তভরিয়া।
রাখব লইয়া साम গুপত করিয়া ॥ ২৬ ॥
se saba samagrT yata jhalite bhariya
raghava la-iya ya’'na gupata kariya


--- Page 267 ---
266 ऽन Caita nya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
se saba—all those; samagri—ingredients; yata—all of them; jhalite bhariya—pack-
ing in a bag; raghava—Raghava Pandita; /a-iya—carried; ya’'na—goes; gupata kariya—
very confidentially.
TRANSLATION
The foodstuffs Damayanti cooked for Lord Caitanya when He was at Puri were
carried in a bag by her brother Raghava without the knowledge of others.
TEXT 27
বারমাস তাহা প্রভু করেন खनौ कात्र |
রাঘবের Af বলি' প্রসিদ্ধি योत्र ॥ ২৭ ॥
vara-masa taha prabhu karena angikara
‘raghavera jhali’ bali’ prasiddhi yahara
SYNONYMS
vara-masa—the whole year; taha—all those foodstuffs; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena—did; afgikara—accept; raghavera jhali —the bag of Raghava
Pandita; bali’—so called; prasiddhi—celebrated; yahara—of which.
TRANSLATION
The Lord accepted these foodstuffs throughout the entire year. That bag is still
celebrated as Raghavera jhali [*‘the bag of Raghava Pandita’].
TEXT 28
সে-সব সামগ্রী আগে করিব विष्ड।ब्र ।
যাহার SACS ভক্তের ICT অশ্রধার ॥ ২৮ ॥
se-saba samagri age kariba vistara
yahara Sravane bhaktera vahe asrudhara
SYNONYMS
se-saba—all these things; samagri—ingredients of the foodstuffs; age—further on;
kariba—| shall describe; vistara—vividly; yahara—of which; Sravane—by the hearing;
bhaktera—of a devotee; vahe—flowing; asrudhara—tears.
TRANSLATION
1 shall describe the contents of the bag of Raghava Pandita later in this book.
Hearing this narration, devotees generally cry, and tears glide down from their
eyes.


--- Page 268 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 267
PURPORT
A vivid description of this Raghavera jhali is to be found in Chapter Ten of the
Antya-lila portion of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.
TEXT 29
eign অত্যন্ত প্রিয়_ পণ্ডিত swe
যাহার WAC হয় সর্ববন্ধ-নাশ ॥ ২৯ ॥
prabhura atyanta priya—pandita gangadasa
yanhara smarane haya sarva-bandha-nasa
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; atyanta—very much; priya—dear; pandita gafigadasa—of
the name Pandita Gangadasa; yanhara—who; smarane—by remembering; haya—it
becomes; sarva-bandha-nasa—freedom from all kinds of bondage.
TRANSLATION
Pandita Gangadasa was the eighth dear branch of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One
who remembers his activities attains freedom from all bondage.
TEXT 30
চৈতন্য-পার্ধযদ _ঞ্জীতচার্য পুরন্দর |
S
পিতা করি' যারে বলে গোৌরাঙ্গস্বন্দর ॥ ৩* ॥
caitanya-parsada—s;sri-acarya purandara
pita kari’ yanre bale gauranga-sundara
SYNONYMS
„ caitanya-parsada—associate of Lord Caitanya; Sri-acarya purandara—of the name
Sri Acarya Purandara; pita—father; kari’—taking him; yanre—whom; bale—says;
gauranga-sundara—\Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Sri Acarya 20113170313, the ninth branch, was a constant associate of Lord Caitanya.
The Lord accepted him as His father.
PURPORT
It is described in the Caitanya-bhagavata that whenever Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu visited the house of Raghava Pandita, He also visited Purandara Acarya
immediately upon receiving an invitation. Purandara Acarya is to be considered


--- Page 269 ---
268 Si Caitanya-caritamrta
most fortunate because the Lord used to greet him by addressing him as His father
and embracing him in great love.
TEXT 31
দামোদরপণ্ডিত শাখা প্রেমেতে প্রচণ্ড
প্রভুর উপরে যেঁহে। কৈল ATMA ॥ ৩১ ॥
damodara-pandita sakha premete pracanda
prabhura upare yenho kaila vakya-danda
SYNONYMS
damodara-pangita—of the name Damodara Pandita; sakha—another branch (the
tenth branch); premete—in affection; pracanda—very much advanced; prabhura—
the Lord; upare—upon; yenho—he who; kaila—did; vakya-danga—chastisement by
speaking.
TRANSLATION
Damodara Pandita, the tenth branch of the Caitanya tree, was so elevated in love
of Lord Caitanya that he once unhesitatingly chastised the Lord with strong words.
TEXT 32
দণ্ড-কথা কহিব wget चिन्न afm ।
দণ্ডে তুষ্ট প্রভু তারে ASE নদীয়া ॥ ৩২ ॥
dangda-katha kahiba age vistara kariya
dande tusta prabhu tanre pathaila nadiya
SYNONYMS
danda-katha—the narration of such chastisement; kahiba—| shall speak; age—
ahead; vistara—detailed description; kariya—making; dande—in the matter of chas-
tisement; tusta prabhu—the Lord is very much satisfied; tanre—him; pathaila—sent
back; nadiya—Nadia (a district in Bengal).
TRANSLATION
I shall describe in detail this incident of chastisement later in Caitanya-caritamrta.
The Lord, being very much satisfied by this chastisement, sent Damodara Pandita
10 Navadvipa.
PURPORT
Damodara Pandita, who was formerly known as $aibya in Vrajadhama, used to
carry messages from Lord Caitanya to Sacimata, and during the Rathayatra festival
he carried messages from Sacimata to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 270 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 269
TEXT 33
তাহার অনুজ শাখা শঙ্করপণ্ডিত |
পিভূপাছোপাধান' যার নাম বিদিত ॥ ৩৩ ॥
tanhara anuja sSakha—;sankara-pandita
‘prabhu-padopadhana’ yanra nama vidita
SYNONYMS
tanhara—his (Damodara Pandita’s); anuja—younger brother; sakha—the eleventh
branch; Sankara-pandita—of the name Sankara Pandita; prabhu—the Lord's; pada-
upadhana—shoes; yanra—whose; nama—name; vidita—celebrated.
TRANSLATION
, The eleventh branch, the younger brother of Damodara Pandita, was known as
Sankara Pandita. He was celebrated as the shoes of the Lord.
TEXT 34
সজ্গাশিবপণ্ডিত सौत्र প্রভুপজে আশ ।
প্রথমেই নিত্যানন্দের যার ঘরে বাস ॥ ৩৪ ॥
sadasiva-pandita yanra prabhu-pade asa
prathamei nityanandera yanra ghare vasa
SYNONYMS
sadasiva-pandita—of the name Sadaéiva Pandita; yanra—whose; prabhu-pade—
unto the lotus feet of the Lord; asa—constant desire; prathamei—in the beginning;
nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda; yanra—of whom; ghare—in the home; vasa—
residence.
TRANSLATION
Sadasiva Pandita, the twelfth branch, was always anxious to serve the lotus feet
of the Lord. It was his good fortune that when Lord Nityananda came to
Navadvipa He resided at his house.
PURPORT
It is mentioned in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-Iila, Chapter Nine, that Sadasiva
Pandita was a pure devotee and that Nityananda Prabhu resided at his house.
TEXT 35
জীনুসিংহ-উপাসক — ogra ব্র্মচারী |
প্রভু তার নাম কৈলা FEW করি” ॥ ৩৫ ॥


--- Page 271 ---
270 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
sri-nrsimha-upasaka—pradyumna brahmacari
prabhu tanra nama kaila ‘nrsirnhananda’ kari’
SYNONYMS
sri-nrsimha-upasaka—the worshiper of Lord Nrsimhadeva; pradyumna brahma-
cari—of the name Pradyumna Brahmacari; prabhu—the Lord; tanra—his; nama—
name; kaila—turned into; nrsirmhananda—of the name Nrsimhananda; kari’—by such
a name.
TRANSLATION
The thirteenth branch was Pradyumna Brahmacari. Since he was a worshiper of
Lord Nrsimhadeva, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu changed his name to Nrsimhananda
Brahmacari.
PURPORT
Pradyumna Brahmacarf is described in the Antya-/ila, Second Chapter, of Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta. He was a great devotee of Lord Caitanya, who changed his
name to Nrsimhananda. While coming from the house of Raghava Pandita at
Panihati to the house of Sivananda, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared in the
heart of Nrsimhananda Brahmacari. To acknowledge this, Nrsimhananda Brahmacari
used to accept as eatables the foodstuffs of three Deities, namely, Jagannatha,
Nrsimhadeva and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is stated in the Caitanya-
caritamrta, Antya-Iila, Second Chapter, verses 48 through 78. Upon receiving infor-
mation that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was proceeding toward Vrndavana from
Kulia, Nrsimhananda absorbed himself in meditation and by his mental activities
constructed a very nice road from Kulia to Vrndavana. All of a sudden, however,
he broke his meditation and told the other devotees that this time Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu would not go to Vrndavana but only as far as the place known as
Kanai’s Natasala. This is described in the Madhya-/ila, Chapter One, verses 55
through 62. The Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 74, says, avesas ca tatha jiieyo misre
pradyumna-sarnjiiake: Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu changed the name of Pradyumna
Misra, or Pradyumna Brahmacari, to Nrsimhananda Brahmacari, for in his heart
Lord Nrsimhadeva was manifest. It is said that Lord Nrsimhadeva used to talk with
him directly.
TEXT 36
নারায়ণ-পণ্ডিত এক বড়ই উদার |
চেতন্তচরণ विद्र নাহি জানে আর ॥ ৩৬ ॥
narayana-pandita eka badai udara
caitanya-carana vinu nahi jane ara
SYNONYMS
narayana-pandita—of the name Narayana Pandita; eka—one; badai—very much;
udara—liberal; caitanya-carana—the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya;vinu—except; nahi—
not; jane—know; ara—anything else.


--- Page 272 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 271
TRANSLATION
Narayana Pandita, the fourteenth branch, a great and liberal devotee, did not
know any shelter but Lord Caitanya’s lotus feet.
PURPORT
Narayana Pandita was one of the associates of Srivasa Thakura. It is mentioned
in Caitanya-bhagavata, Ninth Chapter, verse 93, that he went to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri with Srivasa Thakura’s brother Sri Rama Pandita.
TEXT 37
জীমান্পণ্ডিত শাখা _ প্রভুর निज ge; |
দেউটি ধরেন, যবে প্রভু করেন নৃত্য ॥ ৩৭ ॥
sSriman-pandita sakha—prabhura nija bhrtya
deuti dharena, yabe prabhu karena nrtya
SYNONYMS
Sriman-pandita—of the name Sriman Pandita; $akha—branch; prabhura—of the
Lord; nija—own; bhrtya—servant; deuti—torchlight; dharena—carries; yabe—while;
prabhu—Lord Caitanya; karena—does; nrtya—dance.
TRANSLATION
The fifteenth branch was Sriman Pandita, who was a constant servitor of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He used to carry a torch while the Lord danced.
PURPORT
Sriman Pandita was among the companions of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu when
the Lord performed sankirtana. When Lord Caitanya dressed Himself in the form of
the goddess Laksmi and danced in the streets of Navadvipa, Sriman Pandita carried
a torch to light the way.
TEXT 38
শুক্লাজ্বর-ত্রহ্মচারী বড় ভাণ্যবান্‌।
যার खन्न মাগি” কাড়ি' খাইল৷ ভগবাল্‌ ॥ ৩৮ ॥
Suklambara-brahmacari 8000 bhagyavan
yanra anna magi’ kadi’ khaila bhagavan
SYNONYMS
Suklambara-brahmacari—of the name Suklambara Brahmacari; bada—very much;
bhagyavan—fortunate; yanra— whose; anna—foodstuff; magi’—begging; kadi’—snatch-
ing; khaila—ate; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 273 ---
272 SA-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
The sixteenth branch, Suklambara Brahmacari, was very fortunate because Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu jokingly or seriously begged food from him or sometimes
snatched it from him forcibly and ate it.
PURPORT
It is stated that Suklambara Brahmacari, an inhabitant of Navadvipa, was Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s first companion in the sankirtana movement. When Lord
Caitanya returned from Gaya after initiation, He stayed with Suklambara Brahma-
cari because He wanted to hear from this devotee about the pastimes of Lord
Krsna. Suklambara Brahmacari collected alms of rice from the inhabitants of
Navadyvipa, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took pleasure in eating the rice that he
cooked. It is said that Suklambara Brahmacari was one of the wives of the yajiic
brahmanas during the time of Lord Krsna’s pastimes in Vrndavana. Lord Krsna
begged foodstuffs from the wives of the yajiic brahmanpas, and Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu performed a similar pastime by begging rice from Suklambara
Brahmacari.
TEXT 39
নজ্দন-আচার্য-শাখা জগতে विकिड |
कूकादेग्ा তুই প্রভুর যার ঘরে স্থিত ॥ ৩৯ ॥
nandana-acarya-$akha jagate vidita
lukaiya dui prabhura yanra ghare sthita
SYNONYMS
nandana-acarya—of the name Nandana Acarya; $akha—the seventeenth branch;
Jjagate—in the world; vidita—celebrated; /ukaiya—hiding; dui—two; prabhura—of the
Lords; yanra—of whom; ghare—in the house; sthita—situated.
TRANSLATION
Nandana Acirya, the seventeenth branch of the Caitanyatree, is celebrated within
the world because the two Prabhus [Lord Caitanya and Nityananda] sometimes hid
in his house.
PURPORT
Nandana Aciarya was another companion of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu during
His kirtana pastimes in Navadvipa. Srila Nityananda Prabhu, as Avadhita, traveled
on many pilgrimages, and when He first came to Sri Navadvipa-dhama He remained
hidden in the house of Nandana Acarya. It is there that He first met all the devotees
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His maha-
prakasa, He asked Ramai Pandita to call Advaita Prabhu, who was hiding in the


--- Page 274 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 273
home of Nandana Acarya, for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could understand that He
was hiding. Similarly, Lord Caitanya also sometimes hid in the home of Nandana
Acarya. In this connection one may refer to Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-Iila,
Chapters Six and Seventeen.

TEXT 40
জীনুকুন্দ-বত্ত শাখা - প্রভুর সমাধ্যায়ী ৷
যাহার কীর্তনে নাচে চৈতন্ত-স্লোসাঞ্জি ॥ ৪০ ॥
Sri-mukunda-datta Sakha— prabhura samadhyayi
yanhara Rirtane nace caitanya-gosani
SYNONYMS
Sri-mukunda-datta—of the name Sri Mukunda Datta; sakha—another branch;
prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; samadhyayi—class friend; yanhara—
whose; kirtane—in sankirtana; nace— dances; caitanya-gosarii—Sri Caitanya Maha-
{prabhu.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda Datta, a class friend of Lord Caitanya’s, was another branch of the
Caitanya tree. Lord Caitanya danced while he sang.
PURPORT
ऽ Mukunda Datta was born in the Cattagrama district in the village of Chanhora,
which is under the jurisdiction of the police station named Patiya. This village is
situated ten krosas, or about twenty miles,from the home of Pundarika Vidyanidhi.
In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (140) it is said:
vraje sthitau gayakau yau madhukantha-madhuvratau
mukunda-vasudevau tau dattau gauranga-gayakau
“In Vraja there were two very nice singers named Madhukantha and Madhuvrata.
They appeared in caitanya-fild as Mukunda and Vasudeva Datta, who were singers
in the society of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.”” When Lord Caitanya was a student,
Mukunda Datta was His class friend, and they frequently engaged in logical argu-
ments. Sometimes Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu would fight with Mukunda Datta,"
using tricks of logic. This is described in Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-fila, Chapters
Seven and Eight. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned from Gaya, Mukunda
Datta gave Him pleasure by reciting verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam about krsnpa-
710. It was by his endeavor that Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami became a disciple of
Pundarika Vidyanidhi, as stated in Madhya-/ila, Chapter Seven. When Mukunda
Datta sang in the courtyard of Srivasa Prabhu, Mahaprabhu danced with His singing,
and when Lord Caitanya for twenty-one hours exhibited an ecstatic manifestation
known as sata-prahariya, Mukunda Datta inaugurated the function by singing.


--- Page 275 ---
274 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

Sometimes Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu chastised Mukunda Datta by calling him
kharjhatia beta because he attended many functions held by different classes of non-
devotees. This is stated in Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila, Chapter Ten. When
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu dressed Himself as the goddess of fortune to dance in
the house of Candrasekhara, Mukunda Datta began the first song.

Before disclosing His desire to take the renounced order of life, Lord Caitanya
first went to the house of Mukunda Datta, but at that time Mukunda Datta request-
ed Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to continue His safkirtana movement for a few days
more before taking sannyasa. This is stated in Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila,
Chapter Twenty-five. The information of Lord Caitanya’s accepting the renounced
order was made known to Gadadhara Pandita, Candrasekhara Acarya and Mukunda
Datta by Nityananda Prabhu, and therefore all of them went to Katwa and arranged
for kirtana and all the paraphernalia for Lord Caitanya’s acceptance of sannydasa.
After the Lord took sannyasa, they all followed Him, especially Sri Nityananda
Prabhu, Gadadhara Prabhu and Govinda, who followed Him all the way to
Purusottama-ksetra. In this connection one may refer to Antya-/ila, Chapter Two.
In the place known as Jalesvara, Nityananda Prabhu broke the sannyasa rod of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Mukunda Datta was also present at that time. He went every
year from Bengal to see Lord Caitanya at Jagannatha Puri.

TEXT 41
বাস্থদেব দত্ত- প্রভুর ভৃত্য মহাশয় |
সংঅ-মুখে যার গুণ কহিলে না হয় ॥ ৪১॥
vasudeva datta—prabhura bhrtya mahasaya
sahasra-mukhe yanra guna kahile na haya
SYNONYMS

vasudeva datta—of the name Vasudeva Datta; prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhrtya—servant; mahasaya—great personality; sahasra-mukhe—with
thousands of mouths; yanra—whose; guna—qualities; kahile—describing; na—never;
haya—becomes fulfilled.

TRANSLATION

Vasudeva Datta, the nineteenth branch of the Sri Caitanya tree, was a great
personality and a most confidential devotee of the Lord. One could not describe
his qualities even with thousands of mouths.

PURPORT

Vasudeva Datta, the brother of Mukunda Datta, was also a resident of Cattagrama.
In the Caitanya-bhagavata it is said, yanra sthane Rrsna haya apane vikraya: Vasudeva
Datta was such a powerful devotee that Krsna was purchased by him. Vasudeva
Datta stayed at Srivasa Pandita’s house, and in Caitanya-bhagavata it is described


--- Page 276 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 275
that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so pleased with Vasudeva Datta and so affec-
tionate toward him that He used to say, | am only Vasudeva [21125 man. My
body is only meant to please Vasudeva Datta, and he can sell Me anywhere.”
Thrice He vowed that this was a fact and that no one should disbelieve these state-
ments. “All My dear devotees,” He said, “^| tell you the truth. My body is especially
meant for Vasudeva Datta.” Vasudeva Datta initiated Sri Yadunandana Acarya, the
spiritual master of Raghunatha dasa, who later became Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
This will be found in the Antya-/ila, Sixth Chapter, verse 161. Vasudeva Datta spent
money very liberally; therefore Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Sivananda Sen to
become his sarakhela, or secretary, in order to control his extravagant expenses.
Vasudeva Datta was so kind to the living entities that he wanted to take all their
sinful reactions so that they might be delivered by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This
is described in the Fifteenth Chapter of Adi-/ila, verses 159 through 180.

There is a railway station named Purvasthali near the Navadvipa railway station,
and about one mile away, in a village known 25 Mamagachi, which is the birthplace
of Vrndavana dasa Thakura, there is presently a temple of Madana-gopala that was
established by Vasudeva Datta. The Gaudiya Matha devotees have now taken
charge of this temple, and the seva-puja is going on very nicely. Every year all the
pilgrims on the navadvipa-parikrama visit Mamagachi. Since Sri Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura inaugurated the navadvipa-parikrama function, the temple has
been very well managed.

TEXT 42
জগতে যতেক জীব, তার পাপ लयभ |
নরক ভুঞ্জিতে চাহে জীব ছাড়াইয়া ॥ ৪২ ॥
Jagate yateka jiva, tara papa laha
naraka bhunijite cahe jiva chadaiya
SYNONYMS

jagate—in the world; yateka—all; jiva—living entities; tara—their; papa—sinful
activities; /ana—taking; naraka—hell; bhunjite—to suffer; cahe—wanted; jiva—the
living entities; chadaiya—liberating them.

TRANSLATION
Srila Vasudeva Datta Thakura wanted to suffer for the sinful activities of all the
people of the world so that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu might deliver them.
TEXT 43
হুরিদাসঠাকুর শাখার অস্ভু,ত চরিত |
তিন লক্ষ ন।ম (छट লয়েন অপতিত ॥ ৪৩ ॥


--- Page 277 ---
276 $ii-Caitanya-caritimrta
haridasa-thakura sakhara adbhuta carita
tina laksa nama tenho layena apatita
SYNONYMS
haridasa-thakura—of the name Haridasa Thakura; sakhara—of the branch; adbhu-
ta—wonderful; carita—characteristics; tina—three; laksa—hundred thousand; nama—
names; tenho—he; layena—chanted; apatita— without fail.
TRANSLATION
The twentieth branch of the Caitanya tree was Haridasa Thakura. His character
was wonderful. He used to chant the holy name of Krsna 300,000 times a day
without fail.
PURPORT
Certainly the chanting of 300,000 holy names of the Lord is wonderful. No
ordinary person can chant so many names, nor should one artificially imitate
Haridasa Thakura’s behavior. It is essential, however, that everyone fulfill a specific
vow to chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Therefore we have prescribed in our society
that all our students must chant at least sixteen rounds daily. Such chanting must
be offenseless in order to be of high quality. Mechanical chanting is not as powerful
as chanting of the holy name without offenses. Itis stated in the Caitanya-bhagavata,
Adi-lfla, Chapter Two, that Haridasa Thakura was born in a village known as
Budhana but after some time came to live on the bank of the Ganges at Fulia near
Santipura. From the description of his chastisement by a Muslim magistrate, which
is found in the Eleventh Chapter of the Adi-/ila of Caitanya-bhagavata, we can under-
stand how humble and meek Haridasa Thakura was and how he achieved the cause-
less mercy of the Lord. In the dramas performed by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Haridasa Thakura played the part of a police chief. While chanting the Hare Krsna
mahd-mantra in Benapola, he was personally tested by Mayadevi herself. Haridasa
Thakura’s passing away is described in the Antya-lila of Caitanya-caritamrta,
Eleventh Chapter. It is not definitely certain whether Sri Haridasa Thakura appeared
in the village named Budhana that is in the district of Khulana. Formerly this
village was within a district of twenty-four pargapas within the Sataksira division.
TEXT 44
তাঁহার অনন্ত গুণ, - कडि रिज ।
আচার্য গোনাঞ্ি सद्र gun खगो ॥ 8৪ ॥
tanhara ananta gupa—kahi difimatra
dacarya gosani yanre bhunjaya sraddha-patra
SYNONYMS
tanhara—Haridasa Thakura’s; ananta—unlimited; guna—qualities; kahi-| speak;
dinmatra—only a small part; dcarya gosani—Sri Advaita Acarya Prabhu; yarnre—to


--- Page 278 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 277
whom; bhuhjaya—offered to eat; sraddha-patra—prasada offered to Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
There was no end to the transcendental qualities of Haridasa Thakura. Here |
mention but a fraction of his qualities. He was so exalted that Advaita Gosvami,
when performing the sraddha ceremony of his father, offered him the first plate.
TEXT 45
প্রহলাদ-সমান তার গুণের SAW |
ববল-তাড়নেও मत्र নাহিক Few ॥ 8८ ॥
prahlada-samana tafnra gunera taranga
yavana-tadaneo yanra nahika bhra-bhanga
SYNONYMS
prahlada-samana—exactly like Prahlada Maharaja; tanra—his; gunera—qualities;
taranga— waves; yavana—of the Mohammedans; tadaneo—even by the persecution;
yanra—whose; nahika—there was none; bhra-bhafiga—even the slightest agitation of
an eyebrow.
TRANSLATION
The waves of his good qualities were like those of Prahlada Maharaja. He did not
even slightly raise an eyebrow when persecuted by the Mohammedan ruler.
TEXT 46
তেঁহো সিদ্ধি পাইলে তঁার দেহ न] ८काटन ।
Tom दण्डक थद মহাকুতুহলে ॥ ৪৬ ॥
tenho siddhi paile tanra deha lana kole
nacila caitanya-prabhu maha-kutuhale
SYNONYMS
tenho—he; siddhi—perfection; paile—after achieving; tanra—his; deha—body; lana—
taking; kole—on the lap; nacila—danced; caitanya-prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; maha-kutuhale—in great ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
After the passing away of Haridasa Thakura, the Lord Himself took his body on
His lap, and He danced with it in great ecstasy.


--- Page 279 ---
278 Si Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 47
Sta लोल বর্ণিয়াছেন বৃন্দাবনদাল |
(सवा অবশিষ্ট, আগে করিব প্রকাশ ॥ 8१ ॥
tanra lila varniyachena vrndavana-dasa
yeba avasista, age kariba prakasa
SYNONYMS
tanra—his;  Jila—pastimes;  varpiyachena—described;  vrndavana-dasa—Srila
Vrndavana dasa Thakura; yeba—whatever; avasista—remained undescribed; age—
later in the book; kariba—| shall make; prakasa—manifest.
TRANSLATION
Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura vividly described the pastimes of Haridasa Thakura
in his Caitanya-bhagavata. Whatever has remained undescribed | shall try to explain
later in this book.
TEXT 48
ভার উপশাখা,- যত কুলীনগ্রামী जन |
সভ্যরাজ-আদি তার কৃপার ভাজন ॥ ৪৮ ॥
tanra upasakha— yata kulina-grami jana
satyaraja-adi—tanra krpara bhajana
SYNONYMS
tanra upasakha—his sub-branch; yata—all; kulina-grami jana—the inhabitants of
Kulina-grama; satyaraja—of the name Satyaraja; adi—heading the list; tanra—his;
krpara—of mercy; bhajana—recipient.
TRANSLATION
One sub-branch of Haridasa Thakura consisted of the residents of Kulina-grama.
The most important among them was Satyaraja Khana, or Satyaraja Vasu, who was
a recipient of all the mercy of Haridasa Thakura.
PURPORT
Satyaraja Khana was the son of Gunaraja Khana and father of Ramananda Vasu.
Haridasa Thakura lived for some time during the Caturmasya period in the village
named Kulina-grama, where he chanted the holy name, the Hare Krsna maha-mantra,
and distributed his mercy to the descendants of the Vasu family. Satyaraja Khana
was allotted the service of supplying silk ropes for the Jagannatha Deity during the


--- Page 280 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 279
Rathayatra festival. The answers to his inquiries from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
about the duty of householder devotees are vividly described in the Madhya-/ila,
Chapters Fifteen and Sixteen. The village of Kulina-grama is situated two miles
from the railway station named Jaugrama on the Newcord line from Howrah to
Burdwan. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu very highly praised the people of Kulina-
grama, and He stated that even a dog of Kulina-grama was very dear to Him.
TEXT 49
Sif গুপ্ত শাখা - প্রেমের ভাণ্ডার |
প্রভুর হৃদয় দ্রেবে শুনি দৈত্য যার ॥ ৪৯ ॥
Sri-murari gupta Sakha— premera bhapdara
prabhura hrdaya drave Suni’ dainya yanra
SYNONYMS
$ri-murari gupta—of the name Sri Murari Gupta; $akha—branch; premera—of love
of Godhead; bhandara—store; prabhura—of the Lord; hrdaya—the heart; drave—
melts; Suni’—hearing; dainya—humility; yanra—of whom.
TRANSLATION
Murari Gupta, the twenty-first branch of the tree of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
was a storehouse of love of Godhead. His great humility and meekness melted the
heart of Lord Caitanya.
PURPORT
Sri Murari Gupta wrote a book called Sri Caitanya-carita. He belonged to a vaidya
physician family of Srihatta, the paternal home of Lord Caitanya, and later became
a resident of Navadvipa. He was among the elders of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Lord Caitanya exhibited His Varaha form in the house of Murari Gupta, as described
in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-fila, Third Chapter. When Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu exhibited His mahdprakasa form, He appeared before Murari Gupta as Lord
Ramacandra. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu were sitting
together in the house of Srivasa Thakura, Murari Gupta first offered his respects to
Lord Caitanya and then to Sri Nityananda Prabhu. Nityananda Prabhu, however,
was older than Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and therefore Lord Caitanya remarked that
Murari Gupta had violated social etiquette, for he should have first shown respect
to Nityananda Prabhu and then to Him. In this way, by the grace of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, Murari Gupta was informed about the position of Sri Nityananda
Prabhu, and the next day he offered obeisances first to Lord Nityananda and then
to Lord Caitanya. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave chewed pan or betel nut to Murari
Gupta. Once Murari Gupta offered foodstuffs to Lord Caitanya that were cooked
with excessive ghee, and the next day the Lord became sick and went to Murari
Gupta for treatment. Lord Caitanya accepted some water from the water pot of


--- Page 281 ---
280 $ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Murari Gupta, and thus He was cured. The natural remedy for indigestion is to
drink a little water, and since Murari Gupta was a physician, he gave the Lord some
drinking water and cured Him. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared in the house
of Srivasa Thakura in His Caturbhuja marti, Murari Gupta became His carrier in the
form of Garuda, and in these pastimes of ecstasy the Lord then got up on his back.:
It was the desire of Murari Gupta to leave his body before the disappearance of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but the Lord forbade him to do so. This is described in
Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-iila, Chapter Twenty. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
one day appeared in ecstasy as the Varaha marti, Murari Gupta offered Him
prayers. He was a great devotee of Lord Ramacandra, and his staunch devotion is
vividly described in the Madhya-iila, Fifteenth Chapter, verses 137 through 157.
TEXT 50
প্রতিগ্রহ নাহি করে, না লয় কার वन ।
আত্মবৃত্তি করি' করে TPE ভরণ ॥ ৫০ ॥
pratigraha nahi kare, na laya kara dhana
atma-vrtti kari’ kare kutumba bharapa
SYNONYMS
pratigraha nahi kare—he did not accept charity from anyone; nd—not; /aya—take;
kara—anyone’s; dhana—wealth; atma-vrtti—own profession; kari’'—executing; kare—
maintained; kutumba—family; bharapa—provision.
TRANSLATION
Srila Murari Gupta never accepted charity from friends, nor did he accept money
from anyone. He practiced as a physician and maintained his family with his earnings.
PURPORT
It should be noted that a grhastha (householder) must not make his livelihood by
begging from anyone. Every householder of the higher castes should engage himself
in his own occupational duty as a brahmanpa, ksatriya or vaisya, but he should not
engage in the service of others, for this is the duty of a $adra. One should simply
accept whatever he earns by his own profession. The engagements of a brahmapa
are yajana, ydjana, pathana, pathana, dana and pratigraha. A brahmanpa should be a
worshiper of Visnu, and he should also instruct others how to worship Him. A
ksatriya can become a landholder and earn his livelihood by levying taxes or collect-
ing rent from tenants. A vaisya can accept agriculture or general trade as an occupa-
tional duty. Since Murari Gupta was born in a physician's family (vaidya-varnsa),
he practiced as a physician, and with whatever income he earned he maintained his
family. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, everyone should execute his occupational
duty, and thus he should satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the
perfection of life. This system is called daiva-varpasrama. Murari Gupta was an ideal


--- Page 282 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 281
grhastha, for he was a great devotee of Lord Ramacandra and Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
By practicing as a physician he maintained his family and at the same time satisfied
Lord Caitanya to the best of his ability. This is the ideal of householder life.

TEXT 51
চিকিৎসা করেন যারে হইয়া সদয় ।
দেহরোগ ভবরোগ,- দুই তার ক্ষয় ॥৫১॥
cikitsa karena ydre ha-iya sadaya
deha-roga bhava-roga,—dui tara ksaya
SYNONYMS
cikitsa—medical treatment; karena—did; yare—upon whom; ha-iya—becoming;
sadaya—merciful; deha-roga—the disease of the body; bhava-roga—the disease of
material existence; dui—both; tdra— his; ksaya—diminished.
TRANSLATION
As Murari Gupta treated his patients, by his mercy both their bodily and spiritual
diseases subsided.
PURPORT
Murari Gupta could treat both bodily and spiritual disease because he was a
physician by profession and a great devotee of the Lord in terms of spiritual advance-
ment. This is an example of service to humanity. Everyone should know that there
are two kinds of diseases in human society. One disease, which is called adhyat-
mika, or material disease, pertains to the body, but the main disease is spiritual. The
living entity is eternal, but somehow or other, when in contact with the material
energy, he is subjected to the repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. The
physicians of the modern day should learn from Murari Gupta. Although modern
philanthropic physicians open gigantic hospitals, there are no hospitals to cure the
material disease of the spirit soul. The Krsna consciousness movement has taken up
the mission of curing this disease, but people are not very appreciative because they
do not know what this disease is. A diseased person needs both proper medicine and
a proper diet, and therefore the Krsna consciousness movement supplies materially
stricken people with the medicine of the chanting of the holy name, or the Hare
Krsna mahd-mantra, and the diet of prasada. There are many hospitals and medical
clinics to cure bodily diseases, but there are no such hospitals to cure the material
disease of the spirit soul. The centers of the Krsna consciousness movement are the
only established hospitals that can cure man of birth, death, old age and disease.
TEXT 52
माम्‌ সেন প্রভুর সেবক প্রধান।
চৈতল্ত-চরণ fag নাছি জানে আল ॥ ৫২ ॥


--- Page 283 ---
282 Sr-Caitanya-caritamrta
$riman sena prabhura sevaka pradhana
caitanya-carapa vinu nahi jane ana
SYNONYMS
$riman sena—of the name Sriman Sena; prabhura—of the Lord; sevaka—servant;
pradhana—chief; caitanya-carapa—the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
vinu—except; nahi—does not; jane—know; Gna—anything else.
TRANSLATION
Sriman Sena, the twenty-second branch of the Caitanya tree, was a very faithful
servant of Lord Caitanya. He knew nothing else but the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
Sriman Sena was one of the inhabitants of Navadvipa and was a constant compan-
ion of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 53
জীগদাধর দাস শাখা সর্বোপরি ।
কাজীগণের মুখে (रंश বোল৷/ইল হরি neon
$ri-gadadhara dasa $akha sarvopari
kaji-gapera mukhe yenha bolaila hari
SYNONYMS
$rigadadhara dasa—of the name Si Gadadhara 0353; $Gkha—another branch;
sarva-upari—above all; kdji-ganpera—of the Kazis (Mohammedan magistrates); mukhe—
in the mouth; yeha—one who; boldila—caused to speak; hari—the holy name of Hari.
TRANSLATION
Sri Gadadhara dasa, the twenty-third branch, was understood to be the topmost,
for he induced all the Mohammedan Kazis to chant the holy name of Lord Hari.
PURPORT
About eight or ten miles from Calcutta on the banks of the Ganges is a village
known as Endiyadaha-grama. Srila Gadadhara dasa was known as an inhabitant
of this village (engiyadaha-vasi gadadhara dasa). The Bhakti-ratnakara, Seventh
Chapter, . informs us that after the disappearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Gadadhara dasa came from Navadvipa to Katwa. Thereafter he came to Efdiyadaha
and resided there. He is stated to be the luster of the body of Srimati Radharani,
just as Srila Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami is an incarnation of Srimati Radharani


--- Page 284 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 10 283
Herself. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is sometimes explained to ibe .radhabhava-dyuti-
savalita, or characterized by the emotions and bodily luster of Srimatt Radharani.
Gadadhara dasa is this dyuti, or luster. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika he is described
to be the expansion potency of Srimati Radharani. He counts among the associates
of both Srila Gaurahari and Nityananda Prabhu; as a devotee of Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu he was one of the associates of Lord Krsna in conjugal love, and as a devotee
of Lord Nityananda he is considered to have been one of the friends of Krsna in
pure devotional service. Even though he was an associate of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu, he was not among the cowherd boys but was situated in the transcendental
mellow of conjugal love. He established a temple of Sri Gaurasundara in Katwa.

In 1434 dakdbda (1534 A.D.) when Lord Nityananda Prabhu was empowered
by Lord Caitanya to preach the sanikirtana movement in Bengal, Sri Gadadhara
dasa was one of Lord Nityananda's chief assistants. He preached the sankirtana
movement by requesting everyone to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.This simple
preaching method of Srila Gadadhara dasa can be followed by anyone and everyone
in any position of society. One must simply be a sincere and serious servant of
Nityananda Prabhu and preach this cult door to door.

When Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was preaching the cult of hari-kirtana, there
was a magistrate who was very much against his sankirtana movement. Following
in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Srila Gadadhara dasa one night
went to the house of the Kazi and requested him to chant the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. The Kazi replied, “All right, | shall chant Hare Krsna tomorrow.” On
hearing this, Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu began to dance, and he said, “Why
tomorrow? You have already chanted the Hare Krsna mantra, so simply continue.”

In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika it is said:

radhda-vibhati-ripa ya candrakantih pura vraje
sa $ri-gauranga-nikate dasa-varnsyo gadadharah
plrpananda vraje yasid baladeva-priyagrant
sapi karya-vasad eva pravisat tarn gadadharam
Srila Gadadhara dasa is considered to be a united form of Candrakanti, who
is the effulgence of Srimati Radharani, and Purpananda, who is an expansion of
Lord Balarama’s very dear girl friend. Thus Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was one of
the associates of both Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu. Once while
Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was returning to Bengal from Jagannatha Puri with
Nityananda Prabhu, he forgot himself and began talking very loudly as if he were a
girl of 13138170171 selling yogurt, and Srila Nityananda Prabhu noted this. Another
time, while absorbed in the ecstasy of the gopis, he carried a jug filled with Ganges
water on his head as if he were selling milk. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu ap-
peared in the house of Raghava Pandita while going to Vrndavana, Gadadhara dasa
went to see Him, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so glad that He put His foot on
his head. When Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was present in Endiyadaha he established a
Balagopala marti for worship there. Sri Madhava Ghosh performed a drama known
as “Dana-khanda” with the help of Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Gadadhara dasa.


--- Page 285 ---
284 ऽन Caitanya-caritamrta
This is explained in Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khapda, Fifth Chapter.

The tomb of Gadadhara dasa Prabhu, which is in the village of Endiyadaha, was
under the control of the Samyogi Vaisnavas and later under the direction of Siddha
Bhagavan dasa Babaji of Kalna. By his order, Sri Madhustadana Mullik, one of the
members of the aristocratic Mullik family of the Narikeladanga in Calcutta, estab-
lished a patavati (monastery) there in the Bengali year 1256. He also arranged for
the worship of a Deity named Sri Radhakanta. His son Balaicanda Mullik, estab-
lished Gaura-Nitai Deities there in the Bengali year 1312. Thus on the throne of the
temple are both Gaura-Nityananda Deities and Radha-Krsna Deities. Below the
throne is a tablet with an inscription written in Sanskrit. In that temple there is
also a small Deity of Lord Siva as Gopesvara. This is all described on a stone by the
side of the entrance door.

TEXT 54
শিবানন্দ সেন-_ প্রভুর ভূত্য অন্তরঙ্গ ৷
প্রভুস্থানে যাইতে সবে লয়েন যার সঙ্গ ॥ ৫৪ ॥
$/৮/70/700 sena—prabhura 8/00[1%0 antaranga
prabhu-sthane ydite sabe layena yarnra 50740
SYNONYMS

$ivananda sena—of the name Sivananda Sena; prabhura—of the Lord; bhrtya—
servant; antarafiga—very confidential; prabhu-sthane—in Jagannatha Puri, where the
Lord was staying; ydite— while going; sabe—all; layena—took; yarnra— whose; sanga—
shelter.

TRANSLATION

Sivananda Sena, the twenty-fourth branch of the tree, was an extremely confi-
dential servant of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Everyone who went to Jagannatha
Puri to visit Lord Caitanya took shelter and guidance from Sri Sivananda Sena.

TEXT 55
প্রতিবর্ধে প্রভুগণ সঙ্গেতে লইয়া |
লীলাচলে চলেন পথে পালন করিয়া ee ॥
prativarse prabhugana sangete la-iya
nilacale calena pathe palana kariya
SYNONYMS

prativarse—every year; prabhu-gana—the devotees of Lord Caitanya; sarigete—
along with; /a-iya—taking; nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; calena—goes; pathe—on the
road; palana—maintenance; kariya— providing.


--- Page 286 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 285
TRANSLATION
Every year he took a party of devotees from Bengal to Jagannatha Puri to visit
Lord Caitanya. He maintained the entire party as they journeyed on the road.
TEXT 56
ভক্তে FoH করেন अद्‌ এ-তিন স্বক্ূপে |
“সাক্ষাৎ”, “আবেশ” আর “আবির্ভাব-রূপে ॥ ৫৬ ॥
bhakte krpa karena prabhu e-tina 5৮০/0£6
‘saksat,’ ‘avesa’ ara ‘avirbhava’—rape
SYNONYMS
bhakte—unto devotees; krpa—mercy; karena—bestows; prabhu—Lord Caitanya;
e—these; tina—three; svaripe—features; saksat—directly; avesa—empowered by the
Lord; 3/৫- 3170; avirbhava—appearance; riipe—in the features.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bestows His causeless mercy upon His devotees in
three features: His own direct appearance [saksat], His prowess within someone He
empowers [३५९६३ | , and His manifestation [avirbhava].
PURPORT
The saksat feature of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is His personal presence. Avesa
refers to invested power, like that invested in Nakula Brahmacari. Avirbhava is a
manifestation of the Lord that appears even though He is personally not present.
For example, Sri Sacimata offered foodstuffs at home to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
although He was far away in Jagannatha Puri, and when she opened her eyes after
offering the foodstuffs she saw that they had actually been eaten by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Similarly, Srivasa Thakura performed sankirtana, and everyone felt
the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu even in His absence. This is another
example of avirbhava.
TEXT 57
সাক্ষাতে” সকল ভক্ত দেখে নিষ্বিশেষ |
ন্‌কুল ব্রহ্মচারি-দেহছে প্রভুর “আবেশ” ॥ ৫৭ ॥
‘saksate’ sakala bhakta dekhe nirvisesa
nakula brahmacari-dehe prabhura ‘avesa’


--- Page 287 ---
286 Si Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
saksate—directly; sakala—all; bhakta—devotees; dekhe—see; nirvisesa—nothing
peculiar but as He is; nakula brahmacari—of the name Nakula Brahmacari; dehe—in
the body; prabhura—the Lord’s; Gvesa—symptoms of power.
TRANSLATION
The appearance of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in every devotee’s presence is
called 5३1८521. His appearance in Nakula Brahmacari as a symptom of special prowess
is an example of avesa.
TEXT 58
‘AFIS TRIN তঁার আগে নাম किनि ।
“মৃলিংহামন্দ” নাম প্রভু পাছে ङ রাখিল ॥ ৫৮ ॥
‘pradyumna 8/0/7/7000/71 tarnra age nama chila
‘ngsirhhdananda’ nama prabhu pdche ta’ rakhila
SYNONYMS
pradyumna brahmacari—of the name Pradyumna Brahmacari; tanra—his; dge—
previously; nama—name; chila—was; ngsirnhananda—of the name Nrsimhananda;
nama— the name; prabhu—the Lord; pache—afterward; ta’—certainly; rakhila—kept it.
TRANSLATION
The former Pradyumna Brahmacari was given the name Nrsimhananda Brahma-
cari by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 59
তাহাতে হইল চেতন্তের “আবির্ভাব”
অলোকিক এছে প্রভুর অনেক স্বভাব ॥ ৫৯ ॥
tanhate ha-ila caitanyera ‘avirbhava’
alaukika aiche prabhura aneka svabhava
SYNONYMS
tanhate—in him; ha-ila—there was; caitanyera—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
avirbhava—appearance; alaukika—uncommon; aiche—like that; prabhura—of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; aneka—various; svabhava—features.
TRANSLATION
In his body there were symptoms of avirbhava. Such appearances are uncommon,
but Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu displayed many such pastimes through His different
features.


--- Page 288 ---
Adi-ITla, Chapter 10 287
PURPORT

In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika (74) it is said that Nakula 81317730311 displayed
the prowess (Gvesa) and Pradyumna Brahmacari the appearance (avirbhava) of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There are many hundreds and thousands of devotees of
Lord Caitanya among whom there are no special symptoms, but when a devotee of
Lord 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu functions with specific prowess, he displays the
feature called avesa. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally spread the sarikirtana
movement, and He advised all the inhabitants of Bharata-varsa to take up His cult
and preach it all over the world. The visible bodily symptoms of devotees who
follow such instructions are called dvesa. Srila Sivananda Sena observed such 2/९
symptoms in Nakula Brahmacari, who displayed symptoms exactly like those of Sri’
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Caitanya-caritamrta states that in this age of Kali the
only spiritual function is to broadcast the holy name of the Lord, but this function
can be performed only by one who is actually empowered by Lord Krsna. The
process by which a devotee is thus empowered is called dvesa, or sometimes it is
called saktyavesa.

Pradyumna Brahmacari was formerly a resident of a village known as Piyarigafija
in Kalna. There is 2 description of him in the Antya-lila of Caitanya-caritamyta,
Second Chapter, and in the Antya-lila of Caitanya-bhagavata, Chapters Three and
Nine.

TEXT 60
আস্বাদিল এ সব রস সেন শিবানন্দ।
বিস্তারি” কহিষ আগে এসব खोनन्त ॥ ৬০ ॥
asvadila € saba rasa sena Sivananda
vistari’ kahiba age esaba ananda
SYNONYMS

asvadila—tasted; e—these; saba—all; rasa—mellows; sena sSivananda—Sivananda
Sena; vistari’—describing vividly; kahiba—1 shall speak; age—later on; esaba—all this;
ananda— transcendental bliss.

TRANSLATION

Srila Sivananda Sena experienced the three features saksat, avesa and avirbhava.

Later | shall vividly describe this transcendentally blissful subject.
PURPORT

Srila Sivananda Sena has been described by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Maha-
raja as follows. He was a resident of Kumarahatta, which is also known as Halisahara,
and was a great devotee of the Lord. About one and a half miles from Kumarahatta
is another village, known as Kancadapada, in which there are Gaura-Gopala Deities
installed by Sivananda Sena, who also established a temple of Krsnaraya that is still


--- Page 289 ---
288 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta

existing. Sivananda Sena was the father of Paramananda Sena, who was also known
as Puridasa or Karpapira. Paramananda Sena wrote in his Gaura-gagoddesa-dipika
(176) that two of the 4075 of Vrndavana, whose former names were Vira and
Dati, combined to become his father. Srila Sivananda Sena guided all the devotees
of Lord Caitanya who went from Bengal 10 Jagannatha Puri, and he personally bore
all the expenses for their journey. This is described in the Madhya-fild, Chapter Six-
teen, verses 19 through 26. Srila Sivananda Sena had three sons, named Caitanya
dasa, Ramadasa and Paramananda. This last son later became Kavikarpapara, and
he is the author of Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika. His spiritual master was Srinatha
Pandita, who was Sivananda Sena’s priest. Due to Vasudeva Datta’s lavish spending,
Sivananda Sena was engaged to supervise his expenditures.

Sri Sivananda Sena actually experienced Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's features of
saksat, avesa and avirbhava. He once picked up a dog while on his way to Jagannatha
Puri, and it is described in the Antya-/ila, First Chapter, that this dog later attained
salvation by his association. When Srila Raghunatha dasa, who later became
Raghunitha dasa Gosvami, fled his paternal home to join Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
his father wrote a letter to Sivananda Sena to get information about him. Sivananda
Sena supplied him the details for which he asked, and later Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami’s father sent some servants and money to Sivananda Sena to take care of
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. Once Sri Sivananda Sena invited Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu to his home and fed Him so sumptuously that the Lord felt indigestion and
was somewhat sick. This became known to his son, who gave the Lord some medicine
for His digestion, and thus Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased. This is
described in the Antya-1ila, Tenth Chapter, verses 124 through 151.

Once while going to Jagannatha Puri all the devotees had to stay underneath a
tree, without the shelter of a house or even a shed, and Nityananda Prabhu became
very angry, as if He were greatly disturbed by hunger. Thus He cursed Sivananda’s
sons to die. Sivananda’s wife was very much aggrieved at this, and she began to cry.
She very seriously thought that since her sons had been cursed by Nityananda
Prabhu, certainly they would die. When Sivananda later returned and saw his wife
crying, he said, “Why are you crying? Let us all die if Sri Nityananda Prabhu de-
sires.” When Sivananda Sena returned and Srila Nityananda Prabhu saw him, the
Lord kicked him severely, complaining that He was very hungry, and asked why he
did riot arrange for His food. Such is the behavior of the Lord with His devotees.
Srila Nityananda Prabhu behaved like an ordinary hungry man, as if completely
dependent on the arrangements of Sivananda Sena.

There was a nephew of Sivananda Sena’s named Srikanta who left the company
in protest of Nityananda Prabhu’s curse and went directly to Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu at Jagannatha Puri, where the Lord pacified him. On that occasion, Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu allowed His toe to be sucked by Puridasa, who was then a
child. It is by the order of Caitanya Mahaprabhu that he could immediately com-
pose Sanskrit verses. During the misunderstanding with Sivananda’s family, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered His personal attendant Govinda to give them all the
remnants of His foodstuffs. This is described in the Antya-khanga, Chapter
Twelve, verse 53.


--- Page 290 ---
Adi-I1la, Chapter 10 289
TEXT 61
শিবানন্দের উপশাখা, SH পরিকর।
পুজ- ভৃত্য-মাদি করি' চৈতন্য-কিন্কর ॥ ৬১ ॥
$/৮৭/70/706/0 upasakha, tanra parikara
putra-bhrtya-adi kari’ caitanya-kifnkara
SYNONYMS
Sivanandera—of Sivananda Sena; wupasakha—sub-branch; tanra—his; parikara—
associates; putra—sons; bhrtya—servants; adi—all these; kari’—taking together;
caitanya-kinkara—servants of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The sons, servants and family members of Sivananda Sena constituted a sub-
branch. They were all sincere servants of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 62
WEA, রামদাস, আর কর্ণপুর |
তিন धज শিবানন্দের প্রভুর ভক্তশুর ॥ ৬২ ॥
caitanya-dasa, ramadasa, ara karpapira
tina putra $ivanandera prabhura bhakta-Sara
SYNONYMIS
caitanya-dasa—of the name Caitanya dasa; rarnadasa—of the name Ramadasa;
ara—and; karpapiira—of the name Karnapdra; tina putra—three sons; $ivanandera—of
Sivananda Sena; prabhura—of the Lord; bhakta-sara—of the heroic devotees.
TRANSLATION
The three sons of Sivananda Sena, named Caitanya dasa, Ramadasa and Karna-
pura, were all heroic devotees of Lord Caitanya.
PURPORT
Caitanya dasa, the eldest son of Sivananda Sena, wrote a commentary on Kyspa-
karpamyrta which was later translated by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his paper
Sajjana-tosani. According to expert opinion, Caitanya dasa was the author of the
book Caitanya-carita, which was written in Sanskrit. The author was not Kavikarna-
pura, as generally supposed. This is the opinion of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura. Sri Ramadasa was the second son of Sivananda Sena. It is stated in the
Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika (145) that two experienced servants of Lord Krsna named


--- Page 291 ---
290 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Suka and Daksa in krspa-/ila became the elder brothers of Kavikarnapira, namely,
Caitanya dasa and Ramadasa. Karpapura, the third son, who was also known as
Paramananda dasa or Puridasa, was initiated by Srinatha Pandita, who was a disciple
of Sri Advaita Prabhu. Karpapiira wrote many books that are important in
Vaisnava literature, such as Ananda-vyndavana-campii, Alankdra-kaustubha, Gaura-
gapoddesa-dipikd and the great epic Caitanya-candrodaya-ndtaka. He was born in
the year $akdbda 1448. He continually wrote books for ten years, from 1488 until
1498.
TEXT 63
লরীবল্পভসেন, আর সেন निका |
শিবানন্দ-সন্বন্ধে প্রভুর ভক্ত একান্ত ॥ ৬৩ ॥
$ri-vallabhasena, ara sena Srikanta
$ivananda-sambandhe prabhura bhakta ekanta
SYNONYMS
Sri-vallabha-sena—of the name Srivallabha Sena; ara—and; sena $rikanta—of the
name Srikanta Sena; $ivananda—Sivananda Sena; sambandhe—in relationship;
prabhura—the Lord's; bhakta—devotees; ekanta—unflinching.
TRANSLATION
Srivallabha Sena and Srikanta Sena were also sub-branches of Sivananda Sena,
for they were not only his nephews but also unalloyed devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
When Lord Nityananda Prabhu rebuked Sivananda Sena on the way to Puri, these
two nephews of Sivananda left the company as a protest and went to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri. The Lord could understand the feelings of the boys,
and He asked His personal assistant Govinda to supply them prasada until the
party of Sivananda arrived. During the Rathayatra sarikirtana festival these two
brothers were members of the party led by Mukunda. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-
dipika it is said that the 40/27 whose name was Katyayani appeared 25 Srikanta Sena.
TEXT 64
প্রভুপ্রিয় গোবিন্দানন্দ মহাঙভাগবত |
প্রভুর FEN! wife क्योटो रिन्त দত্ত ॥ ৬৪ ॥
prabhu-priya govindananda mahabhagavata
prabhura Rirtaniya adi $rigovinda datta


--- Page 292 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 291
SYNONYMS
prabhu-priya—the most dear to the Lord; govindananda—of the name
Govindananda; maha-bhagavata—great devotee; prabhura—of the Lord; kirtaniya—
performer of kirtana, adi—originally; $ri-govinda datta—of the name of Sri Govinda
Datta.
TRANSLATION
Govindananda and Govinda Datta, the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth branches
of the tree, were performers of kirtana in the company of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Govinda Datta was the principal singer in Lord Caitanya’s kirtana party.
PURPORT
Govinda Datta appeared in the village of Sukhacara near Khadadaha.
TEXT 65
জীবিজয়দাস-নাম প্রভুর sm |
প্রভুরে অনেক পুথি দিয়।ছে লিখিয়। ॥ ৬৫ ॥
Sri-vijaya-dasa-nama prabhura akhariya-
prabhure aneka purnithi diyache likhiya
SYNONYMS
$ri-vijaya-dasa—of the name Sri Vijaya dasa; nama—name; prabhura—of the
Lord; akhariya—chief singer; prabhure—unto the Lord; aneka—many; purithi—
literatures; diyache—has given; likhiya—by writing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Vijaya dasa, the twenty-seventh branch, another of the Lord’s chief singers,
gave the Lord many books written by hand.
PURPORT
Formerly there were no printing presses nor printed books. All books were hand-
written. Precious books were kept in manuscript form in temples or important
places, and anyone who was interested in a book had to copy it by hand. Vijaya
dasa was a professional writer who copied many manuscripts and gave them to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 66
‘Fyre বলি” প্রভু থুইল Sra नाम ।
অকিঞ্চন প্রভুর প্রিয় কুষ্ণণাস-নাম ॥ ৬৬ ॥


--- Page 293 ---
292 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
‘ratnabahu’ bali’ prabhu thuila tanra nama
akinicana prabhura priya krspadasa-nama
SYNONYMS
ratnabahu—the title Ratnabahu; bali’—calling him; prabhu—the Lord; thuila—
kept; tanra—his; nagma—name; akificana—unalloyed; prabhura—of the Lord; priya—
dear; krspadasa—of the name Krsnadasa; ndma—name.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave Vijaya dasa the name Ratnabahu [“jewel-handed"’]
because he copied for Him many manuscripts. The twenty-eighth branch was
Krsnadasa, who was very dear to the Lord. He was known as Akincana 1৫090030353.
PURPORT
Akificana means ‘one who possesses nothing in this world.”
TEXT 67
খোলা-বেচা শ্লীধর त्र প্রিয়দ।স।
যাহা-সনে প্রভু করে নিত্য পরিহাস ॥ ৬৭ ॥
khola-veca $ridhara prabhura priyadasa
yanha-sane prabhu kare nitya parihasa
SYNONYMS
kholaveca—a person who sells the bark of banana trees; sridhara—Sridhara Prabhu;
prabhura—of the Lord; priya-dasa—very dear servant; yanha-sane—with whom;
prabhu—the Lord; kare—does; nitya—daily; parihdsa—joking.
TRANSLATION
The twenty-ninth branch was Sridhara, a trader in banana tree bark. He was a
very dear servant of the Lord. On many occasions, the Lord played jokes on him.
PURPORT
Sridhara was a poor brahmapa who made a living by selling banana tree bark to
be made into cups. Most probably he had a banana tree garden and collected the
leaves, skin and pulp of the banana trees to sell daily in the market. He spent fifty
percent of his income to worship the Ganges, and the balance he used for his
subsistence. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started His civil disobedience move-
ment in defiance of the Kazi, Sridhara danced in jublilation. The Lord used to drink
water from his water jug. Sridhara presented a squash to Sacidevi to cook before
Lord Caitanya took sannyasa. Every year he went to see Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu


--- Page 294 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 293
at Jagannatha Puri. According to Kavikarnapira, Sridhara was a cowherd boy of
Vrndavana whose name was Kusumasava. In his Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 133,
it is stated:

kholavecataya khyatah papditah $ridharo dvijah
asid vraje hdasya-karo yo namnd kusumdasavah
“The cowherd boy known as Kusumasava in krspa-/ild later became Kholaveca
Sridhara during Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s /ila at Navadvipa.”
TEXT 68
প্রভু যার নিত্য লয় থোড়-মোচা-ফল |
যার ফুটা-লৌহপাত্রে প্রভু निल জল ॥ ৬৮ ॥
prabhu yanra nitya laya thoda-moca-phala
yanra phuta-lauhapatre prabhu pila jala
SYNONYMS
prabhu—the Lord; yanra—whose; nitya—daily; laya—takes; thoda—the pulp of
thebanana tree; mocd—the flowers of the banana tree; phala—the fruits of the banana
tree; ydnra—whose; phuta—broken; lauha-pdtre—in the iron pot; prabhu—the Lord;
pila—drank; jala— water.
TRANSLATION
Every day Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu jokingly snatched fruits, flowers and pulp
from Sridhara and drank from his broken iron pot.
TEXT 69
প্রভুর অতিপ্রিয় দাস ভগব।ন্‌ পণ্ডিত |
যার দেহে কৃষ্ণ পূর্বে হৈল। অধিভিত ॥ ৬৯ ॥
prabhura atipriya dasa bhagavan pandita
ydrira dehe krsna parve haila adhigthita
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; atipriya—very dear; dasa—servant; bhagavan pandita—of
the name Bhagavan Pandita; yarnira—whose; dehe—in the body; krsna—Lord Krsna;
parve—previously; haildi—became; adhisthita—established.

TRANSLATION

The thirtieth branch was Bhagavan Pandita. He was an extremely dear servant of
the Lord, but even previously he was a great devotee of Lord Krsna who always kept
the Lord within his heart.


--- Page 295 ---
294 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 70
জগদীশ পণ্ডিত, আর হিরণ্য Tes |
যারে কৃপ। কৈল বাল্য প্রভু দয়।ময় ॥ ৭০ ॥
Jagadisa papdita, ara hirapnya mahasaya
yare Rrpa kaila balye prabhu dayamaya
SYNONYMS
Jagadisa pandita—of the name | 2६20152 Pandita; ara—and; hiranya—of the name
Hiranya; mahasaya—great personality; yare—unto whom; krpa—mercy; kaila—
showed; balye—in childhood; prabhu—the Lord; dayamaya—merciful.
TRANSLATION
The thirty-first branch was Jagadisa Pandita, and the thirty-second was Hiranya
Mahasaya, unto whom Lord Caitanya in His childhood showed His causeless mercy.
PURPORT
Jagadisa Pandita was formerly a great dancer in krspa-/ila and was known as
Candrahasa. Regarding Hiranya Pandita, it is said that once Lord Nityananda,
decorated with valuable jewels, stayed at his home, and a great thief attempted all
night long to plunder these jewels but was unsuccessful. Later he came to
Nityananda Prabhu and surrendered unto Him.
TEXT 71
এই তুই-ঘরে প্রভু QIN দিনে।
বিষ্ণুর নৈবেত্ত मागि" খাইল আপনে ॥ ৭১॥
ei dui-ghare prabhu ९4047 dine
visnura naivedya magi’ Rhaila Gpane
SYNONYMS
ei dui-ghare—in these two houses; prabhu—the Lord; ekddasi dine—on the .
Ekadasi day; vispura—of Lord Visnu; naivedya—foodstuffs offered to Lord Visnu;
magi'—begging; khaila—ate; Gpane— personally.
TRANSLATION
In their two houses Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu begged foodstuffs on the Ekadasi
day and ate them personally.
PURPORT
The injunction to fast on Ekadasi is especially meant for devotees; on Ekadasi
there are no restrictions regarding foodstuffs that may be offered to the Lord. Lord


--- Page 296 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 295
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took the foodstuffs of Lord Visnu in His ecstasy 25 visnu-
tattva.
TEXT 72
প্রভুর न, एदे, PLANER, AH |
ব্যাকরণে দুই শিষ্য- দুই মহাশয় ॥ ৭২ ॥
prabhura paguya dui,—purusottama, safijaya
vyakarane dui $isya— dui mahasaya
SYNONYMS
prabhura paguya dui—the Lord’s two students; purusottama—of the name
Purusottama; safijaya—of the name Sanjaya; vyakarape—studying grammar; dui
Sisya—two disciples; dui mahasaya—very great personalities.
TRANSLATION
The thirty-third and thirty-fourth branches were the two students of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu named Purusottama and Sanjaya, who were stalwart students in
grammar. They were very great personalities.
PURPORT
These two students were inhabitants of Navadvipa and were the [01015 first
companions in the sankirtana movement. According to (Caitanya-bhagavata,
Purusottama Sanjaya was the son of Mukunda Safjaya, but the author of Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta has clarified that Purusottama and Saiijaya were two people,
not one.
TEXT 73
বলমালী পণ্ডিত শাখা বিখ্যাত জগতে |
সোণার TTA হল দেখিল SpA হাতে ॥ ৭৩ ॥
৮/70/77/7 pandita $akha vikhyata jagate
sondra musala hala dekhila prabhura hate
SYNONYMS
vanamali pangdita—of the name Vanamali Pandita; sGkhd—the next branch;
vikhyata—celebrated; jagate—in the world; sopdra—made of gold; musala—club;
hala—plow; dekhila—saw; prabhura—of the Lord; hate—in the hand.
TRANSLATION
Vanamali Pandita, the thirty-fifth branch of the tree, was very celebrated in this
world. He saw in the hands of the Lord a golden club and plow.


--- Page 297 ---
296 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
PURPORT
Vanamali Pandita saw Lord Caitanya in the ecstasy of Balarama. This is described
vividly in Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-Iila, Chapter Nine.
TEXT 74
জীচৈতন্তের অতি প্রিয় বুদ্ধিমন্ত शाम्‌ ।
আজন্ম আজ্ঞাকারী তেঁহো সেবক-প্রধান ॥ ৭৪ |
sri-caitanyera ati priya buddhimanta khan
ajanma 2/00/€0/7 tenho sevaka-pradhana
SYNONYMS
sri-caitanyera—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ati priya—very dear; buddhi-
manta khan—of the name Buddhimanta Khan; ajanma—from the very beginning of
his life; gjrigkari—follower of the orders; teriho—he;sevaka—servant; pradhana—chief.
TRANSLATION
The thirty-sixth branch, Buddhimanta Khan, was extremely dear to Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He was always prepared to carry out the Lord’s orders, and therefore
he was considered to be a chief servant of the Lord.
PURPORT
Sri Buddhimanta Khan was one of the inhabitants of Navadvipa. He was very
rich, and it is he who arranged for the marriage of Lord Caitanya with Visnupriya,
the daughter of Sanatana Misra, who was the priest of the local Zamindar. He
personally defrayed all the expenditures for the marriage ceremony. When Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was attacked by vayu-vyddhi (derangement of the air within
the body) Buddhimanta Khan paid for all requisite medicines and treatments to
cure the Lord. He was the Lord's constant companion in the kirtana movement. He
collected ornaments for the Lord when He played the part of the goddess of fortune
in the house of Candrasekhara Acarya. He also went to see Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu when He was staying at Jagannatha 2011.
TEXT 75
গরুড় পণ্ডিত লয় धिोनांम-मन्नल |
নাম-বলে বিষ যারে न। করিল वन ॥ ৭৫ ॥
garuda pandita laya $1170/770-770/100/0
nama-bale visa ydnre na karila bala


--- Page 298 ---
Adi-Ila, Chapter 10 297
SYNONYMS
garuda pangdita—of the name Garuda Pandita; laya—takes; $rinama-marigala—the
auspicious Hare Krsna mahd-mantra; ndma-bale—by the strength of this chanting;
visa—poison; yanre—whom; na—did not; karila—affect; bala—strength.
TRANSLATION
Garuda Pandita, the thirty-seventh branch of the tree, always engaged in chanting
the auspicious name of the Lord. Because of the strength of this chanting, even the
effects of poison could not touch him.
PURPORT
Garuda Pandita was once bitten by a poisonous snake, but the snake’s poison
could not affect him because of his chanting the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra.
TEXT 76
গোপীনাথ সিংহ — क BST ছাস।
gen afer প্রভু ষ।রে टेकल। পরিহাস ॥ ৭৬ ॥
gopinatha 5/77/70---6/২0 caitanyera dasa
akrara bali’ prabhu yanre kaila parihasa
SYNONYMS
gopinatha siriha—of the name of Gopinatha Simha; eka—one; caitanyera dasa—.
servant of Lord Caitanya; akrdra bali’—famous as Akrira; prabhu—the Lord; yanre—
whom; kaila—did; parihasa—joking.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha 91071112, the thirty-eighth branch of the tree, was a faithful servant of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord jokingly addressed him as Akrara.
PURPORT
Actually he was Akrara, as stated in Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika.
TEXT 77
ভাগবডী দেবানম্দ বক্রেম্বর-কবূপাতে।
ভাগবতের তক্তি-অর্থ পাইল প্রভু হৈতে ॥ ৭৭ ॥
bhagavati devananda ৮০/২7/6$৮0/0-২//2016
bhagavatera bhakti-artha paila prabhu haite


--- Page 299 ---
298 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
SYNONYMS
bhdgavati devinanda—Devananda, who used to recite Srimad-Bhagavatam; vakre-
Svara-krpate—by the mercy of Vakresvara; bhagavatera—of Srimad-Bhagavatam;
bhakti-artha—the bhakti interpretation; pdila—got; prabhu haite—from the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Devananda Pandita was a professional reciter of Srimad-Bhagavatam, but by the
mercy of Vakresvara Pandita and the grace of the Lord he understood the devotional
interpretation of the Bhagavatam.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-bhdgavata, Madhya-lild, Chapter Twenty-one, it is stated that
Devananda Pandita was an inhabitant of the same village in which the father of
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Visarada, lived. He was a professional reciter of Srfmad-
Bhagavatam, but Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not like his interpretation of it.
In the present town of Navadvipa, which was formerly known as Kuliya, Lord
Caitanya showed such mercy to him that he gave up the Mayavadi interpretation of
Srimad-Bhagavatam and learned how to explain Srimad-Bhagavatam in terms of
bhakti. Formerly, when Devananda was expounding the Mayavadri interpretation,
Srivasa Thakura was once present in his meeting, and when he began to cry,
Devananda’s students drove him away. Some days later, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
passed that way, and when He met Devananda He chastised him severely because of
his Mayavada interpretation of Srimad-Bhdgavatam. At that time Devananda had
little faith in Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as an incarnation of Lord Krsna, but one
night some time later Vakresvara Pandita was a guest in his house, and when he ex-
plained the science of Krsna, Devananda was convinced about the identity of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thus he was induced to explain Srimad-Bhagavatam accord-
ing to the Vaisnava understanding. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika it is described that
he was formerly Bhaguri Muni, who was the sabha-pandita who recited Vedic litera-
tures in the house of Nanda Maharaja.
TEXTS 78-79
খণ্ডবাসী AFH A, Sagas |
নরহরিদাস, চিরঞ্জীব, স্থলোচন ॥ ৭৮ ॥
এই जव মহাশাখা - চৈতন্তর-কবপাধাম।
প্রেম-কল-ফুল করে যাহ তাহা দান ॥ ৭৯ ॥
1৫700000৮5/ mukunda-dasa, sri-raghunandana
narahari-dasa, ciraiijiva, sulocana


--- Page 300 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 299
ei saba maha$akhd— caitanya-krpadhama
prema-phala-phula kare yahan tahan dana
SYNONYMS

khandavasi mukunda-dasa—of the name Mukunda dasa; $ri-raghunandana—of the
name Raghunandana; narahari-dasa—of the name Narahari dasa; ciranjiva—of the
name Ciranjiva; sulocana—of the name Sulocana; ei saba—all of them; mahasakha—
greatbranches;caitanya-krpadhama—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the reservoir
of mercy; prema—love of God; phala—fruit; phula—flower; kare—does; yahan—any-
where; taharn—everywhere; dana—distribution.

TRANSLATION

Sri Khandavasi Mukunda and his son Raghunandana were the thirty-ninth branch
of the tree, Narahari was the fortieth, Ciraijiva the forty-first and Sulocana the
forty-second. They were all big branches of the all-merciful tree of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. They distributed the fruits and flowers of love of Godhead anywhere
and everywhere.

PURPORT

57 Mukunda 0353 was the son of Narayana dasa and eldest brother of Narahari
Sarakara. His second brother's name was Madhava dasa, and his son was named
Raghunandana dasa. Descendants of Raghunandana dasa still live four miles west of
Katwa in the village named Srikhanda, where Raghunandana dasa used to live.
Raghunandana had one son named Kanai, who had two sons—Madana Raya, who was
a disciple of Narahari Thakura, and Vamsivadana. It is estimated that at least four
hundred men descended in this dynasty. All their names are recorded in the village
known as Srikhanda. In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika it is stated that the gop? whose
name was Vrndadevi became Mukunda dasa, lived in Srikhanda village and was very
dear to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. His wonderful devotion and love for Krsna are des-
cribed in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Fifteen. It is stated in the Bhakti-ratnakara, Chap-
ter Eight, that Raghunandana used to serve a Deity of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

Narahari dasa Sarakara was a very famous devotee. Locana dasaThakura, the
celebrated author of Caitanya-mangala, was his disciple. In Caitanya-mangala it is
stated that Sri Gadadhara dasa and Narahari Sarakara were extremely dear to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but there is no specific statement regarding the inhabitants
of the village of Srikhanda.

Ciraiijiva and Sulocana were both residents of Srikhanda, where their descendants
are still living. Of Ciranjiva’s two sons, the elder, Ramacandra Kaviraja, was a
disciple of Srinivasacarya and an intimate associate of Narottama dasa Thakura.
The younger son was Govinda dasa Kaviraja, the famous Vaisnava poet. (112) [1५25
wife was Sunanda, and his father-in-law was Damodara Sena Kaviraja. Ciraijiva
previously lived on the bank of the Ganges River in the village of Kumaranagara.
The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (verses 187 and 207) states that he was formerly
Candrika in Vrndavana.


--- Page 301 ---
300 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 80
FAAS [FAA সত্যরাজ, রামানন্দ |
GAY, পুবুুযোত্তম, শঙ্কর, বিভানন্দ ॥ ৮০ ॥
kulinagrama-vasr satyaraja, ramananda
yadunatha, purusottama, Sankara, vidyananda
SYNONYMS
kulinagrama-vasi—the inhabitants of Kulina-grama; satyardja—of the name Satya-
raja; ramananda—of the name Ramananda; yadundtha—of the name Yadunatha;
purusottama—of the name Purusottama; sarikara—of the name Sarikara; vidyananda—
of the name Vidyananda.
TRANSLATION
Satyaraja, Ramananda, Yadunatha, Purusottama, Sankara and Vidyananda all
belonged to the twentieth branch. They were inhabitants of the village known as
Kulina-grama.
TEXT 81
বাণীনাথ वद सिं যত গ্রামী जन |
AAR চৈতন্তাভূত্য, - চৈতন্য-প্রাণধন ॥ ৮১ ॥
vaninatha vasu adi yata gramr jana
sabei caitanya-bhrtya,—caitanya-prapadhana
SYNONYMS
vapinatha vasu—of the name Vaninatha Vasu; ddi—heading the list; yata—all;
grami—of the village; jana—inhabitants; sabei—all of them; caitanya-bhrtya—servants
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; caitanya-pranadhana—their life and soul was Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All the inhabitants of Kulina-grama village, headed by Vaninatha Vasu, were
servants of Lord Caitanya, who was their only life and wealth.
TEXT 82
«ड्‌ কহে, কুলীলগ্র।মের যে TA FHA |
সেই মোর প্রিয়, অন্য खन রহ দুর ॥ ৮২ ॥
prabhu kahe, kulinagramera ye haya kukkura
sei mora priya, anya jana rahu dara


--- Page 302 ---
2011715, Chapter 10 301
SYNONYMS
prabhu—the Lord; kahe—says; kulinagramera—of the village of Kulinagrama; ye—
anyone who; haya—becomes; kukkura—even a dog; sei—he; mora—My; priya—dear;
anya—others; jana—persons; rahu—let them remain; diara—away.
TRANSLATION
The Lord said: “Not to speak of others, even a dog in the village of Kulina-grama
is My dear friend.
TEXT 83
কুলীনগ্রামীর ভাগ্য কহনে না যায়।
শুকর BAH ডোম, সেহ কৃষ্ণ গায় ॥ ৮৩ ॥
kulinagramira bhagya kahane na yaya
Sttkara caraya doma, seha krsna gaya
SYNONYMS
kulinagramira—the residents of Kulina-grama; bhagya—fortune; kahane— to speak;
na—not; yaya—is possible; $tkara—hogs; caraya—tending; doma—sweeper; seha—he
also; krspa—Lord Krsna; gaya—chants.
TRANSLATION
“No one can speak about the fortunate position of Kulina-grama. it is so sublime
that even sweepers who tend their hogs there also chant the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra.”
TEXT 84
অনুপম-বল্লভ, জীরূপ, जनांङन |
এই छिन শাখা বৃক্ষের পশ্চিমে সর্বোত্তম ॥ ৮৪ ॥
anupama-vallabha, $/7470/20, sanatana
ei tina $akha vrksera pascime sarvottama
SYNONYMS
anupama—of the name Anupama; vallabha—of the name Vallabha; $ri-rispa—of
the name Sri Rapa; sanatana—of the name Sanatana; ei—these; tina—three; sSakha—
branches;vrksera—of the tree; pascime—on the western side; sarvottama—very great.
TRANSLATION
, On the western side were the forty-third, forty-fourth and forty-fifth branches—
Sri Sanatana, Sri Ripa and Anupama. They were the best of all.


--- Page 303 ---
302 S$ii-Caitanya-caritamrta
PURPORT

Sri Anupama was the father of Srila Jiva Gosvami and youngest brother of Sri
Sanatana Gosvami and Sri Rapa Gosvami. His former name was Vallabha, but after
Lord Caitanya met him He gave him the name Anupama. Because of working in the
Mohammedan government, these three brothers were given the title Mullik. Our
personal family is connected with the Mulliks of Mahatma Gandhi Road in Calcutta,
and we often used to visit their Radha-Govinda temple. They belong to the same
family as we do. (Our family gotra, or original genealogical line, is the gautama-gotra,
or line of disciples of Gautama Muni, and our surname is De. But due to their
accepting the posts of Zamindars in the Mohammedan government, they received
the title Mullik. Similarly, Rapa, Sanatana and Vallabha were also given the title
Mullik. Mullik means “lord.” Just as the English government gives rich and respect-
able persons the title “lord,” so the Mohammedans give the title Mullik to rich,
respectable families that have intimate connections with the government. The title
Mullik is found not only among the Hindu aristocracy but also among
Mohammedans. This title is not restricted to a particular family but is given to
different families and castes. The qualifications for receiving it are wealth and
respectability.

Sanatana Gosvami and Ripa Gosvami belonged to the bharadvaja-gotra, which
indicates that they belonged either to the family or disciplic succession of
Bharadvaja Muni. As members of the Krsna consciousness movement, we belong to
the family or disciplic succession of Sarasvati Gosvami, and thus we are known as
Sarasvatas. Obeisances are therefore offered to the spiritual master as sarasvata-deva,
or a member of the Sarasvata family (namas te sarasvate devam), whose mission is
to broadcast the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu (gaura-vani-pracarine) and to
fight with impersonalists and voidists (nirvisesa-Sanyavadi-pascatya-desa-tarine). This
was also the occupational duty of Sanatana Gosvami, Ripa Gosvami and Anupama
Gosvami.

The genealogical table of Sanatana Gosvami, Ripa Gosvami and Vallabha Gosvami
can be traced back to the Twelfth Century sakabda, when a gentleman of the name
Sarvajiia appeared in a very rich and opulent brahmapa family in the province of
Karnata. He had two sons named Aniruddhera Ripesvara and Harihara, who were
both bereft of their kingdoms and thus obliged to reside in the highlands. The son
of Rupesvara, who was named Padmanabha, moved to a place in Bengal known 25
Naihati on the bank of the Ganges. There he had five sons, of whom the youngest,
Mukunda, had a well-behaved son named Kumaradeva, who was the father of Ripa,
Sanatana and Vallabha. Kumaradeva lived in Baklacandradvipa, which was in the
district of Yasohara and is now known as Phateyabad. Of his many sons, three took
to the path of Vaispavism. Later, Sri Vallabha and his elder brothers Sri Rapa and
Sanatana came from Candradvipa to the village in the Maldah district of Bengal
known as Ramakeli. It is in this village that Srila Jiva Gosvami took birth, accepting
Vallabha as his father. Because of engaging in the service of the Mohammedan
government, the three brothers received the title Mullik. When Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu visited the village of Ramakeli, He met Vallabha there. Later, Sri Rapa


--- Page 304 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 303
Gosvami, after meeting Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, resigned from government service,
and when he went to Vrndavana to meet Lord Caitanya, Vallabha accompanied
him. The meeting of Ripa Gosvami and Vallabha with Caitanya Mahaprabhu at
Allahabad is described in the Madhya-/ila, Chapter Nineteen.
, Actually, it is to be understood from the statement of ৩3173103173 Gosvami that
Sri Ripa Gosvami and Vallabha went to Vrndavana under the instructions of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. First they went to Mathura, where they met a gentleman
named Subuddhi Raya who maintained himself by selling dry fuel wood. He was
very pleased to meet Sri Ripa Gosvami and Anupama, and he showed them the
twelve forests of Vrndavana. Thus they lived in Vrndavana for one month and then
again went to search for Sanatana Gosvami. Following the course of the Ganges,
they reached Allahabad, or Prayaga-tirtha, but because Sanatana Gosvami had come
there by a different road, they did not meet him there, and when Sanatana
Gosvami came to Mathura he was informed of the visit of Rupa Gosvami and
Anupama by Subuddhi Raya. When Ripa Gosvami and Anupama met Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Benares, they heard about Sanatana Gosvami’s travels from Him,
and thus they returned to Bengal, adjusted their affairs with the state and, on the
order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, went to see the Lord at Jagannatha Puri.

In the year 1436 sakabda, the youngest brother, Anupama, died and went back
home, back to Godhead. He went to the abode in the spiritual sky where Sri
Ramacandra is situated. At Jagannatha Puri, Sri Ripa Gosvami informed Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu of this incident. Vallabha was a great devotee of Sri
Ramacandra; therefore he could not seriously consider the worship of Radha-
Govinda according to the instructions of $rf Caitanya Mah@prabhu. Yet he directly
accepted Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Ramacandra. In the Bhakti-ratnakara there is the following statement:
“Vallabha was given the name Anupama by Sri Gaurasundara, but he was always
absorbed in the devotional service of Lord Ramacandra. He did not know anyone
but Sri Ramacandra, but he knew that Caitanya Gosafi was the same Lord
Ramacandra.”

In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika (180) Sri Ripa Gosvami is described to be the
00/27 named Sri Rapa-manjari. In the Bhakti-ratnakara there is a list of the books
Sri Ripa Gosvami compiled. Of all his books, the following sixteen are very popular
among Vaisnavas: (1) Harnsadita, (2) Uddhava-sandesa, (3) Krsna-janma-tithi-vidhi,
(4 and 5) Ganoddesa-dipika, Brhat (major) and Laghu (minor), (6) Stavamala, (7)
Vidagdha-madhava, (8) Lalita-madhava, (9) ODana-keli-kaumudi, (10) Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu (this is the most celebrated book by Sri Rupa Gosvami), (11)
Ujjvala-nilamani, (12) Akhyata-candrika, (13) Mathura-mahima, (14) Padyavalr, (15)
Nataka-candrika and (16) Laghu-bhdgavatamyta. Sri Rapa Gosvami gave up all
family connections, joined the renounced order of life and divided his money,
giving fifty percent to the brdhmapas and Vaisnavas and twenty-five percent to his
kutumbas (family members) and keeping twenty-five percent for personal emergen-
cies. He met Haridasa Thakura in Jagannatha Puri, where he also met Lord Caitanya
and His other associates. $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to praise the handwriting
of Ripa Gosvami. Srila Ripa Gosvami could compose verses according to the de-


--- Page 305 ---
304 S$r-Caitanya-caritamrta

sires of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and by His direction he wrote two books named
Lalita-madhava and Vidagdha-madhava. Lord Caitanya desired the two brothers,
Sanatana Gosvami and Rapa Gosvami, to publish many books in support of the
Vaisnava religion. When Sanatana Gosvami met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord
advised him also to go to Vrndavana.

Sri Sanatana Gosvami is described in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (181). He was
formerly known as Rati-manjari or sometimes Labariga-manjari. In the Bhakti-
ratndkara it is stated that his spiritual master, Vidyavacaspati, sometimes stayed in
the village of Ramakeli, and Sanatana Gosvami studied all the Vedic literature from
him. He was so devoted to his spiritual master that this cannot be described. Accord-
ing to the Vedic system, if someone sees a Mohammedan he must perform rituals
to atone for the meeting. Sanatana Gosvami always associated with Mohammedan
kings. Not giving much attention to the Vedic injunctions, he used to visit the
houses of Mohammedan kings, and thus he considered himself to have been con-
verted into a Mohammedan. He was therefore always very humble and meek. When
Sanatana Gosvami presented himself before Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he admit-
ted, “I am always in association with lower class people, and my behavior is there-
fore very abominable.” He actually belonged to a respectable brahmana family, but
because he considered his behavior to be abominable, he did not try to place himself
among the brahmapas but always remained among people of the lower castes. He
wrote Hari-bhakti-vilasa and Vaispava-tosani, which is a commentary on the Tenth
Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam. In the year 1476 $akabda he completed the Brhad-
vaispava-tosapi commentary on Srimad-Bhagavatam. In the year 1504 $akdbda he
finished the Laghu-tosani.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught his principles through four chief followers.
Among them, Ramananda Raya is exceptional, for through him the Lord taught
how a devotee can completely vanquish the power of Cupid. By Cupid’s power,
as soon as one sees a beautiful woman he is conquered by her beauty. Sri Ramananda
Raya vanquished Cupid’s pride because in the Jagannatha-vallabha-ndtaka he
personally directed extremely beautiful young girls in dancing, but he was never
affected by their youthful beauty. Sri Ramananda Raya personally bathed these
girls, touching them and washing them with his own hands, yet he remained calm
and passionless, as a great devotee should be. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu certified
that this was possible only for Ramananda Raya. Similarly, Damodara Pandita was
notable for his objectivity as a critic. He did not even spare Caitanya Mahaprabhu
from his criticism. This also cannot be imitated by anyone else. Haridasa Thakura
is exceptional for his forbearance because although he was beaten with canes in
twenty-two marketplaces, nevertheless he was tolerant. Similarly, Sri Sanatana
Gosvami, although he belonged to a most respectable brahmana family, was excep-
tional for his humility and meekness.

In the Madhya-fila, Chapter Nineteen, the device adopted by Sanatana Gosvami
to get free from the government service is described. He served a notice of sickness
to the Nawab, the Moslem governer, but actually he was studying Srimad-Bhdgavatam
with brahmanas at home. The Nawab received information of this through a royal
physician, and he immediately went to see Sanatana Gosvami to uncover his inten-


--- Page 306 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 305
tions. The Nawab requested Sanatana to accompany him on an expedition to
Orissa, but when Sanatana Gosvami refused, the Nawab ordered that he be im-
prisoned. When Ripa Gosvami left home, he wrote a note for Sanatana Gosvami
informing him of some money that he had entrusted to a local grocer. Sanatana
Gosvami took advantage of this money to bribe the jail keeper and get free from
detention. Then he left for Benares to meet Caitanya Mahaprabhu, bringing with
him only one servant, whose name was sana. On the way they stopped at a sara,
or hotel, and when the hotel keeper found out that [13 had some golden coins with
him, he planned to kill both Sanatana Gosvami and Té3na to take away the coins.
Later Sanatana Gosvami saw that although the hotel keeper did not know them,
he was being especially attentive to their comfort. Therefore he concluded that
Téana was secretly carrying some money and that the hotel keeper was aware of this
and therefore planned to kill them for it. Upon being questioned by Sanatana
Gosvami, sana admitted that he indeed had money with him, and immediately
Sanatana Gosvami took the money and gave it to the hotel keeper, requesting him
to help them get though the jungle. Thus with the help of the hotel keeper, who
was also the chief of the thieves of that territory, he crossed over the Hazipur
mountains, which are presently known as the Hazaribags. He then met his brother-
in-law Srikanta, who requested that he stay with him. Sanatana Gosvami refused,
but before they parted, Srikanta gave him a valuable blanket.

Somehow or other Sanatana Gosvami reached Varanasi and met Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at the house of Candrasekhara. By the order of the Lord, Sanatana
Gosvami was cleanly shaved and his dress changed to that of a mendicant, or
babaji. He put on old garments of Tapana Misra and took prasada at the house of
a Maharastra brahmapa. Then, in discourses with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
Lord Himself explained everything about devotional service to Sanatana Gosvami.
He advised Sanatana Gosvami to write books on devotional service, including a book
of directions for Vaisnava activities, and to excavate the lost places of pilgrimage in
Vrndavana. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave him His blessings to do all this work
and also explained to Sanatana Gosvami the import of the atmarama verse from
sixty-one different angles of vision.

Sanatana Gosvami went to Vrndavana by the main road, and when he reached
Mathura he met Subuddhi Raya. Then he returned to Jagannatha Puri through
Jharikhanda, the Uttara Pradesh jungle. At Jagannatha Puri he decided to give up
his body by falling down beneath a wheel of the Jagannatha ratha, but Caitanya
Mahaprabhu saved him. Then Sanatana Gosvami met Haridasa Thakura and heard
about the disappearance of Anupama. Sanatana Gosvami later described the glories
of Haridasa Thakura. Sanatana observed the etiquette of Jagannatha’s temple by
going through the beach to visit Lord Caitanya, although it was extremely hot due
to the sun. He requested Jagadananda Pandita to give him permission to return to
Vrndavana. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu praised the character of Sanatana Gosvami,
and He embraced Sanatana, accepting his body as spiritual. Sanatana Gosvami was
ordered by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to live at Jagannatha Puri for one year. When
he returned to Vrndavana after many years, he again met Ripa Gosvami, and both
brothers remained in Vrndavana to execute the orders of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 307 ---
306 $r-Caitanya-caritimrta

The place where Sri Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami formerly lived has now
become a place of pilgrimage. 11 is generally known as Gupta Vrndavana, or hidden
Vrndavana, and is situated about eight miles south of Imrejabajara. There the fol-
lowing places are still visited: (1) the temple of Sri Madana-mohana Deity, (2) the
Keli-kadamba tree under which Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu met Sanatana Gosvami at
night and (3) ९००52821, a large pond excavated by Sri Rapa Gosvami. A society
named Ramakeli-sarnskara-samiti.was established in 1924 to repair the temple and
renovate the pond.

TEXT 85
তাঁর মধ্যে রূপ-সনাতন- বড় শাখা।
অনুপম, জীব, রাজেন্দ্রাদি উপশাখা ॥ ৮৫ ॥
tanra madhye /0/200-50/7010/7---8000 $Gkha
anupama, jiva, rajendradi upasakha
SYNONYMS

tanra—within that; madhye—in the midst of; ripa-sanatana—the branch known as
Rupa-Sanatana; 8000 sakha—the big branch; anupama—of the name Anupama; jiva—
of the name |Jiva; rdjendra-adi—and Rajendra and others; wpasakha—their
sub-branches.

TRANSLATION

Among these branches, Riipa and Sanatana were principal. Anupama, Jiva Gosvami

and others, headed by Rajendra, were their sub-branches.
PURPORT

In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika it is said that Srila Jiva Gosvami was formerly
Vilasa-manjari gopi. From his very childhood |1५2 Gosvami was greatly fond of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, He later came to Navadvipa to study Sanskrit, and, following
in the footsteps of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, he circumambulated the entire Navadvipa-
dhama. After visiting Navadvipa-dhama he went to Benares to study Sanskrit under
Madhustidana Vacaspati, and after finishing his studies in Benares, he went to
Vrndavana and took shelter of his uncles, Sri Ripa and Sanatana. This is described
in the Bhakti-ratnakara. As far as our information goes, Srila Jiva Gosvami composed
and edited at least twenty-five books. They are all very celebrated, and they are listed
as follows: (1) Hari-namamrta-vyakaranpa, (2) Statra-malika, (3) Dhatu-sarigraha, (4)
Krsnarca-dipikg, (5) Gopala-virudavali, (6) Rasamyta-Sesa, (7) $/7 Madhava-mahotsava,
(8) Sri Sankalpa-kalpavrksa, (9) Bhavartha-sicaka-campi, (10) Gopala-tapani-tika,
(11) a commentary on Brahma-sarhhita, (12) a commentary on Bhakti-rasamyta-
sindhu, (13) a commentary on Ujjvala-nilamani, (14) a commentary on Yogasdra-
stava, (15) a commentary on the Gayatri-mantra as described in the Agni Purana,
(16) a description derived from the Padma Purdna of the lotus feet of the Lord, (17)


--- Page 308 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 307
a description of the lotus feet of Srimati Radharant, (18) Gopala-campi (in two parts)
and (19-25) seven sandharbhas: the Krama, Tattva, Bhagavat, Paramatma, Krsna,
Bhakti and Priti Sandharbhas. After the disappearance of Srila Ripa Gosvami and
Sanatana Gosvami in Vrndavana, Srila )Jiva Gosvami became the dacdrya of all the
Vaisnavas in Bengal, Orissa and the rest of the world, and it is he who used to guide
them in their devotional service. In Vindavana he established the Radha-Damodara
temple, where we had the opportunity to live and retire until the age of 65, when
we decided to come to the United States of America. When Jiva Gosvami was still
present, Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami compiled his famous Caitanya-caritamrta.
Later, Srila Jiva Gosvami inspired Srinivasa Acarya, Narottama dasa Thakura and
Duhkhi Krsnadasa to preach Krsna consciousness in Bengal. Jiva Gosvami was in-
formed that all the manuscripts that were collected from Vrndavana and sent to
Bengal for preaching purposes were plundered near Visnupura in Bengal, but later
he received the information that the books had been recovered. Sri iva Gosvami
awarded the designation Kaviraja to Ramacandra Sena, a disciple of Srinivasa
Acarya, and his younger brother Govinda. While Jiva Gosvami was alive, Srimati
Jahnavi-devi, the pleasure potency of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, went to Vyndavana
with a few devotees. Jiva Gosvami was very kind to the Gaudiya Vaisnavas, the.
Vaisnavas from Bengal. Whoever went to Vindavana he provided with a residence
and prasada. His disciple Krsnadasa Adhikari listed all the books of the Gosvamis in
his diary. ,

The sahajiyas level three accusations against Srila Jiva Gosvami. This is certainly
not congenial with the execution of devotional service. The first accusation concerns
a materialist who was very proud of his reputation as a great Sanskrit scholar and
approached Sri Rapa and Sanatana to argue with them about the revealed scriptures.
Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, not wanting to waste their time, gave
him a written statement that he had defeated them in a debate on the revealed
scriptures. Taking this paper, the scholar approached Jiva Gosvami for a similar
certificate of defeat, but Jiva Gosvami did not agree to give him one. On the con-
trary, he argued with him regarding the scriptures and defeated him. Certainly it
was right for Jiva Gosvami to stop such a dishonest scholar from advertising that he
had defeated Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, but due to their illiteracy
the sahajiya class refer to this incident to accuse Srila Jiva Gosvami of deviating from
the principle of humility. They do not know, however, that humility and meekness
are appropriate when one’s own honor is insulted. But when Lord Visnu or the
dcdryas are blasphemed, one should not be humble and meek but must act. One
should follow the example given by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord (2112112 says
in His prayer:

trpad api sunicena
taror api sahispuna
amanina manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih
“One can chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking him-
self lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree,


--- Page 309 ---
308 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

devoid of all sense of false prestige, and should be ready to offer all respect to others.
In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.”
Nevertheless, when the Lord was informed that Nityananda Prabhu was injured by
Jagai and Madhai, He immediately went to the spot, angry like fire, wanting to kill
them. Thus Lord Caitanya has explained His verse by the example of His own be-
havior. One should tolerate insults against oneself, but when there is blasphemy com-
mitted against superiors such as other Vaisnavas, one should be neither humble nor
meek; one must take proper steps to counteract such blasphemy. This is the duty
of a servant of a guru and Vaisnavas. Anyone who understands the principle of eter-
nal servitude to the guru and Vaisnavas will appreciate the action of Sri Jiva Gosvami
in connection with the so-called scholar’s victory over his gurus, Srila Rupa and
Srila Sanatana Gosvami. र

Another story fabricated to defame Srila Jiva Gosvami states that after compiling
Sri Caitanya-caritamyta, Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami showed the manuscript to
Jiva Gosvami, who thought that it would hamper his reputation as a big scholar and
therefore threw it in a well. Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami was greatly shocked,
and he died immediately. Fortunately a copy of the manuscript of Caitanya-
caritamyta had been kept by a person named Mukunda, and therefore later it was
possible to publish the book. This story is another ignominious example of
blasphemy against a guru and Vaisnava. Such a story should never be accepted as
authoritative.

According to another accusation, Srila Jiva Gosvami did not approve of the
principles of the pdrakiya-rasa of Vrajadhama and therefore supported svakiya-rasa,
showing that Radha and Krsna are eternally married. Actually, when Jiva Gosvami
was alive, some of his followers disliked the pdrakiya-rasa of the gopis. Therefore
Srila Jiva Gosvami, for their spiritual benefit, supported svakiya-rasa, for he could
understand that sahajiyas would otherwise exploit the pdrakiya-rasa, as they are
actually doing at the present. Unfortunately, in Vrndavana and Navadvipa it has be-
come fashionable among sahajiyas, in their debauchery, to find an unmarried sexual
partner to live with to execute devotional service in pdrakiya-rasa. Foreseeing this,
Srila Jiva Gosvami supported svakiya-rasa, and later all the Vaisnava dcaryas also
approved of it. Srila Jiva Gosvami was never opposed to the transcendental
parakiya-rasa, nor has any other Vaisnava disapproved of it. Srila Jiva Gosvami
strictly followed his predecessor gurus and Vaisnavas, Srila Ripa and Sanatana
Gosvami, and Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami accepted him as one of his
instructor gurus.

TEXT 86
মালীর ইচ্ছায় শাখা IES বাড়িল।
বাড়িয়া পশ্চিম দেশ সব আচ্ছাদিল ॥ ৮৬ ॥
malira icchdya $akha bahuta badila
badiya pascima desa saba acchadila


--- Page 310 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 309
SYNONYMS
malira icchaya—on the desire of the gardener; sGkha—branches; bahuta—many;
badila—expanded; badiya—so expanding; pascima—western; desa—countries; saba—
all; acchadila—covered.
TRANSLATION
By the will of the supreme gardener, the branches of Srila Riipa Gosvami and
Sanatana Gosvami grew many times over, expanding throughout the western
countries and covering the entire region.
TEXT 87
আ.সিদজ্জুনদী-ভীর আর হিমালয় |
বৃষ্দাবন-মধুরাদি যত ভীর্থ হয় ॥ ৮৭ ॥
a-sindhunadi-tira Gra himalaya
vrndavana-mathuradi yata tirtha haya
SYNONYMS
a-sindhu-nadi—to the border of the River Sindhu; tira—border; 3/৫-- 3170) himalaya
—the Himalayan Mountains; vyndavana—of the name Vrndavana; mathura—of the
name Mathura; adi—heading the list; yata—all; tirtha—places of pilgrimage; haya—
there are.
TRANSLATION
Extending to the borders of the River Sindhu and the Himalayan Mountain
valleys, they expanded throughout India, including all the places of pilgrimage such
as Vrndavana, Mathura and Haridvara.
TEXT 88
তুই শাখার প্রেমফলে সকল ভাসিল।
প্রেমফলাস্বাদে লোক TUG হইল ॥ ৮৮ ॥
dui $akhara prema-phale sakala bhasila
prema-phalasvade loka unmatta ha-ila
SYNONYMS
dui $akhara—of the two branches; prema-phale—by the fruit of love of Godhead;
sakala—all; bhasila—became overflooded; prema-phala—the fruit of love of Godhead;
asvade—by tasting; loka—all people; unmatta—maddened; ha-ila— became.


--- Page 311 ---
310 . Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
The fruits of love of Godhead which fructified on these two branches were
distributed in abundance. Tasting these fruits, everyone became mad after them.
TEXT 89
পশ্চিমের লোক সব মুঢ় অনাচার |
তাহ প্রচারিল (कीटक ভক্তি-সদাচার ॥ ৮৯ ॥
pascimera loka saba midha andcara
tahan pracarila dornihe bhakti-sadacara
SYNONYMS
pascimera—on the western side; Joka—people in general; saba—all; madha—less
intelligent; andcara—not well behaved; tahan—there; pracarila—preached; donhe—
Srila Ripa and Sanatana Gosvamf; bhakti—devotional service; saddcara—good
behavior.
TRANSLATION
The people in general on the western side of India were neither intelligent nor
well behaved, but by the influence of Srila Riipa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami
they were trained in devotional service and good behavior.
PURPORT
Although it is not only in western India that people were contaminated by
association with Mohammedans, it is a fact that the farther west one goes in India
the more he will find the people to be fallen from the Vedic culture. Even until
5,000 years ago, when the entire planet was under the control of Maharaja Pariksit,
the Vedic culture was current everywhere. Gradually, however, people were influ-
enced by non-Vedic culture, and they lost sight of how to behave in connection
with devotional service. Srila Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami very kindly
preached the bhakti cult in western India, and following in their footsteps the
propagators of the Caitanya cult in the western countries are spreading the
sankirtana movement and inculcating the principles of Vaisnava behavior, thus
purifying and reforming many persons who were previously accustomed to the
culture of mlecchas and yavanas. All of our devotees in the western countries give
up their old habits of illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. Of course,
500 years ago these practices were unknown at least in eastern India, but unfor-
tunately at present all of India has been victimized by these non-Vedic principles,
which are sometimes even supported by the government.
TEXT 90
শান্ত্রদৃষ্ট্যে কৈল লুপ্ততীর্থের कात्र |
বৃন্দাবনে কৈল জীমুতি-সেবার প্রচার ॥ ৯০ ॥


--- Page 312 ---
40143, Chapter 10 311
Sastra-drstye kaila lupta-tirthera uddhara
vrndavane kaila $rimarti-sevara pracara
SYNONYMS
Sastra-drstye—according to the directions of revealed scriptures; kaila—did; lupta—
forgotten; tirthera—place of pilgrimage; wddhdra—excavation; vrndavane—in
Vrndavana; kaila—did; $ri-marti— Deity ; sevara—of worship; pracara—propagation.
TRANSLATION
In accordance with the directions of the revealed scriptures, both Gosvamis
excavated the lost places of pilgrimage and inaugurated the worship of Deities in
Vrndavana.
PURPORT
The spot where we now find Sri Radhakunda was an agricultural field during the
time of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. A small reservoir of water was there, and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu bathed in that water and pointed out that originally Radha-
kunda existed in that location. Following His directions, Srila Ripa Gosvami and
Sanatana Gosvami renovated Radhakunga. This is one of the brilliant examples of
how the Gosvamis excavated lost places of pilgrimage. Similarly, it is through the
the endeavor of the Gosvamis that all the important temples at Vrndavana were
established. Originally there were seven important Gaudiya Vaispava temples
established in Vindavana, namely, the Madana-mohana temple, Govinda temple,
Gopinatha temple, Sri Radharamana temple, Radha-Syamasundara temple, Radha-
Damodara temple and Gokulananda temple.
TEXT 91
মহাপ্রভুর প্রিয় ভৃত্য _রঘুনাথদাস।
সর্ব ত্যজি' কৈল প্রভুর পদতলে বাস ॥ ৯১ ॥
/770/70/0/00/704/0 priya bhrtya—raghunatha-dasa
sarva tyaji’ kaila prabhura pada-tale vasa
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; priya—very dear; bhrtya—servant;
raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; sarva tyaji’—renouncing everything;
kaila—did; prabhura—of the Lord; pada-tale—under the shelter of the lotus feet;
vasa—habitation.
TRANSLATION
Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the forty-sixth branch of the tree, was one of
the most dear servants of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He left all his material
possessions to surrender completely unto the Lord and live at His lotus feet.


--- Page 313 ---
312 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
PURPORT

Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was most probably born in the year 1416 sakabda
in a kdyastha family as the son of Govardhana Majumdara, who was the younger
brother of the then Zamindar Hiranya Majumdara. The village where he took birth
is known as Sri Krsnapura. On the railway line between Calcutta and Burdwan is a
station named Trisabagha, and about one and a half miles away is the village of Sri
Krsnapura, where the parental home of Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was situated.
A temple of Sri Sri Radha-Govinda is still there. In front of the temple is a large
open area but no large hall for meetings. However, a rich Calcutta gentleman named
Haricarana Ghosh who resided in the Simla quarter recently repaired the temple.
The entire temple compound is surrounded by walls, and in a small room just to the
side of the temple is a small platform on which Raghunatha dasa Gosvami used to
worship the Deity. By the side of the temple is the dying River Sarasvati.

The forefathers of Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami were all Vaisnavas and were
very rich men. His spiritual master at home was Yadunandana Acarya. Although
Raghunatha dasa was a family man, he had no attachment for his estate and wife.
Seeing his tendency to leave home, his father and uncle engaged special bodyguards
to watch over him, but nevertheless he managed to escape their vigilance and went
away to Jagannatha Puri to meet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This incident took place
in the year 1439 $akdbda. Raghunatha dasa Gosvami compiled three books
named Stava-mala or Stavavali, Dana-carita and Muktacarita. He lived for a long
duration of life. For most of his life he resided at Radhakunda. The place where
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami performed his devotional service still exists by Radha-
kunda. He almost completely gave up eating, and therefore he was very skinny and
of weak health. His only concern was to chant the holy name of the Lord. He
gradually reduced his sleeping until he was almost not sleeping at all. It is said that
his eyes were always full of tears. When Srinivasa Acarya went to see Raghunatha
dasa Gosvami, the Gosvami blessed him by embracing him. Srinivasa Acarya re-
quested his blessings for preaching in Bengal, and Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
granted them. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (186) it is stated that Srila Raghunatha
dasa Gosvami was formerly the gopi named Rasa-mafjari. Sometimes it is said that
he was Rati-manjari.

TEXT 92
প্রভু সমপিল তারে স্বরূপের হাতে |
প্রভুর গুপ্তসেবা কৈল স্বরূপের সাথে ॥ ৯২ ॥
prabhu samarpila tanre svartapera hate
prabhura gupta-seva Raila svarapera sathe
SYNONYMS

prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; samarpila—handed over; tanre—him;
svarapera—Svaripa Damodara; hate—to the hand; prabhura—of the Lord; gupta-
seva—confidential service; kaila—did; svarapera—Svaripa Damodara;sathe— with.


--- Page 314 ---
01413, Chapter 10 313
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa Gosvami approached Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at
Jagannatha Puri, the Lord entrusted him to the care of Svarupa Damodara, His
secretary. Thus they both engaged in the confidential service of the Lord.
PURPORT
This confidential service was the personal care of the Lord. Svaripa Damodara,
acting as His secretary, attended to the Lord’s baths, meals, rest and massages, and
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami assisted him. In effect, Raghunatha dasa Gosvamf acted
as the assistant secretary of the Lord.
TEXT 93
ষোড়শ বৎসর देकन्‌ অস্তরঙ্গ-সেবন |
ra
স্বরূপের অন্তর্ধানে আইলা TWIT ॥ ৯৩ ॥
sodasa vatsara Raila antaranga-sevana
svaraipera antardhane aila vrndavana
SYNONYMS
sodasa—sixteen; vatsara—years; kaila—did; antaranga—confidential; sevana—
service; svaripera—of SvarGpa Damodara; antardhane—disappearance; a@i/G—came;
vrndavana—to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
He rendered confidential service to the Lord for sixteen years at Jagannatha Purf,
and after the disappearance of both the Lord and Svaripa Damodara, he left
Jagannatha Puri and went to Vrndavana.
TEXT 94
बन्नादटम দুই ভাইর চরণ wl |
গোবধধধনে ত্যজিব দেহ ভৃগুপাত করিয়া ॥ ৯৪ ॥
vrndavane dui bhaira carana dekhiya
govardhane tyajiba deha bhrgupata kariya
SYNONYMS
vrndavane—at Vindavana; dui bhaira—the two brothers (Rapa and Sanatana);
carapa—feet; dekhiya—after seeing; govardhane—on the hill of Govardhana; tyajiba—
will give up; deha—this body; bhrgupata—falling down; kariya—doing so.


--- Page 315 ---
314 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION
Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami intended to go to Vrndavana to see the lotus feet
of Rapa and Sanatana and then give up his life by jumping from Govardhana Hill.
PURPORT
Jumping from the top of Govardhana Hill is a system of suicide especially per-
formed by saintly persons. After the disappearance of Lord Caitanya and ५५21002
Damodara, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami keenly felt the separation of these two
exalted personalities and therefore decided to give up his life by jumping from
Govardhana Hill in Vrndavana. Before doing so, however, he wanted to see the
lotus feet of Srila Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvamt.
TEXT 95
এই ऊ निष्छम्र করি” আইল বৃন্দাবনে।
আসি” রূপ-সনাতনের বন্দিল চরণে ॥ ৯৫ ॥
ei ta’ niscaya kari’ Gila vrndavane
asi’ rapa-sanatanera vandila carape
SYNONYMS
ei ta’—thus; niscaya kari’—having decided; Gila—came; vrndavane—to Vrndavana;
asi’—coming there; riipa-sanatanera—of Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami;
vandila— offered respects; carape—at the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Thus Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami came to Vrndavana, visited Srila Ripa
Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami and offered them his obeisances.
TEXT 96
তবে দুই ভাই তরে মরিতে না भिन |
নিজ তৃতীয় ভাই করি” নিকটে রাখিল ॥ ৯৬ ॥
tabe dui bhai tanre marite na dila
nija trtiya bhai kari’ nikate rakhila
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; dui bhai—the two brothers (Srila Ripa and Sanatana); tdfre—
him; marite—to die; na dila—did not allow; nija—own; trtiya—third; bhai—brother;
kari’—accepting; nikate—near; rakhila—kept him.


--- Page 316 ---
Adi-lita, Chapter 10 315
TRANSLATION
These two brothers, however, did not allow him to die. They accepted him as
their third brother and kept him in their company.
TEXT 97
মহাপ্রভুর Mel যত বাহির-অনস্তর।
তুই ভাই তার মুখে শুনে নিরস্তর ॥ ৯৭ ॥
mahaprabhura 7/0 yata bahira-antara
dui bhai tanra mukhe Sune nirantara
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; /ila—pastimes; yata—all;
bahira—external; antara—internal; dui bhai—the two brothers; tafira—his; mukhe—
in the mouth; Sune—hear; nirantara—always.
TRANSLATION
Because Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was an assistant to Svartipa Damodara, he
knew much about the external and internal features of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya.
Thus the two brothers Ripa and Sanatana always used to hear of this from him.
TEXT 98
অল্প-জল ত্যাগ কৈল खक्र-कथेन |
পল দুই-তিন মাঠ৷ করেন ভক্ষণ ॥ ৯৮ ॥
anna-jala tyaga kaila anya-kathana
pala dui-tina matha karena bhaksana
SYNONYMS
anna-jala—food and drink; tydga—renunciation; kaila—did; anya-kathana—talking
of other things; pala dui-tina—a few drops of; matha—sour milk; karena—does;
bhaksana—eat.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami gradually gave up all food and drink but a few drops
of buttermilk.
TEXT 99
ATH भवर করে, লয় AW নাম।
দুই সহজ বৈষ্ণবেরে নিত্য পরণাম ॥ >> ॥


--- Page 317 ---
316 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
sahasra dapdavat kare, laya laksa nama
dui sahasra vaispavere nitya parapama
SYNONYMS
sahasra—thousand; dandavat—obeisances; kare—does; laya—takes; laksa—one
hundred thousand; nama—holy names; dui—two; sahasra—thousand; vaisnavere—
unto the devotees; nitya—daily; paranama—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
As a daily duty, he regularly offered one thousand obeisances to the Lord,
chanted at least one hundred thousand holy names and offered obeisances to two
thousand Vaisnpavas.
TEXT 100
রাজিদিনে রাধাকৃষ্ণের মানস (मदन्‌ |
গ্রহরেক মহাপ্রভুর চরিত্র-কথন ॥ ১০০ ॥
ratri-dine radha-krsnera manasa sevana
prahareka mahaprabhura caritra-kathana
SYNONYMS
ratri-dine—day and night; radha-krspera—of Radha and Krsna; manasa—within
the mind; sevana—service; prahareka—about three hours; mahdprabhura—of Lord
Caitanya; caritra—character; kathana—discussing.
TRANSLATION
Day and night he rendered service within his mind to Radha-Krsna, and for three
hours a day he discoursed about the character of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
We have many things to learn about bhajana, or worship of the Lord, by follow-
ing in the footsteps of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. All the Gosvamis engaged in such
transcendental activities, as described by Srinivasa Acarya in his poem about them
(krspotkirtana-gana-nartana-parau premamytambho-nidhi). Following in the foot-
steps of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Srila Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, one
has to execute devotional service very strictly, specifically by chanting the holy
name of the Lord.
TEXT 101
তিন সন্ধ্যা রাধাকুণ্ডে অপতিত Fa ।
ত্রজবাসী বৈষ্ণবে করে আলিজন মান ॥ ১০১ ॥


--- Page 318 ---
Adi-lita, Chapter 10 317
tina sandhya radha-kungde apatita snana
vraja-vasi vaispave kare alingana mana
SYNONYMS
tina sandhya—three times, namely morning, evening and noon; radha-kunge—in
the lake of Radhakunda;:gpatita—without failure; snana—taking bath; vraja-vasi—
inhabitants of Vrajabhami; vaispnave—all devotees; kare—does; alirigana—embracing;
mana—and offering respect.
TRANSLATION
Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami took three baths daily in the Radhakunda lake. As
soon as he found a Vaisnava residing in Vrndavana, he would embrace him and give
him all respect.
TEXT 102
সার্ধ সপ্তপ্রহর করে ভক্তির সাধনে।
চারি দণ্ড faa, সেহ নহে কোনদিলে ॥ ১০২ ।
sardha sapta-prahara kare bhaktira sadhane
cari 00000 nidra, seha nahe kona-dine
SYNONYMS
sardha—one and a half hours; sapta-prahara—seven praharas (twenty-one hours);
kare—does; bhaktira—of devotional serivce;sadhane—in execution; cari dapnda—about
two hours; nidra—sleeping; seha—that also; nahe—not; kona-dine—some days.
TRANSLATION
He engaged himself in devotional service for more than twenty-two and a half
hours a day, and for less than two hours he slept, although on some days that
also was not possible.
TEXT 103
তাঁহার AEN छि শুনিতে চমৎকার |
সেই রূপ-রখুনাথ প্রভু যে আমার ॥ ১০৩ ॥
tanhara sadhana-riti $07/16 camatkara
sei rapa-raghunatha prabhu ye amara
SYNONYMS
tanhara—nhis; sadhana-riti—process of devotional service; sunite—to hear; camat-
kara—wonderful; sei—that; rigpa—Sri Rupa Gosvami; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami; prabhu—lord; ye—that; amara—my.


--- Page 319 ---
318 Sri-Caitanya-carita mrta
TRANSLATION
I am struck with wonder when | hear about the devotional service he executed.
I accept Srila Rupa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami as my guides.
PURPORT
Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami accepted Raghunatha dasa Gosvami as his
special guide. Therefore at the end of every chapter he says, $ri-riipa-raghunatha-
pade yara asa caitanya-caritamyta kahe krspadasa. Sometimes it is misunderstood
that by using the word raghunatha he wanted to offer his respectful obeisances to
Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, for it is sometimes stated that Raghunatha Bhatta
Gosvami was his initiator spiritual master. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami
does not approve of this statement; he does not accept Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami’
as the spiritual master of Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TEXT 104
ই'হা-সবার যৈছে হৈল প্রভুর मिनन ।
আগে বিস্তারিয়৷ Siz) করিব বর্ণন ॥ ১০৪ ॥
inha-sabara yaiche haila prabhura milana
age vistariya taha kariba varpana
SYNONYMS
inh@—of them; sabara—all; yaiche—as; haila—became; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; milana—meeting; dge—later on; vistariya—expanding; taha—that;
kariba—| shall do; varpana—description.
TRANSLATION
I shall later explain very elaborately how all these devotees met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 105
শ্রগোপাল ভট্ট এক শাখা সর্বোত্তম।
করূপ-সন।তন-সঙ্গে THA প্রেম-আলাপন ॥ ১০৫
Sri-gopala bhatta eka sakha sarvottama
rlpa-sanatana-sange yarnra prema-alapana
SYNONYMS
$ri-gopala bhatta—of the name Sri Gopala Bhatta; eka—one; $akha—branch;
sarvottama—very exalted; ripa—of the name Rapa; sandtana—of the name Sanatana;
safige—company; yanra—whose; prema—love of Godhead; dlapana—discussion.


--- Page 320 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 319
TRANSLATION
Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, the forty-seventh branch, was one of the great and
exalted branches of the tree. He always engaged in discourses about love of God-
head in the company of Riipa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami.
PURPORT
টন Sri Gopila Bhatta Gosvami was the son of Venkata Bhatta, a resident of
Srirangam. Gopala Bhatta formerly belonged to the disciplic succession of the
Ramanuja-sampradaya but later became part of the Gaudiya-sampradaya. In the
year 1433 $akabda, when Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was touring South India, He
stayed for four months during the period of Caturmasya at the house of Venkata
Bhatta, who then got the opportunity to serve the Lord to his heart’s content.
Gopila Bhatta also got the opportunity to serve the Lord at this time. 517 Gopala
Bhatta Gosvami was later initiated by his uncle, the great sannydsi Prabodhananda
Sarasvati. Both the father and mother of Gopala Bhatta GosvamT were extremely
fortunate, for they dedicated their entire lives to the service of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. They allowed Gopala Bhatta Gosvami to go to Vrndavana, and they
gave up their lives thinking of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When Lord Caitanya was
later informed that Gopala Bhatta Gosvami had gone to Vrndavana and met Sri
Ripa and Sanatana Gosvami, He was very pleased, and He advised Sri Rapa and
Sanatana to accept Gopala Bhatta Gosvami as their younger brother and take care
of him. Sri Sanatana Gosvami, out of his great affection for Gopala Bhatta Gosvamr,
compiled the Vaisnava smyti named Hari-bhakti-vilasa and published it under his
name. Under the instruction of Srila Ripa and Sanatana, Gopala Bhatta Gosvami
installed one of the seven principal Deities of Vrndavana, the Radharamana Deity.
The sevaits (priests) of the Radharamana temple belong to the Gaugliya-sampradaya.
When Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami took permission from all the Vaisnavas before
writing Caitanya-caritamrta, Gopala Bhatta Gosvami also gave him his blessings, but
he requested him not to mention his name in the book. Therefore Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami has mentioned Gopala Bhatta Gosvami only very cautiously in
one or two passages of Caitanya-caritamyta. Srila Jiva Gosvami has written in the
beginning of his Tattva-sandarbha, "° devotee from southern India who was born of
a brahmapa family and was a very intimate friend of Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana
Gosvami has written a book that he has not compiled chronologically. Therefore I,
a tiny living entity known as jiva, am trying to assort the events of the book
chronologically, consulting the direction of great personalities like Madhvacarya,
Sridhara Svami, Ramanujacarya and other senior Vaisnavas in the disciplic succes-
sion.” In the beginning of the Bhagavat-sandarbha there are similar statements by
Srila Jiva Gosvami. Srila Gopala Bhatta Gosvami compiled a book called Sat-kriya-
sara-dipika, edited the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, wrote a forward to the Sat-sandarbha and
a commentary on the Krspa-karnamyta, and installed the Radharamana Deity in
Vrndavana. In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 184, it is mentioned that his
previous name in the pastimes of Lord Krsna was Ananga-mafnjari. Sometimes he is
also said to have been an incarnation of Gunpa-manjari. Srinivasa Acarya and
Gopinatha Pajari were two of his disciples.


--- Page 321 ---
320 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 106
শঙ্করারণ্য - আচার্থ-বৃক্ষের এক শাখা।
মুকুন্দ, FIA, রুদ্র, - উপশাখা লেখা ॥ ১০৬ ॥
Sankararanya——dcarya-vrksera eka sakha
mukunda, kasinatha, rudra—upasakha lekha
SYNONYMS

Sankardrapya—of the name Sankararanya; carya-vrksera—of the tree of acaryas;
eka—one; $akha—branch; mukunda—of the name Mukunda; ka@sinatha—of the name
Kasinatha; rudra—of the name Rudra; upasakha lekha—they are known as sub-
branches.

TRANSLATION

The acarya Sankararanya was considered the forty-eighth branch of the original

tree. From him proceeded sub-branches known as Mukunda, Kasinatha and Rudra.
PURPORT

It is said that Sankararanya was the sannydsa name of Srila Visvariipa, who was
the elder brother of Visvambhara (the original name of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu).
Sankararanya expired in 1432 sakabda at Solapura, where there is a place of pilgri-
mage known 25 Panderapura. This is referred to in the Madhya-/ild, Chapter Nine,
verses 299 and 300.

Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu opened a primary school in the house of Mukunda,
or Mukunda Saiijaya, and Mukunda’s son, whose name was Purusottama, became
the Lord’s student. Kasinatha arranged the marriage of Lord Caitanya in His
previous @srama, when His name was Visvambhara. He induced the court-pandita,
92012112, to offer Visvambhara his daughter. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse
50, it is mentioned that Kasinatha was an incarnation of Satrajit, who arranged the
marriage of Krsna and Satya, and it is mentioned in verse 135 that Rudra, or Sri
Rudrarama Pandita, was formerly a friend of Lord Krsna named Varithapa. Sri
Rudrarama Pandita constructed a big temple at Vallabhapura, which is one mile
north of Mahesa, for the Deities named Radhavallabha. The descendants of his
brother, Yadunandana Bandyopadhyaya, are known as Cakravarti Thakuras, and
they are in charge of the maintenance of this temple as sevaits. Formerly the
Jagannatha Deity used to come to the temple of Radhavallabha from Mahesa
during the Rathayatra festival, but in the Bengali year 1262, due to a misunder-
standing between the priests of the two temples, the Jagannatha Deity stopped
coming.

TEXT 107
fare পণ্ডিত — প্রভুর কপার खाऊन |
যার কৃষ্ণসেবা দেখি” বশ ङिदूवन्‌ ॥ ১০৭ ॥


--- Page 322 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 321
$rinatha pandita—prabhura kppara bhajana
yanra kgspa-seva dekhi’ vasa tri-bhuvana
SYNONYMS
$rinatha papgdita—of the name Srinatha Pandita; prabhura—of the Lord; kfpara—
of mercy; bhdjana—receiver; yanra—whose; kfspa-seva—worship of Lord Krsna;
dekhi’—seeing; vasa—subjugated; tri-bhuvana—all the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
Srinatha Pandita, the forty-ninth branch, was the beloved recipient of all the
mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Everyone in the three worlds was astonished
to see how he worshiped Lord Krsna.
PURPORT
About one and a half miles away from Kumarahatta, or Kamarhatti, which
is a few miles from Calcutta, is a village known as Karicadapada which was
the home of Sri Sivananda Sena. There he constructed a temple of Sri Gaura-
20013. Another temple was established there with ৩11 Radha-Krsna mirtis
by Srinatha Pandita. The Deity of that temple is named Sri Krsna Raya. The temple
of Krsna Raya, which was constructed in the year 1708 sakabda by a prominent
Zamindar named Nimai Mullik of Pathuriya-ghata in Calcutta, is very large. There is
a big courtyard in front of the temple, and there are residential quartersifor visitors
and good arrangements for cooking prasada. The entire courtyard is surrounded by
very high boundary walls, and the temple is almost as big as the Mahesa temple.
Inscribed on a tablet are the names of Srinatha Pandita and his father and grand-
father and the date of construction of the temple. Srinatha Pandita, one of the
disciples of Advaita Prabhu, was the spiritual master of the third son of Sivananda
Sena, who was known as Paramananda Kavikarnapdra. It is supposed to be during
the time of Kavikarnapdira that the Krsna Raya Deity was installed. According to
hearsay, Virabhadra Prabhu, the son of Nityananda Prabhu, brought a big stone
from Mursidabad from which three Deities were carved—namely, the Radhavallabha
vigraha of Vallabhapura, the Syamasundara vigraha of Khadadaha and the Sri Krsna
Raya vigraha of Kancadapada.The home of Sivananda Sena was situated on the bank
of the Ganges near an almost ruined temple. It is said that the same Nimai Mullik
of Calcutta saw this broken-down temple of Krsna Raya while he was going to
Benares and thereafter constructed the present temple.
TEXT 108
জগল্লাথ আচার্য প্রভুর প্রিয় দাল।
প্রভুর আজ্ঞাতে ভেঁহো৷ CTA গঙ্গাবান ॥ ১০৮ ॥
jagannatha acarya prabhura priya dasa
prabhura gjfiate tenho kaila ganga-vasa


--- Page 323 ---
322 Sr-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
jaganndtha acdarya—of the name )agannitha Acarya; prabhura—of the Lord;
priya dasa—very dear servant; prabhura ajiiate—by the order of the Lord; teiho—
he; kaila—agreed; ganga-vasa—living on the bank of the Ganges.
TRANSLATION
Jagannatha Acarya, the fiftieth branch of the Caitanya tree, was an extremely
dear servant of the Lord, by whose order he decided to live on the bank of the
Ganges.
PURPORT
Jagannatha Acirya is stated in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (111) to have formerly
been Durvasa of Nidhuvana.
TEXT 109
FW বৈদ্য) আর পণ্ডিত-শেখর |
কবিচন্দ্, আর কীর্তলীয়া सवत्र ॥ ১০৯ ॥
krsnadasa vaidya, ara papdita-Sekhara
kavicandra, ara kirtaniya sasthivara
SYNONYMS
krspadadsa vaidya—of the name Krsnadasa Vaidya; ara—and; pandita-$ekhara—of
the name Pandita Sekhara; kavicandra—of the name Kavicandra;ara—and; kirtaniya—
kirtana performer; sasthivara—of the name Sasthivara.
TRANSLATION
The fifty-first branch of the Caitanya tree was Krsnadasa Vaidya, the fifty-
second was Pandita Sekhara, the fifty-third was Kavicandra, and the fifty-fourth
was Sasthivara, who was a great sankirtana performer.
PURPORT
In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (171) it is mentioned that Srinatha Misra was
Citrangi and Kavicandra was Manohara-gopf.
TEXT 110
জীনাথ মিশ্র, শুভানম্দ, Baim, ঈশান |
ff, জীগোপীকাল্ত, মিশ্র ভগবান্‌ ॥ ১১০ ॥
$rindatha misra, Subhananda, $rirama, 1$3/70
Srinidhi, Srigopikanta, misra bhagavan


--- Page 324 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 323
SYNONYMS
Srinatha misra—of the name Srinatha Misra; $ubh@nanda—of the name Subhananda;
Srirama—of the name Srirama; 7$ana—of the name sana; $rinidhi—of the name
Srinidhi; $ri-gopikanta—of the name Sri Gopikanta; misra bhagavan—of the name
Misra Bliagavan.
TRANSLATION
The fifty-fifth branch was Srinatha Misra, the fifty-sixth was Subhananda; the
fifty-seventh was Srirama, the fifty-eighth was [sana, the fifty-ninth was Srinidhi,
the sixtieth was $ri Gopikanta, and the sixty-first was Misra Bhagavan.
PURPORT
Subhananda, who formerly lived in Vrndavana 25 Malati, was one of the kirtana
performers who danced in front of the Rathayatra car during the Jagannatha
festival. It is said that he ate the foam that came out of the mouth of the Lord
while He danced before the Rathayatra car. Isana was a personal servant of Srimati
Sacidevi, who showed her great mercy upon him. He was also very dear to Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 111
স্ববুদ্ধি মিশ্র, হৃদয়ানন্দ, কমলনয়ন।
মহেশ পণ্ডিত, জীকর, জীমধুসূছল ॥ ১১১ ॥
subuddhi misra, hrdayananda, kamala-nayana
mahesa pandita, $rikara, Sri-madhusudana
SYNONYMS
subuddhi misra—of the name Subuddhi Misra; hrdaydnanda—of the name
Hrdayananda; kamala-nayana—of the name Kamala-nayana; mahesa pandita—of the
name Mahesa Pandita; $rikara—of the name Srikara; $ri-madhusiidana—of the name
Sri Madhustdana.
TRANSLATION
The sixty-second branch of the tree was Subuddhi Misra, the sixty-third was
Hrdayananda, the sixty-fourth is Kamala-nayana, the sixty-fifth was Mahesa Pandita,
the sixty-sixth was Srikara, and the sixty-seventh was Sri Madhustidana.
PURPORT
Subuddhi Misra, who was formerly Gunactida in Vrndavana, installed Gaura-
Nityananda Deities in a temple in the village known as Belagan, which is about three
miles away from Srikhanda. His present descendant is known as Govindacandra
Gosvami.


--- Page 325 ---
324 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 112
পুকুষোত্তম, ল্রীগালীম, जगन्नाम |
জঞীচন্দ্রশেখর Law, দ্বিজ হরিদাস ॥ ১১২ ॥
purusottama, $ri-galima, jagannatha-dasa
$ri-candrasekhara vaidya, dvija haridasa
SYNONYMS
purusottama—of the name Purusottama; $ri-galima—of the name Sri Galima;
jagannatha-dasa—of the name Jagannatha dasa; $ri-candresekhara vaidya—of the
name Sri Candrasekhara Vaidya; dvija haridasa—of the name Dvija Haridasa.
TRANSLATION
The sixty-eighth branch of the original tree was Purusottama, the sixty-ninth
was Sri Galima, the seventieth was Jagannatha dasa, the seventy-first was Sri
Candrasekhara Vaidya, and the seventy-second was Dvija Haridasa.
PURPORT
There is some question about whether Dvija Haridasa was the author of
Astottara-$ata-nama. He had two sons named Sridama and Gokulananda who were
disciples of $ri Advaita Acarya. Their village, Kancana-gadiya, is situated within
five miles of the Bajarasau station, the fifth station from Ajimaganja in the district
of Mursidabad, West Bengal.
TEXT 113
রামদাস, Flava, कटने) ग।लम। ज |
ভাগবতাচার্য, ঠাকুর সারজদাস ॥ ১১৩ ॥
ramadasa, kavicandra, $/17-00/20/00350
bhagavatacarya, thakura sarafigadasa
SYNONYMS
ramadasa—of the name Ramadasa; kavicandra—of the name Kavicandra; $ri-
gopdladasa—of the name Sri Gopala dasa; bhagavatacarya—of the name
Bhagavatacarya; thakura sarafigadasa—of the name Thakura Saranga dasa.
TRANSLATION
The seventy-third branch of the original tree was Ramadasa, the seventy-fourth
was Kavicandra, the seventy-fifth was Sri Gopala dasa, the seventy-sixth was
Bhagavatacarya, and the seventy-seventh was Thakura Saranga dasa.


--- Page 326 ---
Adi-lia, Chapter 10 325
PURPORT

In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (203) it is said, ‘‘Bhagavatacarya compiled a book
entitled Kfspa-prema-tarangini, and he was the most beloved devotee of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.” When Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited Varahanagara,
a suburb of Calcutta, He stayed in the house of a most fortunate brahmana who
was a very learned scholar in Bhdgavata literature. As soon as this brahmana saw
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he began to read $rimad-Bhagavatam. When Mahaprabhu
heard his explanation, which expounded bhakti-yoga, He immediately became un-
conscious in ecstasy. Lord Caitanya later said, “^| have never heard such a nice
explanation of $rimad-Bhagavatam. | therefore designate you Bhagavatacarya. Your
only duty is to recite Srimad-Bhagavatam. That is My injunction.” His real name
was Raghunatha. His monastery, which is situated in Varahanagara, about three and
a half miles north of Calcutta on the bank of the Ganges, still exists, and it is
managed by the initiated disciples of the late Sri Ramadasa Babaji. Presently,
however, it is not as well managed as in the presence of Babaji Maharaja.

Another name of Thakura 5212182 dasa was Sarnga Thakura. Sometimes he was
also called Sarngapani or Sarrigadhara. He was a resident of Navadvipa in the neigh-
borhood known as Modadruma-dvipa, and he used to worship the Supreme Lord in
a secluded place on the bank of the Ganges. He did not accept disciples, but he was
repeatedly inspired from within by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to do so.
Thus one morning he decided, “Whomever | see | shall make my disciple.” When he
went to the bank of the Ganges to take his bath, by chance he saw a dead body
floating in the water, and he touched it with his feet. This immediately brought the
body to life, and Thakura Sarariga dasa accepted him as his disciple. This disciple
later became famous as Thakura Murari, and his name is always associated with
that of Sri Saranga. His disciplic succession still inhabits the village of Sar. There is
a temple at Mamagacchi that is supposed to have been started by Sarriga Thakura.
Not long ago, a new temple building was erected in front of a bakula tree there,
and it is now being managed by the members of the Gaudiya Matha. 1015 said that
the management of the temple is now far better than before. In the Gaura-
ganoddesa-dipika (172) it is stated that Sarnga Thakura was formerly a 40/27 named
Nandimukhi. Some devotees say that he was formerly Prahlada Maharaja, but Set
Kavikarnapara says that his father, Sivananda Sena, does not accept this proposition.

TEXT 114
জগন্নাথ তীর্থ, বিপ্র ্রীজানকীনাথ ।
গোপাল আচার্য, আর বিপ্র বাণীনাথ ॥ ১১৪ ॥
Jagannatha tirtha, vipra Sri-janakinatha
gopala acarya, ara vipra vaninatha
SYNONYMS

Jjagannatha tirtha—of the name Jagannatha Tirtha; vipra—brahmanpa; S$ri-

Jjanakinatha—of the name Sri Janakinatha; gopala dcarya—of the name


--- Page 327 ---
326 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Gopala Acarya; ara—and; vipra vapingtha—the brahmana of the name
Vaninatha.
TRANSLATION
The seventy-eighth branch of the original tree was Jagannatha Tirtha, the seventy-
ninth was the brahmana Sri Janakinatha, the eightieth was Gopala Acarya, and the
eighty-first was the brahmana Vaninatha.
PURPORT
Jagannatha Tirtha was one of the nine principal sannyasis who were Lord
Caitanya’s associates. Vaninatha Vipra was a resident of Canpahati, a village in the
district of Burdwan near the town of Navadvipa, the police station of Purvasthali
and the post office of Samudragada. The temple there was very much neglected,
but it was renovated in the Bengali year 1328 by Sri Paramananda Brahmacari, one
of Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura’s disciples, who reorganized the sevd-pija
(worship in the temple) and placed the temple under the management of the Sri
Caitanya Matha of Sri Mayapur. In the temple as it now exists, the Deity of Sri
Gaura-Gadadhara is worshiped strictly according to the principles of the revealed
scriptures. Canpahati is two miles away from both Samudragada and the Navadvipa
station of the eastern railway.
TEXT 115
গোবিন্দ, মাধব, বাসুদেব, তিন ভাই |
F317 কীর্তনে-নাচে চৈতদ্ত-নিতাই ॥ ১১৫ ॥
govinda, madhava, vasudeva—tina bhai
yar-sabara kirtane nace caitanya-nitai
SYNONYMS
govinda—of the name Govinda; madhava—of the name Madhava; vasudeva—of
the name Vasudeva; tina bhai—three brothers; yan-sabara—all of whom; kirtane—in
the performance of sankirtana; nace—dance; caitanya-nitdi—Lord Caitanya and
Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
The three brothers Govinda, Madhava and Vasudeva were the eighty-second,
eighty-third and eighty-fourth branches of the tree. Lord Caitanya and Nityananda
used to dance in their kirtana performances.
PURPORT
The three brothers Govinda, Madhava and Vasudeva Ghosh all belonged to a
kayastha family. Govinda established the Gopinatha temple in Agradvipa, where he
resided. Madhava Ghosh was expert in performing kirtana. No one within this


--- Page 328 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 327
world could compete with him. He was known as the singer of Vindavana and was
very dear to Sri Nityananda Prabhu. It is said that when the three brothers per-
formed sankirtana, immediately Lord Caitanya and Nityananda would dance in
ecstasy. According to the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika (188), the three brothers were
formerly Kalavati, Rasollasa and Gunaturiga, who recited the songs composed by
Sri Visakha-gopi. The three brothers were among one of the seven parties that per-
formed kirtana when Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu attended the Rathayatra
festival at Jagannatha Puri. Vakresvara Pandita was the chief dancer in their party.
This is vividly described in the Madhya-Iila, Chapter Thirteen, verses 42 and 43.

TEXT 116
রামদাস অতস্তিরাম_সখ্য-প্রেমরাশি ।
বোলসাঙ্গের क।रं তুলি' যে করিল AR ॥ ১১৬ ॥
ramadasa abhirama—sakhya-premarasi
solasangera kastha tuli’ ye karila vansi
SYNONYMS
ramadasa abhirama—of the name Ramadasa Abhirama; sakhya-prema—friendship;
rasi—great volume; sola-sargera—of sixteen knots; kdstha—wood; tuli’—lifting; ye—
one who; karila—made; vansi—fiute.
TRANSLATION
Ramadasa Abhirama was fully absorbed in the mellow of friendship. He made a
flute of a bamboo stick with sixteen knots.
PURPORT
Abhirama was an inhabitant of Khanakulakrsna-nagara.
TEXT 117
প্রভুর WER নিতযানম্দ গৌড়ে एनिल) |
তর সঙ্গে তিনজন প্রভু-আস্ায় আইলা ॥ ১১৭ ॥
prabhura GjAdya nityananda gaude calila
tanra sange tina-jana prabhu-ajiiaya aila
SYNONYMS
prabhura ajnaya—under the order of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityananda—
Lord Nityananda; gaude—to Bengal; calila—went back; tanra sange—in His company;
tina-jana—three men; prabhu-ajnaya—under the order of the Lord; aila—went.


--- Page 329 ---
328 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
By the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, three devotees accompanied Lord
Nityananda Prabhu when He returned to Bengal to preach.
TEXT 118
রামদাস, মাধব, আর বাস্থরদেব CAF |
প্রভু-সঙ্গে রহে গোবিন্দ পাইয়া সম্তোষ ॥ ১১৮ ॥
ramadasa, madhava, ara vasudeva ghosa
prabhu-sange rahe govinda paiya santosa
SYNONYMS
ramadasa—of the name Ramadasa; mddhava—of the name Madhava; dra—and;
vasudeva ghosa—of the name Vasudeva Ghosh ; prabhu-sarige—in the company of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rahe—remained; govinda—of the name Govinda; paiya—feel-
ing; santosa—great satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
These three were Ramadasa, Madhava and Vasudeva Ghosh. Govinda Ghosh,
however, remained with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri and thus felt
great satisfaction.
TEXT 119
ভাগবতাচার্য, চিরঞ্জীব, Sagem |
মাধবাচার্য, कमल। कांड, ল্রীষতুনন্দন ॥ ১১৯ ॥
bhagavatacarya, ciranijiva sri-raghunandana
madhavacarya, kamalakanta, $ri-yadunandana
SYNONYMS
bhagavatacarya—of the name Bhagavatacarya; cirafijiva—of the name Ciradjiva;
$ri-raghunandana—of the name Sri Raghunandana; madhavicarya—of the name
Madhayacarya; kamalakanta—of the name Kamalakanta; $ri-yadunandana—of the
name Sri Yadunandana.
TRANSLATION
, Bhagavatacarya, Ciranjiva, Sri Raghunandana, Madhavacarya, Kamalakanta and
Sri Yadunandana were all among the branches of the Caitanya tree.
PURPORT
Sri Madhavacarya was the husband of Lord Nityananda's daughter, Garigadevi.
He took initiation from Purusottama, a branch of Nityananda Prabhu. It is said


--- Page 330 ---
01413, Chapter 10 329
that when Nityananda Prabhu’s daughter married Madhavacarya, the Lord gave
him the village named Panjinagara as a dowry. His temple is situated near the Jirag
railway station on the eastern railway. According to Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (169)
Sri Madhavacarya was formerly the gop? named Madhavi. Kamalakanta belonged to
the branch of Sri Advaita Prabhu. His full name was Kamalakanta Visvasa.

TEXT 120
মহা-কূপাপাত্র প্রভুর জগাই, মাধাই |
পতিতপাবন নামের সাক্ষী দুই ভাই ॥ ১২০ ॥
maha-krpa-patra prabhura jagai, madhai
‘patita-pavana’ namera 5057 dui bhai
SYNONYMS
maha-krpa-patra—object of very great mercy; prabhura—of the Lord; jagai
madhai—the two brothers Jagai and Madhai; patita-pavana—deliverer of the fallen;
namera—of this name; saksi— witness; dui bhai—these two brothers.

TRANSLATION

Jagai and Madhai, the eighty-ninth and nintieth branches of the tree, were the
greatest recipients of Lord Caitanya's mercy. These two brothers were the witnesses
who proved that Lord Caitanya was rightly named Patita-pavana, ‘‘the deliverer
of the fallen souls.”

PURPORT

In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (115) it is said that the two brothers Jagai and
Madhai were formerly the doorkeepers named Jaya and Vijaya, who later became
Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu. Jagai and Madhai were born in respectable brahmana
families, but they adopted the professions of thieves and rogues and thus became
implicated in all kinds of undesirable activities, especially woman hunting, intoxica-
tion and gambling. Later, by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Sri
Nityananda Prabhu, they were initiated, and they got the chance to chant the Hare
Krsna mahd-mantra. As a result of chanting, both brothers later became exalted
devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The descendants of Madhai still exist, and
they are respectable brahmanas. The tombs of these two brothers, Jagai and Madhai,
are in a place known as 01710937313, or Madhaitala-grama, which is situated about
one mile south of Katwa. It is said that Sri Gopicarana dasa Babaji established a
temple of Nitai-Gaura at this place about 200 years ago.

TEXT 121
গোৌড়দেশ-ভক্তের কৈল সংক্ষেপ कथेन |
অনন্ত চৈতন্তযভক্ত না যায় গণন ॥ ১২১ ॥


--- Page 331 ---
330 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
gauga-desa-bhaktera kaila sanksepa kathana
ananta caitanya-bhakta na yaya ganana
SYNONYMS
gauda-desa—in Bengal; bhaktera—of the devotees; kaila—| have described;
sanksepa—in brief; kathana—narration;ananta—unlimited; caitanya-bhakta— devotees
of Lord Caitanya; nd—not; yaya—can be; ganana—counted.
TRANSLATION
I have given a brief description of the devotees of Lord Caitanya in Bengal.
Actually His devotees are innumerable.
TEXT 122
নীল।চলে এই जव ভক্ত প্রভুমঙ্গে ৷
দুই স্থানে প্রভু-সেব৷ কৈল নানা-রঙ্গে ॥ ১২২ ॥
nilacale ei 5000 bhakta prabhu-sarnge
dui sthane prabhu-seva kaila nana-range
SYNONYMS
nilacale—at Jagannatha 12011) ei—these; saba—all; bhakta—devotees; prabhu-sarige—
in the company of Lord Caitanya; dui sthane—in two places; prabhu-seva—service
of the Lord; kaila—executed; nand-range—in different ways.
TRANSLATION
I have especially mentioned all these devotees because they accompanied Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Bengal and Orissa and served Him in many ways.
PURPORT
Most of the devotees of Lord Caitanya lived in Bengal and Orissa. Thus they are
celebrated as oriyas and gaudiyas. At present, however, by the grace of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His cult is being propagated all over the world, and it is
most probable that in the future history of Lord Caitanya’s movement, Europeans,
Americans, Canadians, Australians, South Americans, Asians and people from all
over the world will be celebrated as devotees of Lord Caitanya. The International
Society for Krishna Consciousness has already constructed a big temple at Mayapur,
Navadvipa, which is being visited by devotees from all parts of the world, as fore-
told by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and anticipated by Sri Bhaktivinoda Thakura.
TEXT 123
কেবল নীলাচলে প্রভুর যে যে ভক্তগণ |
সংক্ষেপে করিয়ে কিছু সে সব কথন ॥ ১২৩ ॥


--- Page 332 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 331
kevala nilacale prabhura ye ye bhakta-gana
sanksepe kariye Richu se saba kathana
SYNONYMS
kevala—only; nilacale—in Jagannatha Pur; prabhura—of the Lord; ye ye—all those;
bhakta-gapa—devotees; sanksepe—in brief; kariye—| do; kichu—some; se saba—all
those; kathana—narration.
TRANSLATION
Let me briefly describe some of the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in
Jagannatha Puri.
TEXTS 124-126
নীলাচলে প্রভুসঙ্গে যত ভক্তগণ |
সবার অধ্যক্ষ প্রভুর মর্ম দুইজন ॥ ১২৪ ॥
পরমানম্দপুরী, আর স্বরূপ-দামোদর |
গদাধর, জগদানন্দ, শঙ্কর, বক্রেশ্বর ॥ ১২৫ ॥
দামোদর পণ্ডিত, ঠাকুর হরিদাস |
রঘুনাথ বৈদ্য, আর রঘুনাথদাস ॥ ১২৬ ॥
77/300/6 prabhu-sange yata bhakta-gana
sabdra adhyaksa prabhura marma dui-jana
paramananda-puri, ara svartipa-damodara
gadadhara, jagadananda, Sankara, vakresvara
damodara pandita, thakura haridasa
raghunatha vaidya, ara raghunatha-dasa
SYNONYMS
nilacale—in Jagannatha Puri; prabhu-safige—in the company of Lord Caitanya;
yata—all; bhakta-gapa—devotees; sabara—of all of them; adhyaksa—the chief;
prabhura—of the Lord; marma—heart and soul; dui-jana—two persons; paramananda
puri—of the name Paramananda Puri; gra—and; svarpa-damodara—of the name
Svarapa Damodara; gadddhara—of the name Gadadhara; jagadananda—of the name
Jagadananda; Sarkara—of the name Sankara; vakresvara—of the name Vakresvara;
damodara pandita—of the name Damodara Pandita; thakura haridasa—of the name
Thakura Haridasa; raghunatha vaidya—of the name Raghunatha Vaidya; ৭/৫- 3170;
raghunatha-dasa—of the name Raghunatha dasa.


--- Page 333 ---
332 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
Among the devotees who accompanied the Lord in Jagannatha Puri, two of
them—Paramananda Puri and Svaripa Damodara—were the heart and soul of the
Lord. Among the other devotees were Gadadhara, Jagadananda, Sankara, Vakresvara,
Damodara Pandita, Thakura Haridasa, Raghunatha Vaidya and Raghunatha dasa.
PURPORT
The Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Five, states that Raghunatha Vaidya
came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when the Lord was staying at Panihati. He
was a great devotee and had all good qualities. According to the Caitanya-bhagavata,
he was formerly Revati, the wife of Balarama. Anyone he glanced upon would
immediately attain Krspa consciousness. He lived on the seashore at Jagannatha
Puri and compiled a book of the name Sthana-nirtipana.
TEXT 127
ইত্যাদিক পূর্বসজী व ভক্তগণ |
নীলাচলে রহি' করে প্রভুর সেবন ॥ ১২৭ ॥
ityadika parva-sangi bada bhakta-gana
nilacale rahi’ kare prabhura sevana
SYNONYMS
ityadika—all these and others; parva-sangi—former associates; baga—very much;
bhakta-gana—great devotees; nildcale—at )Jagannatha Pur; rahi’—remaining; kare—
do; prabhura—of the Lord; sevana—service.
TRANSLATION
All these devotees were associates of the Lord from the very beginning, and
when the Lord took up residence in Jagannatha Puri they remained there to serve
Him faithfully.
TEXT 128
আর যত ভক্তগণ গোৌড়দেশবাসী |
SICH প্রভুরে দে থে নীলাচলে আসি” ॥ ১২৮ ॥
dra yata bhakta-gana gaugda-desa-vasi
pratyabde prabhure dekhe nilacale asi’
SYNONYMS
ara— others; yata—all; bhakta-gapa—devotees; gauda-desa-vasi—residents of Bengal;
pratyabde—each year; prabhure—the Lord; dekhe—see; nilacale—in | agannatha Purf;
dsi’—coming there.


--- Page 334 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 333
TRANSLATION
All the devotees who resided in Bengal used to visit Jagannatha Puri to see the
Lord.
TEXT 129
নীলাচলে প্রভুসহ প্রথম मिनन |
সেই ভক্তগণের टव করিয়ে भगेन ॥ ১২৯ ॥
nilacale prabhu-saha prathama milana
sei bhakta-ganera ebe kariye ganana
SYNONYMS
nilacale—at Jagannatha Pur; prabhu-saha— with the Lord; prathama—first; milana
—meeting; se/i—that; bhakta-ganera—of the devotees; ebe—now; kariye—| do; ganana
—count.
TRANSLATION
Now let me enumerate the devotees of Bengal who first came to see the Lord at
Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 130
TEI এক,- সার্বভৌম खों |
ভার ভম্ীপতি জ্রীগোপীনাথাচার্য ॥ ১৩০ ॥
baga-sakha eka, —sarvabhauma bhattacarya
tanra bhagni-pati $ri-gopinathacarya
SYNONYMS
bada-sakha eka—one of the biggest branches; sarvabhauma bhagtacarya—of the
name Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; {0/८ bhagni-pati—his brother-in-law (the husband
of Sarvabhauma's sister); sri-gopinathacarya—of the name Sri Gopinathacarya.
TRANSLATION
There was Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, one of the biggest branches of the tree of
the Lord, and his sister’s husband, $ri Gopinathacarya.
PURPORT
The original name of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was Vasudeva Bhattacarya. His
place of birth, which is known as Vidyanagara, is about two and a half miles away
from the Navadvipa railway station, or Caripahati railway station. His father was a
very celebrated man of the name Mahesvara Visarada. It is said that Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya was the greatest logician of his time in India. At Mithila in Bihar he
became a student of a great professor named Paksadhara Misra, who did not allow


--- Page 335 ---
334 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta

any student to note down his explanations of logic. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was
so talented, however, that he learned the explanations by heart, and when he later
returned to Navadvipa he established a school for the study of logic, thus diminishing
the importance of Mithila. Students from various parts of India still come to
Navadvipa to study logic. According to some authoritative opinions, the celebrated
logician Raghunatha Siromani was also a student of Sarvabhauma Bhattacirya. In
effect, Sarvabhauma Bhattacaryabecame the leader of all students of logic. Although
he was a grhastha (householder), he even taught many sannydsis in the knowledge
of logic. He started a school at | agannatha 2011 for the study of Vedanta philosophy,
of which he was a great scholar. When Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, he advised the Lord to learn Vedanta philosophy from him, but later
he became a student of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to understand the real meaning
of Vedanta. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was so fortunate as to see the six-armed
form of Lord Caitanya known as $Sadbhuja. A Sadbhuja Deity is still situated at
one end of the Jagannatha temple. Daily safkirtana performances take place in this
part of the temple. The meeting of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya with Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is vividly described in the Madhya-/ila, Chapter Six. Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya wrote a book named Caitanya-sataka. Of the 100 verses of this book,
two verses, beginning with the words vairdgya-vidya-nijabhaktiyoga, are very fa-
mous among Gaugiya Vaisnavas. The Gaure-ganoddesa-dipika (119) states that
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was an incarnation of Brhaspati, the learned scholar from
the celestial planets.

Gopinatha Acarya, who belonged to a respectable brahmana family, was also an
inhabitant of Navadvipa and constant companion of the Lord. He was the husband
of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’s sister. In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika (178) it is
described that he was formerly the 40/27 named Ratnavali. According to the opinion
of others, he was an incarnation of Brahma.

TEXT 131
কালীমিশ্র, প্রস্যুল্লমিশ্র, রায় ভবানন্দ |
যাহার মিলনে यङ्‌ नटेन) আমন্দ ॥ ১৩১ ॥
kasi-misra, pradyumna-misra, raya bhavananda
yanhdara milane prabhu paila ananda
SYNONYMS

kasi-misra—of the name Kasi Misra; pradyumna-misra— of the name Pradyumna
Misra; raya bhavananda—of the name Bhavananda Raya; yanhara—of whom; milane—
meeting; prabhu—the Lord; paila—got; Gnanda—great pleasure.

TRANSLATION

In the list of devotees at Jagannatha Puri [whieh begins with Paramananda 0५7,

Svariipa Damodara, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Gopinatha Acarya], Kasi Misra


--- Page 336 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 335
was the fifth, Pradyumna Misra the sixth and Bhavananda Raya the seventh. Lord
Caitanya took great pleasure in meeting with them.

PURPORT

In Jagannatha Puri Lord Caitanya lived at the house of Kasi Misra, who was the
priest of the king. Later this house was inherited by Vakresvara Pandita and then
by his disciple Gopalaguru Gosvami, who established there a Deity of Radhakanta.
The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (193) states that Kasi Misra was formerly the gopi 10
Vrndavana named Krsnavallabha. Pradyumna Misra, an inhabitant of Orissa, was a
great devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Pradyumna Misra was born of a
bréhmana family and Ramananda Raya of a non-brghmapa family, yet Lord
CaitanyaMahaprabhu advised PradyumnaMisra to take instruction from Ramananda
Raya. This incident is described in the Antya-/ila, Chapter Five.

Bhavananda Raya was the father of Sri Ramananda Raya. His residence was in
Alalanatha (Brahmagiri), which is about twelve miles west of Jagannatha Puri. By
caste he belonged to the karana community of Orissa, whose members were some-
times known as kayasthas and sometimes as $izdras, but he was the governor of
Madras under the control of King Prataparudra of Jagannatha Puri.

TEXT 132
আলিজন FF Sioa বলিল वन ।
তুমি পাও: পঞ্চপাগুব -তোমার নন্দন ॥ ১৩২ ॥
alingana kari’ tanre balila vacana
tumi pandu, pafica-pandava—tomara nandana
SYNONYMS

alingana kari’—embracing; tanre—unto him; balila—said; vacana—those words;
tumi—you; pandu—were Pandu; pafica—five; pandava—the Pandavas; tomdra—your;
nandana—sons.

TRANSLATION
Embracing Raya Bhavananda, the Lord declared to him: “You formerly appeared
as Pandu, and your five sons appeared as the five Pandavas.”
TEXT 133
রামানন্দ রায়, পট্রনায়ক গোপীনাথ |
কলানিধি, guifafy, নায়ক বাণীলাথ ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
ramananda raya, pattandyaka gopinatha
kalanidhi, sudhanidhi, nayaka vaninatha


--- Page 337 ---
336 SrT-Caitanya-caritimrta
SYNONYMS

ramananda raya—of the name Ramananda Raya; pattanayaka gopinatha—of the
name Pattanayaka Gopinatha; kal@nidhi—of the name Kalanidhi; sudhanidhi—of the
name Sudhanidhi; ndyaka vapinatha—of the name Nayaka Vaninatha.

TRANSLATION
The five sons of Bhavananda Raya were Ramananda Raya, Pattanayaka Gopinatha,
Kalanidhi, Sudhanidhi and Nayaka Vaninatha.
TEXT 134
এই পঞ্চ পুত্র তোমার মোর প্রিয়পাত্র।
রামানন্দ সহ মোর দেহু-ভেদ মাত্র ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
ei pafica putra 10/770/0 mora priyapatra
ramananda saha mora deha-bheda matra
SYNONYMS

ei—these; pafica—five; putra—sons; tomdara—your; mora—Mine; priyapatra—very
dear; ramananda saha— with Sri Ramananda Raya; mora—Mine; deha-bheda—bodily
difference; matra—only.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Bhavananda Raya, “Your five sons are all My

dear devotees. Ramananda Raya and | are one, although our bodies are different.”
PURPORT

The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (120-124) states that Ramananda Raya was formerly
Arjuna. He is also considered to have been an incarnation of the 90021 Lalita,
although in the opinion of others he was an incarnation of Visakhadevi. He was a
most confidential devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
said, “Although | am a sannyasi, My mind is sometimes perturbed when | see a
woman. But Ramananda Raya is greater than Me, for he is always undisturbed, even
when he touches a woman.” Only Ramananda Raya was endowed with the pre-
rogrative to touch a woman in this way; no one should imitate him. Unfortunately,
there are rascals who imitate the activities of Ramananda Raya. We need not discuss
them further.

In Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s final pastimes, both Ramananda Raya and
Svarapa Damodara always engaged in reciting suitable verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam
to pacify the Lord’s ecstatic feelings of separation from Krsna. It is said that when
Lord Caitanya went to southern India, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya advised Him to
meet Ramananda Raya, for he declared that there was no devotee as advanced in
understanding the conjugal love of Krsna and the gopis. While touring South India,


--- Page 338 ---
Adi-fila, Chapter 10 337
Lord Caitanya met Ramananda Raya by the bank of the Godavari, and in their
long discourses the Lord took the position of a student, and Ramananda Raya
instructed Him. Caitanya Mahaprabhu concluded these discourses by saying, “My
dear Ramananda Raya, both you and | are madmen, and therefore we met intimate-
ly on an equal level.” Lord Caitanya advised Ramananda Raya to resign from his
government post and come back to Jagannatha Puri to live with Him. Although Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu refused to see Maharaja Prataparudra because he was a king,
Ramananda Raya, by a Vaisnava scheme, arranged a meeting between the Lord and
the King. This is described in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Twelve, verses 41-57. Sr
Ramananda Raya was present during the water sports of the Lord after the Ratha-
yatra festival. ,

Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considered Sri Ramananda Raya and Sri 9271212
Gosvami to be equal in their renunciation, for although Sri Ramananda Raya was a
grhastha engaged in government service and Sri Sanatana Gosvami was in the
renounced order of complete detachment from material activities, they were both
servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who kept Krsna in the center of all
their activities. 911 Ramananda Raya was one of the three and a half personalities
with whom Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu discussed the most confidential topics of
Krsna consciousness. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised Pradyumna Misra to learn
the science of Krsna from Sri Ramananda Raya. As Subala always assisted Krsna in
His dealings with Radharani in krspa-/ila, so Ramananda Raya assisted Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in His feelings of separation from Krsna. Sri Ramananda Raya was the
author of fagannatha-vallabha-nataka.

TEXTS 135-136
প্রতাপরুদ্রে রাজা, আর SG কৃষ্ণানন্দ।
পরমানন্দ মহাপাত্র, ওঢু শিবানন্দ ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
ভগবান্‌ আচার্থ, AMATI ভারতী |
iffy মাহিতি, আর মুরারি মাহিতি ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
prataparudra raja, ara oghra /২[503/70/700
paramananda mahdapatra, oghra S$ivananda
bhagavan acarya, brahmanandakhya bharati
Sri-sikhi mahiti, ara murari mahiti
SYNONYMS

prataparudra raja—King Prataparudra of Orissa; ara—and; oghra krspananda—
Krsnananda, an Oriya devotee; paramananda mahapatra—of the name Paramananda
Mahapatra; oghra Sivananda—the Oriya Sivananda; bhagavan acarya—of the name
Bhagavan Acarya; brahmananda-akhya bharati—of the name Brahmananda Bharati;
$ri-Sikhi mahiti—of the name Sri Sikhi Mahiti; ara—and; murari mahiti—of the name
Murari Mahiti.


--- Page 339 ---
338 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TRANSLATION

King Prataparudra of Orissa, the Oriya devotees Krspananda and Sivananda,
Paramananda Mahapatra, Bhagavan Acarya, Brahmananda Bharati, Sri Sikhi Mahiti
and Murari Mahiti constantly associated with Caitanya Mahaprabhu while He
resided in Jagannatha Puri.

PURPORT

Prataparudra Maharaja, who belonged to the dynasty of the Ganga kings and
whose capital was in Cuttak, was the Emperor of Orissa and a great devotee of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It was by the arrangement of Ramananda Raya and
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya that he was able to serve Lord Caitanya. In the Gaura-
ganoddesa-dipika (118) it is said that King Indradyumna, who established the
temple of Jagannatha thousands of years ago, later took birth again in his own
family as Maharaja Prataparudra during the time of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Maharaja Prataparudra was as powerful as King Indra. The drama named Caitanya-
candrodaya was written under his direction.

In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Five, Paramananda Mahapatra is
described as follows: ‘“‘Paramananda Mahapatra was among the devotees who took
birth in Orissa and accepted Caitanya Mahaprabhu as their only asset. In the ecstasy
of conjugal love, he always thought of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.” Bhagavan Acarya,
a very learned scholar, was formerly an inhabitant of Halisahara, but he left every-
thing to live with Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Jagannatha Puri. His relationship with
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was friendly, like that of a cowherd boy. He was always
friendly to 5५21003 Gosani, but he was staunchly devoted to the lotus feet of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He sometimes invited Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his house.

Bhagavan Acirya was very liberal and simple. His father, Satananda Khan, was
completely materialistic, and his younger brother, Gopala Bhattacarya, was a
staunch Mayavadi philosopher who had studied very elaborately. When his brother
came to | agannatha Pari, Bhagavan Acarya wanted to hear from him about Mayavada
philosophy, but Svariipa Damodara forbade him to do so, and there the matter
stopped. Once a friend of Bhagavan Acarya’s from Bengal wanted to recite a drama
that he had written that was against the principles of devotional service, and although
Bhagavan Acarya wanted to recite this drama before Lord Caitanya 37301306178,
SvarGpa Damodara, the Lord's secretary, did not allow him to do so. Later Svarapa
Damodara pointed out in the drama many mistakes and disagreements with the
conclusion of devotional service, and the author became aware of the faults in his
writing and then surrendered to Svaripa Damodara, begging his mercy. This is
described in the Antya-/ila, Chapter Five, verses 91-166.

In the Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 189, it is said that Sikhi Mahiti was formerly
an assistant of 51171127 Radharani named Ragalekha. His sister Madhavi was also
an assistant of SrimatT Radharani and was named Kalakelf. Sikhi Mahiti, Madhavi
and their brother Murari Mahiti were all unalloyed devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu who could not forget Him for a moment of their lives. There is a book
in the Oriya language called Caitanya-carita-mahakavya in which there are many
narrations about Sikhi Mahiti. One narration concerns his seeing an ecstatic dream.


--- Page 340 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 339
Sikhi Mahiti always engaged in serving the Lord in his mind. One night, while he
was rendering such service, he fell asleep, and while he was asleep his brother and
sister came to awaken him. At that time he was in full ecstasy because he was having
a wonderful dream that Lord Caitanya, while visiting the temple of Jagannatha,
was entering and again coming out of the body of Jagannatha and looking at the
)Jagannatha Deity. Thus as soon as he awakened he embraced his brother and sister
and informed them, “‘My dear brother and sister, | have had a wonderful dream that
I shall now explain to you. The activities of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of
Mother Sac, are certainly most wonderful. | saw that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
while visiting the temple of Jagannatha, was entering the body of Jagannatha and
again coming out of His body. | am still seeing the same dream. Do you think |
have become deranged? | am still seeing the same dream! And the most wonderful
thing is that as soon as | came near Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He embraced me with
His long arms.” As he spoke to his brother and sister in this way, Sikhi Mahiti’s
voice faltered, and there were tears in his eyes. Thus the brothers and sister went
10 the temple of )Jagannatha, and there they saw Lord Caitanya in Jagamohana,
looking at the beauty of Sri Jagannatha Deity just as in Sikhi Mahiti’s dream. The
Lord was so magnanimous that immediately He embraced Sikhi Mahiti, exclaiming,
“You are the elder brother of Murari!” Being thus embraced, Sikhi Mahiti felt
ecstatic transcendental bliss. Thus he and his brother and sister always engaged in
rendering service to the Lord. Murari Mahiti, the youngest brother of Sikhi Mahiti,
is described in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Ten, verse 44.
TEXT 137
মাধবী-দেবী-_শিখিমাহিতির ভগিনী ।
Satara দাসীমধ্যে যার নাম গণি ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
madhavi-devi—Sikhi-mahitira 8000/71
$ri-radhara dasi-madhye yanra nama gani
SYNONYMS
madhavi-devi—of the name Madhavidevi; $ikhi-mahitira—of Sikhi Mahiti;
bhagini—sister; $ri-radhara—of Srimati Radharani; dasi-madhye—amongst the maid-
servants; yanra— whose; ngma—name; gapi—count.
TRANSLATION
Madhavidevi, the seventeenth of the prominent devotees, was the younger sister
of Sikhi Mahiti. She is considered to have formerly been a maidservant of Srimati
Radharani.
PURPORT
In the Antya-lila of Caitanya-caritamyta, Chapter Two, verses 104-106, there is a
description of Madhavidevi. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considered her to be one of


--- Page 341 ---
340 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
the maidservants of Srimati Radharani. Within this world, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
had three and a half very confidential devotees. The three were Svaripa Gosani, Sri
Ramananda Raya and Sikhi Mahiti, and Sikhi Mahiti’s sister, Madhavidevi, being
a woman, was considered to be the half. Thus it is known that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had three and a half confidential devotees.
TEXT 138
ঈশ্বরপুরীর শিষ্য - Fer কাশীশ্বর।
প্রীগোবিদ্দ নাম তাঁর প্রিয় অনুচর ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
i$vara-purira $isya—brahmacari kasisvara
$ri-govinda nama tarra priya anucara
SYNONYMS
i$vara-purira Sisya—disciple of [5५212 Puri; brahmacari kasisvara—of the name
Brahmacari Kasisvara; $ri-govinda—of the name Sri Govinda; nama—name; tanra—
his; priya—very dear; anucara—follower.
TRANSLATION
Brahmacari Kasfsvara was a disciple of Isvara Puri, and 517 Govinda was another
of his dear disciples.
PURPORT
Govinda was the personal servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In the Gatru-
ganoddesa-dipika, verse 137, itis stated that the servants formerly named Bhrrgara
and Bhangura in Vrndavana became Kasisvara and Govinda in Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s
pastimes. Govinda always engaged in the service of the Lord, even at great risk.
TEXT 139
ভার সিদ্ধিকালে হে Six আজ্ঞা! नां |
নীলাচলে প্রভুস্থানে মিলিল আসিয়া ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
tanra siddhi-kale donhe tanra ajna pana
nilacale prabhu-sthane milila asiya
SYNONYMS
tanra siddhi-kale—at the time of [5५272 Puri’s passing away; dofthe—the two of
them; tanra—his; ajnd—order; pana—getting; nilacale—at ] 38317731073 Puri; prabhu-
sthane—at the place of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; milila—met;asiya—coming there.


--- Page 342 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 341
TRANSLATION
In the list of prominent devotees at Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri], Kasisvara was
the eighteenth and Govinda the nineteenth. They both came to see Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri, being thus ordered by Isvara Puri at the time of
his passing away.
TEXT 140
ওরুর ACH AY दकल FEAF
তার আজ্ঞা মানি” সেব| দিলেন (হারে ॥ ১৪০ ॥
gurura sambandhe manya kaila dunhakare
tanra ajind mani’ seva dilena donhare
SYNONYMS
gurura sambandhe—in relationship with his spiritual master; manya—honor;
kaila—offered; dunihakare—to both of them; tarira ajfia—his order; mani’—accepting;
seva—service; dilena—gave them; donnhare—the two of them.
TRANSLATION
Both Kasidvara and Govinda were Godbrothers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and
thus the Lord duly honored them as soon as they arrived. But because Isvara Puri
had ordered them to give Caitanya Mahaprabhu personal service, the Lord accepted
their service.
TEXT 141
অঙসেবা গোবিদ্দেরে দিলেন ঈশ্বর |
জগন্নাথ দেখিতে চলেন আগে কালীশ্বর ॥ ১৪১ ॥
arnga-seva govindere dilena 1$৮০/৫
jagannatha dekhite calena age kasisvara
SYNONYMS
anga-seva—taking care of the body; govindere—unto Govinda; dilena—He gave;
Svara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jagannatha—the )agannatha Deity;
dekhite—while going to visit; calena—goes; age—in front; kasisvara—of the name
Kasisvara.
TRANSLATION
Govinda cared for the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu whereas Kasisvara went
in front of the Lord when He went to see Jagannatha in the temple.


--- Page 343 ---
342 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 142
অপরশ যায় গো मार মনুষ্ত-গহনে।
असक्‌ ঠেলি' পথ করে কালী বলবানে ॥ ১৪২ ॥
aparasa yaya 90507! manusya-gahane
manusya theli’ patha kare kasi balavane
SYNONYMS
aparasa—untouched; ydya—goes; gosahi—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; manusya-
gahane—in the crowd; manusya theli’—pushing the crowd of men; patha kare—
clears the way; kasi—Kasisvara; balavane—very strong.
TRANSLATION
When Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the temple of Jagannatha, Kasisvara, being
very strong, cleared the crowds aside with his hands so that Caitanya Mahaprabhu
could pass untouched.
TEXT 143
রামাই-নম্দাই - chive প্রভুর fava |
গোবিন্দের সঙ্গে সেব! করে निब्र्त्र ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
ramai-nandai—donhe prabhura kinkara
govindera sange seva kare nirantara
SYNONYMS
ramai-nandai—of the names Ramai and Nandai; dofihe—both of them; prabhura—
Lord Caitanya’s; kinkara—servants; govindera—with Govinda; sange—with him;
seva—service; kare—rendered; nirantara—twenty-four hours a day.
TRANSLATION
Ramai and Nandai, the twentieth and twenty-first among the important devotees
in Jagannatha Puri, always assisted Govinda twenty-four hours a day in rendering
service to the Lord.
TEXT 144
বাইশ धृ] জল দিনে ভরেন রামাই |
গোবিম্ব-আজ্ঞায় সেবা করেন SWI ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
baisa ghada jala dine bharena ramai
govinda-ajhdya seva karena nandai


--- Page 344 ---
Adi-Iila, Chapter 10 343
SYNONYMS
baisa—twenty-two; ghada—big water pots; jala—water; dine—daily; bharena—fills;
ramai—of the name Ramai; govinda-gjfidya—by the order of Govinda; seva—service;
karena—renders; nandai—of the name Nandai.
TRANSLATION
Every day Ramai filled twenty-two big water pots, whereas Nandai personally
assisted Govinda.
PURPORT
In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (139) it is stated that two servants who formerly
supplied milk and water to Lord Krsna became Ramai and Nandai in the pastimes
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 145
কৃষ্ণনাস নাম শুদ্ধ কুলীন AW |
যারে সঙ্গে লৈয়। কৈল। দক্ষিণ গমন ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
krspadasa nama suddha kulina brahmana
yare sange laiya kaild 00/৫5/0170 gamana
SYNONYMS
Rrspadasa—of the name Krsnadasa; ndma—name; suddha—pure; kulina—respect-
able; brahmapa—brahmana; yare—whom; sange—with; lajya—taking; kaila—did;
daksipa—southern India; gamana—touring.
TRANSLATION
The twenty-second devotee, Krsnadasa, was born of a pure and respectable
brahmana family. While touring southern India, Lord Caitanya took Krsnadasa
with Him.
PURPORT
Krsnadasa is described in the Madhya-/ila, Chapters Seven and Nine. He went
with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to carry His water pot. In the Malabar state, members
of the Bhattathari cult tried to captivate Krsnadasa by supplying a woman to seduce
him, but although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saved him from being harmed, when
they returned to Jagannatha Puri He asked Krsnadasa to remain there, for the Lord
was never favorably disposed toward an associate who was attracted by a woman.
Thus Krsnadasa lost the personal association of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 146
বলভদ্র ভট্টাচর্য ভক্তি অধিকারী |
মধুবরা-গমমনে প্রভুর যেঁহে। ব্রহ্মচারী ॥ ১৪৬ ॥


--- Page 345 ---
344 Si Caitanya-caritamrta
balabhadra bhattacarya— bhakti adhikarr
mathurd-gamane prabhura yenho brahmacari
SYNONYMS
ballabhadra bhattacarya—of the name Balabhadra Bhattacarya; bhakti adhikari—
bona fide devotee; mathura-gamane—while touring Mathura; prabhura—of the Lord;
yertho—who; brahmacari—acted as a brahmacarr.
TRANSLATION
As a bona fide devotee, Balabhadra Bhattacarya, the twenty-third principal
associate, acted as the brahmacari of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when He toured
Mathura.
PURPORT
Balabhadra Bhattacarya acted as a brahmacari, or personal assistant of a sannyasr.
A sannyasT is not supposed to cook. Generally a sannyasr takes prasada at the house
of a grhastha, and a brahmacart helps in this connection. A sannyasr is supposed to
be a spiritual master and a brahmacarf his disciple. Balabhadra Bhattacarya acted as
a brahmacari for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when the Lord toured Mathura and
Vendavana.
TEXT 147
বড় হরিদাস, আর ছোট হরিদাস।
দুই NEN রহে মহাপ্রভুর পাশ ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
8000 haridasa, ara chota haridasa
dui Rirtaniyd rahe mahaprabhura pasa
SYNONYMS
baga haridasa—of the name Bada Haridasa; Gra—and; chota haridasa—of the name
Chota Haridasa; dui kirtaniya—both of them were good singers; rahe—stay; maha-
prabhura—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pasa—with.
TRANSLATION
Bada Haridasa and Chota Haridasa, the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth devotees
in Nilacala, were good singers who always accompanied Lord Caitanya.
PURPORT
Chota Haridasa was later banished from the company of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, as stated in the Antya-/ila, Chapter Two.


--- Page 346 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 345
TEXT 148
রামভদ্বোচার্য, আর 85 সিংহেশ্বর |
তপন আচার্য, আর AY, নীলাদ্বর ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
ramabhadracarya, ara oghra simhesvara
tapana dacarya, ara raghu, nilambara
SYNONYMS
rdmabhadracdrya—of the name Ramabhadra Acarya; Gra—and; oghra—resident of
Orissa; sirmhesvara—of the name Simhesvara; tapana dacarya—of the name Tapana
Acarya; dra raghu—and another Raghunatha; ni/ambara—of the name Nilambara.
TRANSLATION
Among the devotees who lived with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha
Puri, Ramabhadra Acarya was the twenty-sixth, Simhesvara the twenty-seventh,
Tapana Acarya the twenty-eighth, Raghunatha the twenty-ninth and Nilambara the
thirtieth.
TEXT 149
সিঙ্গাভট্ট, কামাভট্ট, vam শিবানন্দ |
(गो পূর্ব ভূত্য প্রভুর প্রিয় কমলানন্দ ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
singabhatta, kamabhatta, dantura $/৮/70/700
gauge parva bhrtya prabhura priya kamalananda
SYNONYMS
singabhatta—of the name Singabhatta; kamabhatta—of the name Kamabhatta;
dantura $ivananda—of the name Dantura Sivananda; gouge—in Bengal; parva—
formerly; bhrtya—servant; prabhura—of the Lord; priya—very dear; kamalananda—
of the name Kamalananda.
TRANSLATION
Singabhatta was the thirty-first, Kamabhatta the thirty-second, Sivananda the
thirty-third and Kamalananda the thirty-fourth. They all formerly served Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Bengal, but later these servants left Bengal to live with the
Lord in Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 150
অদ্যুতানন্দ_অদ্বৈত-আচার্য-তনয়।
নীলাচলে রহে প্রভুর চরণ আশ্রয় ॥ ১৫০ ॥


--- Page 347 ---
346 ऽन Caitanya-caritamrta
acyutananda—advaita-acarya-tanaya
nildcale rahe prabhura carapa asraya
SYNONYMS
acyutananda—of the name Acyutananda; advaita-acarya-tanaya—the son of
Advaita Acarya; nilacale—at ] 38317173073 Puri; rahe—stays; prabhura—of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carapa—lotus feet; asraya—taking shelter.
TRANSLATION
Acyutananda, the thirty-fifth devotee, was the son of Advaita Acarya. He also
lived with Lord Caitanya, taking shelter of His lotus feet at Jagannatha Puri.
PURPORT
There is a statement about Acyutananda in Chapter Twelve, verse 13, of Adi-/ila.
TEXT 151
নির্লোম গজগাদাস, আর विदाम |
এই সবের প্রভুসঙ্গে লীলাচলে বাস ॥ ১৫১ ॥
nirloma garigadasa, ara vispudasa
ei sabera prabhu-sange nilacale vasa
SYNONYMS
nirloma gahgadasa—of the name Nirloma Gangadasa; ara—and; vispudasa—of the
name Vispudasa; € sabera—of all of them; prabhu-sange—with Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nildcale—at | agannatha Puri; vasa—residence.
TRANSLATION
Nirloma Gangadasa and Visnudasa were the thirty-sixth and thirty-seventh among
the devotees who lived at Jagannatha Puri as servants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXTS 152-154
বারাণসী-মধ্যে প্রভুর ভক্ত তিন छन |
চন্দ্রশেখর বৈদ্য) আর মিশ্র তপন ॥ ১৫২ ॥
রঘুনাথ ভট্টাচার্য মিত্র নন্দন।
প্রভু যবে কাশী আইল দেখি' বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
চন্দ্রশেখর-গৃহে কৈল দুই মাস AA |
তপন-মিথ্রের ঘরে ভিক্ষা! তুই মাস ॥ ১৫৪ ॥


--- Page 348 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 347
varanasi-madhye prabhura bhakta tina jana
candrasekhara vaidya, Gra misra tapana
raghundtha bhattacarya—misrera nandana
prabhu yabe kasi aila dekhi’ vrndavana
candrasekhara-grhe kalla dui masa vasa
tapana-misrera ghare bhiksa dui masa
SYNONYMS
varanasi-madhye—at Varanasi; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta—
devotees; tina jana—three persons; candrasekhara vaidya—the clerk of the name
Candrasekhara; ara—and; /77/$/70 tapana—Tapana Misra; raghunatha bhagtacarya—of
the name Raghunatha Bhattacarya; misrera nandana—the son of Tapana Misra;
prabhu—Lord 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yabe—when; kasi—Varanasi; aila—came;
dekhi’—after visiting; vrndavana—the holy place; candrasekhara-grhe—in the house
of Candrasekhara Vaidya; kaila—did; dui masa—for two months; vasa—reside;
tapana-misrera—of Tapana Misra; ghare—in the house; bhiksa—accepted prasada;
dui masa—for two months.
TRANSLATION
The prominent devotees at Varanasi were the physician Candrasekhara, Tapana
Miéra and Raghunatha Bhattacarya, Tapana Miéra’s son. When Lord Caitanya came
to Varanasi after seeing Vrndavana, for two months He lived at the residence of
Candrasekhara Vaidya and accepted prasada at the house of Tapana Misra.
PURPORT
When SiT Caitanya Mahaprabhu was in Bengal, Tapana Miéra approached Him to
discuss spiritual advancement. Thus he was favored by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and received hari-nama initiation. After that, by the order of the Lord, Tapana
Miséra resided in Varanasi, and when Lord Caitanya visited Varanasi He stayed at
the home of Tapana Misra.
TEXT 155
রঘুনাথ বাল্যে কৈল প্রভুর সেবন।
উচ্ছিষ্ট-মার্জন আর পাদ-সন্বাহুন ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
raghunatha balye kaila prabhura sevana
ucchista-marjana ara pada-samvahana
SYNONYMS
raghunatha—Raghunatha, the son of Tapana Misra; balye— in his boyhood; kaila—
did; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya; sevana—rendering service; ucchista-marjana— wash-
ing the dishes; ara—and; pada-sarnvahana—massaging the feet.


--- Page 349 ---
348 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at the house of Tapana Misra, Raghunatha
Bhatta, who was then a boy, washed His dishes and massaged His legs.
TEXT 156
বড় হৈলে नोनाटटन গেলা প্রভুর স্থানে।
অষ্টমাস রহিল ভিক্ষা দেন কোন দিনে ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
8000 haile nildcale geld prabhura sthane
asta-masa rahila bhiksa dena kona dine
SYNONYMS
bagla haile—when he grew to be a young man; nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri; 96/3-
went; prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;sthane—at the place; asta-masa—
eight months; rahila—stayed; bhiksa—prasada; dena—gave; kona dine—some days.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha grew to be a young man, he visited Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
at Jagannatha Puri and stayed there for eight months. Sometimes he offered
prasada to the Lord.
TEXT 157
প্রভুর আজ্ঞা পাঞ। বৃন্দাবনেরে আইলা |
আসিয়া প্রীরূপ-গোসাঞ্ির নিকটে রহিলা ॥ sea ॥
prabhura Gjna pana ৮1/7703৮0/76/6 Gila
asiya sri-rapa-gosarnira nikate rahila
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gjia—order; pana—receiving;
vrndavanere—to Vrndavana; aila—he came; asiya—coming there; $ri-ripa-gosanira—
of Srila Ripa Gosvami; nikate—at his shelter; rahila—remained.
TRANSLATION
Later, by the order of Lord Caitanya, Raghunatha went to Vygndavana and re-
mained there under the shelter of Srila Riipa Gosvami.
TEXT 158
তাঁর স্থানে রূপ-গোসাঞ্জি শুনেন ভাগবত।
প্রভুর ক্বপায় CSTR কৃষ্ণপ্রেমে মত্ত ॥ ১৫৮ ॥


--- Page 350 ---
Adi-lita, Chapter 10 349
tanra sthane riapa-gosarii $Sunena bhagavata
prabhura krpaya tenho krspa-preme matta
SYNONYMS
tanra sthane—in his place; rigpa-gosarii—Srila Ripa Gosvami; sunena—heard;
bhagavata—the recitation of Srimad-Bhagavatam; prabhura krpaya—by the mercy of
Lord Caitanya; 1000-6; krsna-preme—in love of Krsna; matta—always maddened.
TRANSLATION
While he stayed with $rila Ripa Gosvami, his engagement was to recite $rimad-
Bhagavatam for him to hear. As a result of this Bhagavatam recitation, he attained
perfectional love of Krsna, by which he remained always maddened.
PURPORT
Raghunatha Bhattacarya, or Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, one of the six Gosvamis,
was the son of Tapana Misra. Born in approximately 1425 sakabda, he was expert
in reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam, and in the Antya-/ila, Chapter Thirty, it is stated
that he was also expert in cooking; whatever he cooked would be nectarean. Srv
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was greatly pleased to accept the foodstuffs that he cooked,
and Raghunatha Bhatta used to take the remnants of foodstuffs left by Sri" Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Raghunatha Bhattacarya lived for eight months in ] 38317173073 Puri,
after which Lord Caitanya ordered him to go to Vrndavana to join Sri Ripa
Gosvami. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Raghunatha Bhattacarya not to marry
but to remain a brahmacari, and He also ordered him to read Srimad-Bhagavatam
constantly. Thus he went to Vrndavana, where he engaged in reciting Sritnad-
Bhagavatam to Srila ९0०३ Gosvami. He was so expert in reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam
that he would recite each and every verse in three melodious tunes. While
Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami was living with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord
blessed him by offering him betel nuts offered to the Jagannatha Deity and a gar-
land of tulasi said to be as long as fourteen cubits. The Govinda temple was con-
structed by Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami’s order to one of his disciples. Raghunatha
Bhatta Gosvami supplied all the ornaments of the Govinda Deity. He never talked of
nonsense or worldly matters but always engaged in hearing about Krsna twenty-four
hours a day. He never cared to hear blasphemy of a Vaisnava. Even when there were
points to be criticized, he used to say that since all the Vaisnavas were engaged in
the service of the Lord, he did not mind their faults. Later Raghunatha Bhatta
Gosvami lived by Radhakunda in a small cottage. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika,
verse 185, it is said that Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami was formerly the gopi named
Raga-mafijari.
TEXT 159
এইমত সংখ্যাতীত চৈতন্কয-ভক্তগণ |
দিয্মাত্র লিখি, সম্যক্‌ না যায় কথন ॥ ১৫৯ ॥


--- Page 351 ---
350 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
ei-mata sankhyatita caitanya-bhakta-gana
dirimatra likhi, samyak nd yaya kathana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; sankhya-atita—innumerable; caitanya-bhakta-gana—devotees
of Lord Caitanya; dinmatra—only a fractional part; likhi—!| write; samyak—full;
nd—cannot; yaya—be possible; kathana—to explain.
TRANSLATION
I list in this way only a portion of the innumerable devotees of Lord Caitanya.
To describe them all fully is not possible.
TEXT 160
এটকৈক-শাখাতে লাগে কোটি কোটি छाल।
তার শিষ্য-উপশিষ্য, তার উপডাল ॥ ১৬০ ॥
ekaika-$aGkhate lage koti koti dala
tara $isya-upasisya, tara upadala
SYNONYMS
ekaika—in each; $Gkhate—branch; ldge—grow; koti koti—hundreds and thousands;
dala—twigs; tara—his; Sisya—disciple; upasisya—sub-disciple; tara—his; upadala—sub-
branches.
TRANSLATION
From each branch of the tree have grown hundreds and thousands of sub-branches
of disciples and grand-disciples.
PURPORT
It was the desire of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that His cult be spread all over
the world. Therefore there is a great necessity for many, many disciples of the
branches of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s disciplic succession. His cult should be
spread not only in a few villages, or in Bengal, or in India, but all over the world. It
is very much regrettable that complacent so-called devotees criticize the members
of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness for accepting sannydsa
and spreading the cult of Lord Caitanya all over the world. It is not our business to
criticize anyone, but because they try to find fault with this movement, the real
truth must be stated. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted devotees all over the world,
and Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura and Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura also
confirmed this. It is in pursuit of their will that the ISKCON movement is spread-
ing all over the world. Genuine devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu must take
pride in the spread of Krsna consciousness movement instead of viciously criticiz-
ing its propaganda work.


--- Page 352 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 10 351
TEXT 161
সকল SEAR আছে প্রেম-ফুল-ফলে |
<
ভাসাহল ব্রিজগৎ কৃষ্ণপ্রেম-জলে ॥ ১৬১ ॥
sakala bhariya ache prema-phula-phale
bhasaila tri-jagat krsna-prema-jale
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; bhariya—filled;ache—there is; prema—love of Godhead; phula—flowers;
phale—fruits; bhasdila—inundated; tri-jagat—the whole world; krsna-prema—of love
of Krsna; jale—with water.
TRANSLATION
Every branch and sub-branch of the tree is full of innumerable fruits and
flowers. They inundate the world with the waters of love of Krsna.
TEXT 162
এক এক শাখার म॑द्ि खन মহিমা |
“সহঅ বদলে যার দিতে নারে मौम। ॥ ১৬২ ॥
eka eka $akhara $0/৫1/ ananta mahima
‘sahasra vadane’ yara dite nare sima
SYNONYMS
eka eka—of each and every; sakhara—branch; sakti—power; ananta—unlimited;
mahima—glories; sahasra vadane—in thousands of mouths; ydra—of which; dite—to
give; nare—becomes unable; sima—limit.
TRANSLATION
Each and every branch of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s devotees has unlimited
spiritual power and glory. Even if one had thousands of mouths, it would be im-
possible to describe the limits of their activities.
TEXT 163
সংক্ষেপে কহিল মহাপ্রভুর ভক্তগণ।
সমগ্র বলিতে নারে 'সহঅ-বদন” ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
sanksepe kahila mahaprabhura bhakta-gana
samagra balite nare ‘sahasra-vadana’


--- Page 353 ---
352 S$ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
sanksepe—in brief; kahila—described; mahdprabhura—of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhakta-gapa—the devotees; samagra—all; balite—to speak; nare—
cannot; sahasra-vadana—Lord Sesa, who has thousands of mouths.
TRANSLATION
1 have briefly described the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in different
places. Even Lord Sesa, who has thousands of mouths, could not list them all.
TEXT 164
জীরূপ-রঘুলাথ-পদে বার আশ |
চৈতম্কচরিতামৃত FTE কৃষ্ণদাল ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
$ri-ropa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-ripa—Srita Rupa Gosvami; raghunatha—Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; pade—
at the lotus feet; ydra—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—the book
named Caitanya-caritamyta; kahe— describes; krspadasa—Srila Krsnadasa Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sei Riipa and Sei Raghunatha, always desiring their
mercy, |, Krgnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, fellowing in their footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of € Caitanya-caritamygta, Adi-ild, Chapter
Ten, in the matter of the Main Trunk of the Caitanya Tree, Its Branches and Its
Sub-branches.


--- Page 354 ---
Ail
As the branches and sub-branches of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu were described
in the Tenth Chapter, in this Eleventh Chapter the branches and sub-branches of Sri
Nityananda Prabhu are similarly listed.
TEXT 1
বিত্যানম্বপদঘাস্তোভ্ব-ভূঙ্গান্‌ (थ ममशृद्तम्‌ |
নত্বাখিলান্‌ তেষু মুখ্য৷ লিখ্যস্তে =fefowmin ५ ॥
nityananda-padambhoja-bhrigan prema-madhanmadan
natvakhilan tesu mukhya likhyante katicin maya
SYNONYMS
nityananda—of Lord Sri Nityananda; pada-ambhoja—Iotus feet; bhrigan—the
bumblebees; prema—of love of Godhead; madhu—by the honey; wnmadan—
maddened; natva—offering obeisances; akhilan—to all of them; tesu—out of them;
mukhyah—the chief; likhyante—being described; katicit—a few of them; maya—by
me.
TRANSLATION
After offering my obeisances unto all of the devotees of $ri Nityananda Prabhu,
who are like bumblebees collecting honey from His lotus feet, | shall try to describe
those who are the most prominent.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় মহাপ্রভু ল্রীকৃষ্ণচৈতন্ত |
তাহার एर लिङ যেই, সেই ধন্ক ॥ ২ ॥
Jaya jaya mahaprabhu $/1740151070-00/10/1% 0
tanhara caranasrita yei, sei dhanya
353


--- Page 355 ---
354 Sri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; mahdprabhu—unto Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $~
krsna-caitanya—known as Krsna Caitanya; tanhdra carana-asrita—all who have taken
shelter at His lotus feet; yei—anyone; sei—he is; dhanya—glorious.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! Anyone who has taken shelter at His
lotus feet is glorious.
TEXT 3
জয় জয় AWN, জয় fsa |
জয় জয় মহাপ্রভুর সর্বতুক্তবৃন্ছ॥ ৩ ॥
jaya jaya $77-00৮0/10, jaya nityananda
jaya jaya mahaprabhura sarva-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; s$ri-advaita—unto € Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories;
nityananda—unto Lord Sri Nityananda Prabhu; jaya jaya—all glories; mahaprabhura—
of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sarva—all; bhakta-vrnda—devotees.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Advaita Prabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and all the devotees of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 4
ड निककटऽरुक-गर ८ मायक्रन विनः |
BR डक वशूट्ख्टन्ताः শাখারূপান্‌ গণান্মুমঃ ॥ 8 ॥
tasya Sri-krspa-caitanya-sat-premamara-sakhinah
ardhva-skandhavadhatendoh $sakha-rapan ganan numah
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; $ri-krsna-caitanya—\Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sat-prema—
of eternal love of Godhead; amara— indestructible; sakhinah— of the tree; ardhva—
very high; skandha—branch; avadhata-indoh— of Sri Nityananda; $akhd-riipan—in
the form of different branches; gandn—to the devotees; numah—| offer my respects.
TRANSLATION
Sri Nityananda Prabhu is the topmost branch of the indestructible tree of eternal
love of Godhead, Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu. | offer my respectful obeisances
to all the sub-branches of that topmost branch.


--- Page 356 ---
Adi-Tila, Chapter 11 355
TEXTS
SSIs छक গুরুতর |
তাহাতে জঙ্গিল শাখা-প্রশাখা क्त्र ॥ ¢ ॥
Sri-nityananda-vrksera skandha gurutara
tahate janmila $Gkha-prasakha vistara
SYNONYMS
$ri-nityananda-vrksera—of the tree known as Sri Nityananda; skandha—main
branch; gurutara—extremely heavy; tahate—from that branch; janmila—grew;
S$akha—branches; prasakh@—sub-branches; vistara—expansively.
TRANSLATION
Sri Nityananda Prabhu is an extremely heavy branch of the Sri Caitanya tree.
From that branch grow many branches and sub-branches.
TEXT 6
মালাকারের ইচ্ছা-জলে বাড়ে শাখাগণ।
প্রেম-ফুল-ফলে ভরি” ছাইল ভুবন ॥ ৬ ॥
malakarera icchd-jale bade sakha-gana
prema-phula-phale bhari’ chaila bhuvana
SYNONYMS
malakarera—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; icchd-jale—by the water of His wish;
bade—increase; $akhd-gana—the branches; prema—love of Godhead; phula-phale—
with flowers and fruits; bhari’—filling; chaila—covered; bhuvana—the whole world.
TRANSLATION
Watered by the desire of Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu, these branches and sub-
branches have grown unlimitedly and covered the entire world with fruits and
flowers.
TEXT 7
TARY অনন্ত গণ কে করু গণন।
আপন। শোধিতে কহি মুখ্য মুখ্য জন ॥ ৭ ॥
asankhya ananta gana ke karu ganana
apana sodhite kahi mukhya mukhya jana


--- Page 357 ---
356 Sr-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
asannkhya—innumerable; ananta—unlimited; gana—devotees; ke—who; karu—can;
ganana—count; apana—the self; Sodhite—to purify; kahi—| speak; mukhya mukhya—
only the chief; jana—persons.
TRANSLATION
These branches and sub-branches of devotees are innumerable and unlimited.
Who could count them? For my personal purification | shall try to enumerate only
the most prominent among them.
PURPORT
One should not write books or essays on transcendental subject matter for
material name, fame or profit. Transcendental literature must be written under the
direction of a superior authority because it is not meant for material purposes. If
one tries to write under superior authority, he becomes purified. All Krsna conscious
activities should be undertaken for personal purification. (24/70 sodhite), not for
material gain.
TEXT 8
हयो त्रख्छ (भोजा --ङक-यङां मय |
SH BAY যত, অসংখ্য তার লেখা ॥ ४ ॥
Sri-virabhadra gosani—skandha-mahasakha
tanra upasakha yata, asanikhya tara lekha
SYNONYMS
Sri-virabhadra gosarii—of the name Sri Virabhadra Gosani; skandha—of the trunk;
maha-sakha—the biggest branch; tanra—his; upasakhd—sub-branches; yata—all;
asankhya—innumerable; tara—of that; /ekhd—the description.
TRANSLATION
After Nityananda Prabhu, the greatest branch is Virabhadra Gosani, who also has
innumerable branches and sub-branches. It is not possible to describe them all.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura describes Virabhadra Gosani as the direct
son of Srila Nityananda Prabhu and disciple of Jahnava-devi. His real mother was
Vasudha. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 67, he is mentioned as an incarnation
of Ksirodakasayl Vispu. Therefore Virabhadra Gosani is nondifferent from Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In a village of the name |hamatapura in the district of
Hugali, Virabhadra Gosani had a disciple named Yadunathacarya, who had two
daughters—a real daughter named Srimati and a foster daughter named Narayani.


--- Page 358 ---
Adi-Iita, Chapter 11 357
Both these daughters married, and they are mentioned in Bhakti-ratnakara, Chapter
Thirteen. Virabhadra Gosani had three disciples who are celebrated as his sons—
Gopijana-vallabha, Ramakrsna and Ramacandra. The youngest, Ramacandra, be-
longed to the Sandilya dynasty and had the surname Vatavyala. He established his
family at Khadadaha, and its members are known as the gosvamis of Khadadaha.
The eldest disciple, Gopijana-vallabha, was a resident of a village known as Lata
near the Manakara railway station in the district of Burdwan. The second, Rama-
krsna, lived near Maladaha in a village named Gayesapura. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura notes that since these three disciples belonged to different gotras,
or dynasties, and also had different surnames and lived in different places, it is not
possible to accept them as real sons of Virabhadra Gosani. Ramacandra had four
sons, of whom the eldest was Radhamadhava, whose third son was named
Yadavendra. Yadavendra’s son was Nandakisora, his son was Nidhikrsna, his son
was Caitanyacanda, his son was Krsnamohana, his son was Jaganmohana, his son
was Vrajanatha, and his son was Syamaladla Gosvami. This is the genealogical table
given by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura for the descendants of Virabhadra
Gosani.
TEXT9
ঈশ্বর হইয়। কহায় মহামভাগবত |
বেদধর্যাতীত Fe] CMEC রত ॥ > ॥
i$vara ha-iya kahaya maha-bhagavata
veda-dharmatita haiia veda-dharme rata
SYNONYMS
i$vara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ha-iya—being; kahdya—calls Himself;
maha-bhagavata—great devotee; veda-dharma—the principles of Vedic religion;
atita— transcendental; haia— being; veda-dharme—in the Vedic system; rata—engaged.
TRANSLATION
Although Virabhadra Gosani was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He pre-
sented Himself as a great devotee. And although the Supreme Godhead is transcen-
dental to all Vedic injunctions, He strictly followed the Vedic rituals.
TEXT 10
অন্তরে ঈশ্বর-চেষ্টা, বাহিরে ove ।
চৈতন্যভক্তিমণ্ডপে তেঁছো মুলস্তম্ভ ॥ ১০ |
antare i$vara-cesta, bahire nirdambha
caitanya-bhakti-mandape teriho mila-stambha


--- Page 359 ---
358 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
antare— within Himself; Svara-cestd—the activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bahire—externally; nirdambha— without pride; caitanya-bhakti-mapdape—
in the devotional hall of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ternho—He 15; mala-stambha—the
main pillar.
TRANSLATION
He is the main pillar in the hall of devotional service erected by Si Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He knew within himself that He acted as the Supreme Lord Visnu,
but externally He was prideless.
TEXT 11
অদাপি वक्त्र कुभो-मदिम)। হুইতে।
চৈতন্ত-লিত্যানম্দ গায় সকল জগতে ॥ ১১ ॥
adyapi yanhdra krpa-mahima ha-ite
caitanya-nityananda gaya sakala jagate
SYNONYMS
adyapi—until today; yanhdra—whose; krpa—mercy; mahima—glorious; ha-ite—
from; caitanya-nityananda—Sri Caitanya-Nityananda; gagya—sing; sakala—all; jagate—
in the world.
TRANSLATION
It is by the glorious mercy of Sri Virabhadra Gosani that people all over the
world now have the chance to chant the names of Caitanya and Nityananda.
TEXT 12
সেই বীরভদ্ত্র-গোসাঞ্জির লইদু শরণ |
যাহার প্রসাদে হয় অভীষ্টপুরণ ॥ ১২ ॥
sei ৮/78/70010-8050//70 la-inu Sarapa
yanhara prasade haya abhista-parana
SYNONYMS
sei—that; virabhadra-gosariira—of Sri Virabhadra Gosani; la-inu—| take; Sarana—
shelter; yanhara—whose; prasade—by mercy; haya—it becomes so; abhista-piirana—
fulfillment of desire.
TRANSLATION
I therefore take shelter of the lotus feet of Virabhadra Gosani so that by His
mercy my great desire to write Sri Caitanya-caritamrta will be properly guided.


--- Page 360 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 359
TEXT 13
জীরাষদাস আর, AFD काम |
চৈতষ্-গোসাঞ্জির ভক্ত রহে ভার পাশ ॥ ১৩ ॥
$ri-rama-dasa ara, gadadhara dasa
caitanya-gosarniira bhakta rahe tanra pasa
SYNONYMS

$ri-rama-dasa—of the name 57 Ramadasa; ara—and; gadadhara dasa—of the name
Gadadhara dasa; caitanya-gosanira—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta—
devotees; rahe—stay; tarnra pasa—with Him.

TRANSLATION

Two devotees of Lord Caitanya named Sri Ramadasa and Gadadhara 0353 always
lived with Sri Virabhadra Gosani.

PURPORT

Sri Ramadasa, later known 25 Abhirama Thakura, was one of the twelve gopalas,
cowherd boy friends, of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. The Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse
126, states that Sri Ramadasa was formerly Sridama. In the Bhakti-ratnakara,
Chapter Four, there is a description of Srila Abhirama Thakura. By the order of Sri
Nityananda Prabhu, Abhirama Thakura became a great gcdrya and preacher of the
Caitanya cult of devotional service. He was a very influential personality, and non-
devotees were very much afraid of him. Empowered by Sri Nityananda Prabhu, he
was always in ecstasy and was extremely kind to all fallen souls. It is said that if he
offered obeisances to any stone other than a $alagrama-$ila, it would immediately
fracture.

Ten miles southwest of the railway station Caripadariga on the narrow gauge
railway line from Howrah in Calcutta to Amta, a village in the Hugali district, is a
small town named Khanakdla-krgnanagara where the temple of Abhirama Thakura
is situated. During the rainy season, when this area is inundated with water, people
must go there by another line, which is now called the southeastern railway. On this
line there is a station named Kolaghata, from which one has to go by steamer to
Ranicaka. Seven and a half miles north of Ranicaka is Khanakiila. The temple of
Abhirama Thakura is situated in Krsnanagara, which is near the k@/a (bank) of the
Khana (Dvarakesvara River); therefore this place is celebrated as Khanakdla-
krsnanagara. Outside of the temple is a bakula tree. This place is known as Siddha-
bakula-kufija. It is said that when Abhirama Thakura came there, he sat down under
this tree. In Khanakila-krsnanagara there is a big fair held every year in the month
of caitra (March-April) on the krspa-saptami, the seventh day of the dark moon.
Many hundreds and thousands of people gather for this festival. The temple of
Abhirama Thakura has a very old history. The Deity in the temple is known as
Gopinatha. There are many sevaita families living near the temple. It is said that


--- Page 361 ---
360 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Abhirama Thakura had a whip and that whoever he touched with it would immedi-
ately become an elevated devotee of Krsna. Among his many disciples, Sriman
Srinivasa Acarya was the most famous and the most dear, but it is doubtful that he
was his initiated disciple.
TEXTS 14-15
মিত্যামম্দে আজ্ঞা দিল যবে গৌড়ে যাইতে |
মহাপ্রভু এই দুই দিল৷ তার সাথে ॥ ১৪ ॥
रथव দুইগপে দু'হার Hof |
মাধব-বাস্ত্রদঘ্বেব ঘোষেরও এই বিবরণ ॥ ১৫ ॥
nityanande ajfia dila yabe gaude yaite
mahaprabhu ei dui dila tanra sathe
ataeva dui-gane dunhdra gapana
madhava-vasudeva ghoserao ei vivarana
SYNONYMS
nityanande—unto Lord Nityananda; gjia—order; dila—gave; yabe— when; gaude—
to Bengal; yaite—to go; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; e/ dui—these two;
dila—gave; tanra sathe—with Him; ataeva—therefore; dui-gane—in both the parties;
dunhara—two of them; gapana—are counted; madhava—of the name Madhava;
vasudeva—of the name Vasudeva; ghoserao—of the surname Ghosh; ei—this; vivarapa—
description.
TRANSLATION
When Nityananda Prabhu was ordered to go to Bengal to preach, these two
devotees [ऽ Ramadasa and Gadadhara dasa] were ordered to go with Him. Thus
they are sometimes counted among the devotees of Lord Caitanya and sometimes
among the devotees of Lord Nityananda. Similarly, Madhava and Vasudeva Ghosh
belonged to both groups of devotees simultaneously.
PURPORT
There is a place named Danihata near the Agradvipa railway station and Pauli in
the district of Burdwan where the Deity of Sri Gopinathaji is still situated. This
Deity accepted Govinda Ghosh as His father. Even until today, the Deity performs
the $rdddha ceremony on the anniversary of the death of Govinda Ghosh. The
temple of this Deity is managed by the rdjavarmsa family of Krsnanagara, whose
members are descendants of Raja Krgnacandra. Every year in the month of vaisakha,
when there is a bdradola ceremony, this Gopinatha Deity is taken to Krsnanagara.
The ceremony is performed with eleven other Deities, and then Sri Gopinathaji is
again brought back to the temple in Agradvipa.


--- Page 362 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 361
TEXT 16
রামদাস - মুখ্যশাখা, সখ্য-প্রেমরাশি |
(्वानगाटकक কান্ঠ যেই তুলি” কৈল বালী ॥ ১৬ ॥
rama-dasa—mukhya-$aGkha, sakhya-prema-rasi
sola-sangera kastha yei tuli’ kaila vast
SYNONYMS
rama-dasa—of the name Ramadasa; mukhya-sakha—chief branch; sakhya-prema-
rasi—full of fraternal love; sola-sangera—of sixteen knots; kastha—wood; yei—that;
tuli’—raising; kaila—made; varnsi—flute.
TRANSLATION
Ramadasa, one of the chief branches, was full of fraternal love of Godhead. He
made a flute from a stick with sixteen knots.
TEXT 17
AIR দাস গোপীভাবে পূর্ণানন্দ।
যার ঘরে দানকেলি কৈল নিতভ্যানন্দ ॥ ১৭ ॥
gadadhara dasa gopibhave [।20103/710/700
yanra ghare danakeli kaila nityananda
SYNONYMS
gadadhara dasa—of the name Gadadhara dasa; gopi-bhave—in the ecstasy of the
4075; parpa-Gnanda—fully in transcendental bliss; yanra ghare—in whose house;
danakeli—performance of danakeli-lila; kaila—did; nitydnanda—Lord Nityananda
Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
Srila Gadadhara dasa was always fully absorbed in ecstasy as a gopi. In his house
Lord Nityananda enacted the drama Danakeli.
TEXT 18
Batwa ঘোষ - মুখ্য कोनो राट |
निख्निष्बष्य॑ङ्‌ মৃত্য করে सौत्र ATA ॥ ১৮ ॥
$ri-madhava ghosa—mukhya kirtaniya-gane
nityananda-prabhu nrtya kare yanra gane


--- Page 363 ---
362 $ri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
$ri-madhava ghosa—of the name Sri Madhava Ghosh; mukhya—chief; kirtaniya-
gane—amongst the performers of sankirtana; nityananda-prabhu—of the name
Nityananda Prabhu; nrtya—dance; kare—does; yanra— whose; gane—in song.
TRANSLATION
Sri Madhava Ghosh was a principal performer of kirtana. While he sang,
Nityananda Prabhu danced.
TEXT 19
বাস্থদেব গীতে করে প্রভুর বর্ণনে।
কাষঙ্ূ্পাষাণ लटव ৰাহার শ্রেবণে ॥ ১৯ ॥
vasudeva 0116 kare prabhura varnane
kastha-pasana drave yahara $ravane
SYNONYMS
vasudeva—of the name Vasudeva; gite—while singing; kare—does; prabhura—of
Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Caitanya Prabhu; varnane—in description; kdstha—wood;
pasana—stone; drave—melt; yahdra—whose; sravane—by hearing.
TRANSLATION
When Vasudeva Ghosh performed kirtana, describing Lord Caitanya and
Nityananda, even wood and stone would melt upon hearing it.
TEXT 20
५
মুরারি-চেতস্কদাসের অলৌকিক Mal |
ব্যান্র-গালে চড় নারে, সর্প-সনে খেলা ॥ ২০ ॥
murari-caitanya-dasera alaukika lila
vyaghra-gale cada mare, sarpa-sane kheld
SYNONYMS
murdri—of the name 01311; caitanya-dasera—of the servant of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; alaukika—uncommon; /ila—pastimes; vyaghra—tiger; gale—on the
cheek; cada mare—slaps; sarpa—a snake; sane—with; kheld—playing.
TRANSLATION
There were many extraordinary activities performed by Murari, a great devotee
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sometimes in his ecstasy he would slap the cheek of
a tiger, and sometimes he would play with a venomous snake.


--- Page 364 ---
Adi-ila, Chapter 11 363
PURPORT
Murari Caitanya dasa was born in the village of Sarvrndavana-pura, which is
situated about two miles from the Galasi station on the Burdwan line. When Murari
Caitanya dasa came to Navadvipa, he settled in the village of Modadruma, or
Maugachi-grama. At that time he became known as Sarnga or 5213102 Murari
Caitanya dasa. The descendants of his family still reside in 53161 Pata. In the
Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Five, there is the following statement:
“Murari Caitanya dasa had no material bodily features, for he was completely
spiritual. Thus he would sometimes chase after tigers in the jungle and treat them
just like cats and dogs. He would slap the cheek of a tiger and take a venomous
snake on his lap. He had no fear for his external body, of which he was completely
forgetful. He could spend all twenty-four hours of the day chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra or speaking about Lord Caitanya and Nityananda. Sometimes he
would remain submerged in water for two or three days, but he would feel no bodily
inconvenience. Thus he behaved almost like stone or wood, but he always used his
energy in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. No one can describe his specific
characteristics, but it is understood that wherever Murari Caitanya dasa passed,
whoever was present would be enlightened in Krsna consciousness simply by the
atmosphere he created.”
TEXT 21
निखरनिटब्छत्र গণ सङ, nq ব্রজসখা।
শৃঙজ-বেজ্রঞগোপবেশ, শিরে শিখিপাখা ॥ ২১ ॥
nityanandera gana yata—saba vraja-sakha
$pnga-vetra-gopavesa, Sire $ikhi-pakha
SYNONYMS
nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; gapa—followers; yata—all; saba—all;
vraja-sakha—residents of Vrndavana; srriga—horn; vetra—cane stick; gopa-vesa—
dressed like a cowherd boy; sire—on the head; $ikhi-pakha—the plume of a peacock.
TRANSLATION
All the associates of Lord Nityananda were formerly cowherd boys in Vrajabhaimi.
Their symbolic representations were the horns and sticks they carried, their cowherd
dress and the peacock plumes on their heads.
PURPORT
Jahnava-mata is also within the list of Lord Nityananda’s followers. She is de-
scribed in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 66, as Ananga-manjari of Vrndavana.
All the devotees who are followers of Jahnava-mata are counted within the list of
Sri Nityananda Prabhu’s devotees.


--- Page 365 ---
364 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
TEXT 22
রখঘুনাথ বৈদ্য উপাধ্যায় wer |
যাহার দর্ণনে কৃষ্ণপ্রেমভক্তি হয় ॥ ২২ ॥
raghundtha vaidya upadhydya mahasaya
yanhara darsane Rrsna-prema-bhakti haya
SYNONYMS
raghunatha vaidya—the physician Raghunatha; wupddhydya mahasaya—a great
personality with the title ‘“Upadhyaya’; ydnhdra—whose; darsane—by visiting;
krsna-prema—\ove of Krsna; bhakti—devotional service; haya—awakened;
TRANSLATION
The physician Raghunatha, also known as Upadhyaya, was so great a devotee that
simply seeing him would awaken one’s dormant love of Godhead.
TEXT 23
FRAT — নিত্য।লম্দের শাখা, ভৃত্য मर्य |
যার সঙ্গে নিত্যানন্দ করে ব্রজনর্ম ॥ ২৩ ॥
sundarananda—nityanandera sakha, bhrtya marma
yanra sange nityananda kare vraja-narma
SYNONYMS
sundarananda—of the name Sundarananda; nitydnandera sakha—a branch of
Nityananda Prabhu; bhrtya marma—very intimate servant; ydrra safige—with whom;
nityananda—Lord Nityananda; kare— performs; vraja-narma—activities of Vyndavana.
TRANSLATION
Sundarananda, another branch of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, was Lord Nityananda’s
most intimate servant. Lord Nityananda Prabhu perceived the life of Vrajabhumi in
his company.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Six, it is stated that Sundarananda
was an ocean of love of Godhead and the chief associate of Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika he is stated to have been Sudama in krspa-/ild. Thus
he was one of the twelve cowherd boys who came down with Balarama when He
descended as Sri Nityananda Prabhu. The holy place where Sundarananda lived is
situated in the village known as Mahesapura, which is about fourteen miles east of
the Majadiya railway station of the eastern railway from Calcutta to Burdwan. This


--- Page 366 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 365
place is within the district of Jeshore, which is now in Bangladesh. Among the relics
of this village, only the old residential house of Sundarananda still exists. At the end
of the village resides a bdula (pseudo-Vaisnava), and all the buildings, both the
temples and the house, appear to be newly constructed. In Mahesapura there are
Deities of Sri Radhavallabha and Sri Sri Radharamana. Near the temple is a small
river of the name Vetravati.

Sundarananda Prabhu was a naisthika-brahmacari, he never married in his life.
Therefore he had no direct descendants except his disciples, but the descendants of
his family still reside in the village known as Margaladihi in the district of Birbhum.
In that same village is a temple of Balarama, and the Deity there is regularly
worshiped. The original Deity of Mahesapura, Radhavallabha, was taken by the
Saidabad Gosvamis of Berhampur, and since the present Deities were installed, a
Zamindar family of Mahesapura has looked after Their worship. On the full moon
day of the month of magha ()anuary-February), the anniversary of Sundarananda’s
disappearance is regularly celebrated, and people from the neighboring areas gather
together to observe this festival.

TEXT 24
কমলাকর পিণ্লাই- অলৌকিক Ns |
অলোকিক প্রেম তার ভুবনে বিদিত ॥ ২৪ ॥
kamalakara pippalai—alaukika rita
alaukika prema tanra bhuvane vidita
SYNONYMS

kamalakara pippalai—of the name Kamalakara Pippalai; alaukika—uncommon;
rita—behavior or pastime; alaukika—uncommon; prema—love of Godhead; tanra—
his; bhuvane—in the world; vidita—celebrated.

TRANSLATION

Kamalakara Pippalai is said to have been the third gopala. His behavior and love

of Godhead were uncommon, and thus he is celebrated all over the world.
PURPORT

In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 128, Kamalakara Pippalai is described as the
third gopala. His former name was Mahabala. The Jagannatha Deity at Mahesa in
SriRamapura was installed by KamalakaraPippalai. Thisvillage of Mahesa is situated
about two and a half miles from the Sri Ramapura railway station. The geneology
of the family of Kamalakara Pippalai is given as follows. Kamalakara Pippalai had a
son named Caturbhuja, who had two sons named Narayana and Jagannatha.
Narayana had one son named )Jagadananda, and his son’s name was Rajivalocana.
During the time of Rajivalocana, there was a scarcity of finances for the worship of
the Jagannatha Deity, and it is said that the Nawab of Dacca, whose name was Shah


--- Page 367 ---
366 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
Suja, donated 1,185 bighas of land in the Bengali year 1060. The land being the
possession of Jagannatha, the village was named Jagannatha-pura. It is said that
Kamalakara Pippalai left home, and therefore his younger brother Nidhipati Pippalai
searched for him and in due course of time found him in the village of Mahesa.
Nidhipati Pippalai tried his best to bring his elder brother home, but he would not
return. Under these circumstances, Nidhipati Pippalai, with all his family members,
came to Mahesa to reside. The members of this family still reside in the vicinity of
the Mahesa village. Their family name is Adhikarf, and they are a brahmana family.
The history of the Jagannatha Temple in Mahesa is as follows. One devotee of the
name Dhruvananda went to see Lord Jagannatha, Balarama and Subhadra at
Jagannatha Puri, wanting to offer foodstuffs to Jagannathaji that he had cooked
with his own hands. This being his desire, one night Jagannathaji appeared to him
in a dream and asked him to go to Mahesa on the bank of the Ganges and there
start worship of Him in a temple. Thus Dhruvananda went to Mahesa, where he
saw the three Deities—)agannatha, Balarama and Subhadra—floating in the Ganges.
He picked up all those Deities and installed Them in a small cottage, and with great
satisfaction he executed the worship of Lord Jagannatha. When he became old, he
was very much anxious to hand over the worship to the charge of someone reliable,
and in a dream he got permission from Jagannatha Prabhu to hand it over to a per-
son whom he would meet the next morning. The next morning he met Kamalakara
Pippalai, who was formerly an inhabitant of the village Khalijuli in the Sundaravana
Forest area of Bengal and was a pure Vaisnava, a great devotee of Lord Jagannatha;
thus he immediately gave him charge of the worship. In this way, Kamalakara
Pippalai became the worshiper of Lord Jagannatha, and since then his family mem-
bers have been designated as Adhikari, which means ‘““one who is empowered to
worship the Lord.” These Adhikaris belong to a respectable brahmapa family.
Five types of upper-class brahmanas are recognized by the surname Pippalai.
TEXT 25
সূর্যদাস সরখেল, S13 ভাই কৃষ্ণদাস।
নিত্যানফ্যে gp বিশ্বাস, প্রেমের নিবাস ॥ ২৫ ॥
$0/%00950 sarakhela, tanra bhai krspadasa
nityanande drdha visvisa, premera nivasa
SYNONYMS
saryadasa sarakhela—of the name Suryadasa Sarakhela; tarira bhai—his brother;
. krspadasa—of the name Kysnadasa; nitydnande—unto Lord Nityananda; drgha visvdsa
—-firm faith; premera nivasa—the reservoir of all love of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Suryadasa Sarakhela and his younger brother Krsnadasa Sarakhela both possessed
firm faith in Nityananda Prabhu. They were a reservoir of love of Godhead.


--- Page 368 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 367
PURPORT
In the Bhakti-ratnakara, Chapter Twelve, it is stated that a few miles from
Navadvipa is a place called Saligrama that was the residence of Stiryadasa Sarakhela.
He was employed as a secretary of the Mohammedan government of that time, and
thus he amassed a good fortune. Siiryadasa had four brothers, all of whom were
pure Vaisnavas. Vasudha and Jahnava were two daughters of Stiryadasa Sarakhela.
TEXT 26
গৌরীদাস পণ্ডিত যার প্রেমোজ্ঞণ্ডভক্কি ৷
Fare দিতে, নিতে, ধরে TEE ॥ ২৬ ॥
gauridasa pandita yanra premoddangda-bhakti
krsna-prema dite, nite, dhare mahasakti
SYNONYMS
gauridasa pandita—of the name Gauridasa Pandita; yanra—whose; prema-uddanda-
bhakti—the most elevated in love of Godhead and devotional service; krsna-prema—
love of Krsna; dite—to deliver; nite—and to receive; dhare—empowered; mahasakti—
great potency.
TRANSLATION
Gauridasa Pandita, the emblem of the most elevated devotional service in love of
Godhead, had the greatest potency to receive and deliver such love.
PURPORT
It is said that Gauridasa Pandita was always patronized by King Krsnadasa, the son
of Harihoda. Gauridasa Pandita lived in the village of Saligrama, which is situated a
few miles from the railway station Mudagacha, and later he came to reside in
Ambika-kalana. It is stated in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 128, that formerly
he was Subala, one of the cowherd boy friends of Krsna and Balarama in Vrndavana.
Gauridasa Pandita was the younger brother of Siiryadasa Sarakhela, and with the
permission of his elder brother he shifted his residence to the bank of the Ganges,
living there in the town known as Ambika-kalana. Some of the names of the descen-
dants of Gauridasa Pandita are as follows: (1) Sri Nrsimhacaitanya, (2) Krsnadasa,
(3) Visnudasa, (4) Bada Balarama dasa, (5) Govinda, (6) Raghunatha, (7) Badu
Gangadasa, (8) Auliya Gangarama, (9) Yadavacarya, (10) Hrdayacaitanya, (11)
Canda Haladara, (12) Mahesa Pandita, (13) Mukuta Raya, (14) Bhatuya Gangarama,
(15) Auliya Caitanya, (16) Kaliya Krsnadasa, (17) Patuya Gopala, (18) Bada
Jagannatha, (19) Nityananda, (20) Bhavi, (21) Jagadisa, (22) Raiya Krsnadasa and
(22%) Annapiirna. The eldest son of Gauridasa Pandita was known as big Balarama,
and the youngest was known as Raghunatha. The sons of Raghunatha were Mahesa
Pandita and Govinda. Gauridasa Pandita’s daughter was known 25 Annaparga.


--- Page 369 ---
368 S$ri-Caitanya-caritimrta
, The village Ambika-kalana, which is situated just across the River Ganges from
Santipura, is two miles east of the Kalanakorta railway station on the eastern railway.
In Ambika-kalana there is a temple constructed by the Zamindar of Burdwan. In
front of the temple there is a big tamarind tree, and it is said that Gauridasa Pandita
and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu met underneath this tree. The place where the
temple is situated is known as Ambika, and because it is in the area of Kalana, the
village is known 25 Ambika-kalana. It is said that a copy of Bhagavad-gita written
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu still exists in this temple.
TEXT 27
নিত্যানন্দে সম্বপিল জাতি-কুল-পাঁতি |
জীচৈতদ্ত-নিত্যানম্দে করি প্রাণপতি ॥ ২৭ ॥
nityanande samarpila jati-kula-panti
Sri-caitanya-nityanande kari pranapati
SYNONYMS
nityanande—to Lord Nityananda; samarpila—he offered; jati—caste distinction;
kula—family; panti—fellowship; $ri-caitanya—Lord Caitanya; nityanande—in Lord
Nityananda; kari—making; prana-pati—the Lords of his life.
TRANSLATION
Making Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda the Lords of his life, Gauridasa
Pandita sacrificed everything for the service of Lord Nityananda, even the fellow-
ship of his own family.
TEXT 28
নিত্যানন্দ यत्र প্রিয় -ग॑खिङ পুরন্দর ।
প্রেমার্ণব-মধ্যে ফিরে CTR মন্দর ॥ ২৮ ॥
nityananda prabhura priya—pandita purandara
premarnava-madhye phire yaichana mandara
SYNONYMS
nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; prabhura—of the Lord; priya—very dear;
pandita purandara—of the name Pandita Purandara; prema-arnava-madhye—in the
ocean of love of Godhead; phire—moved; yaichana—exactly like; mandara—the
Mandara Hill.
TRANSLATION
The thirteenth important devotee of Sri Nityananda Prabhu was Pandita
Purandara, who moved in the ocean of love of Godhead just like the Mandara Hill.


--- Page 370 ---
Adi-Iia, Chapter 11 369
PURPORT
Pandita Purandara met Sri Nityananda Prabhu at Khadadaha. When Nityananda
Prabhu visited this village, He danced very uncommonly, and His dancing captivated
Purandara Pandita. The pandita was in the top of a tree, and upon seeing the dancing
of Nityananda he jumped down on the ground proclaiming himself to be Angada,
one of the devotees in the camp of Hanuman during the pastimes of Lord
Ramacandra.
TEXT 29
পরমেস্বরদাস - নিত্যাচ্ত্থক-শরণ |
FREE পায়, তারে ८ब করে স্মরণ ॥ ২৯ ॥
paramesvara-dasa—nityanandaika-$arana
krsna-bhakti pdya, tanre ye kare smarana
SYNONYMS
paramesvara-dasa—of the name Paramesvara dasa; nityananda-eka-sarana—com-
pletely surrendered to the lotus feet of Nityananda; krspa-bhakti pGya—gets love of
Krsna; tanre—him; ye—anyone; kare—does; smarana—remembering.
TRANSLATION
Paramesvara dasa, said to be the fifth gopala of krsna-lila, completely surrendered
to the lotus feet of Nityananda. Anyone who remembers his name, Paramesvara
dasa, will get love of Krsna very easily.
PURPORT
The Caitanya-bhagavata states that Paramesvara dasa, known sometimes as
ParamesvarT dasa, was the life and soul of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. The body of
Paramesvara dasa was the place of Lord Nityananda’s pastimes. Paramesvara dasa,
who lived for some time at Khadadaha village, was always filled with the ecstasy of
a cowherd boy. Formerly he was Arjuna, a friend of Krsna and Balarama. He was
the fifth among the twelve gopdlas. He accompanied Srimati Jahnava-devi when she
performed the festival at Kheturi. It is stated in the Bhakti-ratnakara that by the
order of Srimati Jahnava-mata, he installed Radha-Gopinatha in the temple at
Atapura in the district of 1104821. The Atapura station is on the narrow gauge railway
line between Howrah and Amati. Another temple in Atapura, established by the
Mitra family, is known as the Radha-Govinda temple. In front of the temple, in a
very attractive place among two bakula trees and a kadamba tree, is the tomb of
Paramesvari Thakura, and above it is an altar with a tu/asibush. It is said that only
one flower a year comes out of the kadamba tree. It is offered to the Deity.
Paramesvari Thakura belonged, it is said, to a vaidya family. A descendant of his
brother is at present a worshiper in the temple. Some of their family members still
reside in the district of Hugali near the post office of (21471212. The descendants of


--- Page 371 ---
370 Sr-Caitanya-caritimrta
Paramesvari Thakura took many disciples from brahmapa families, but as these
descendants gradually took to the profession of physicians, persons from brahmana
families ceased becoming their disciples. The family titles of Paramesvari’s descen-
dants are Adhikari and Gupta. Unfortunately his family members do not worship the
Deity directly; they have engaged paid brahmapas to worship the Deity. In the
temple, Baladeva and Sri Sri Radha-Gopinatha are together on the throne. It is sup-
posed that the Deity of Baladeva was installed later because according to transcen-
dental mellow, Baladeva, Krsna and Radha cannot stay on the same throne. On the
full moon day of vaisakha (April-May), the disappearance festival of Paramesvari
Thakura is observed in this temple.
TEXT 30
জগদীশ পণ্ডিত হয় জগৎ-পাবন।
কৃষ্ণপ্রেমামৃত FE, যেন TE ঘন ॥ ৩০ ॥
(0404790 papdita haya jagat-pavana
krspa-premamyta varse, yena varsa ghana
SYNONYMS
Jagadisa pandita—of the name Jagadisa Pandita; haya—becomes; jagat-pavana—the
deliverer of the world; krspa-prema-amyta varse—he always pours torrents of devo-
tional service; yena—like; varsa—rainfall; ghana—heavy.
TRANSLATION
Jagadisa Pandita, the fifteenth branch of Lord Nityananda’s followers, was the
deliverer of the entire world. Devotional love of Krsna showered from him like
torrents of rain.
PURPORT
Descriptions of Jagadisa Pandita are available from Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila,
Chapter Four, and Caitanya-caritamyrta, Adi-ila, Chapter Fourteen. He belonged to
the village of Yasaga-gramain the district of Nadia near the Cakadaha railway station.
His father, the son of Bhatta Narayana, was named Kamalaksa. Both his father and
mother were great devotees of Lord Visnu, and after their death, ] 3830153, with his
wife Duhkhini and brother Mahesa, left his birthplace and came to Sri Mayapur to
live in the company of Jagannatha Misra and other Vaisnavas. Lord Caitanya asked
Jagadisa to go to Jagannatha Puri to preach the hari-ndma-sanikirtana movement.
After returning from Jagannatha Puri, on the order of Lord Jagannatha he established
Deities of Jagannatha in the village of Yasada-grama. It is said that when | 28६20152
Pandita brought ‘the Deity of Jagannatha to Yasada-grama, he tied the heavy Deity
to a stick and thus brought Him to the village. The priests of the temple still show
the stick used by Jagadisa Pandita to carry the Jagannatha Deity.


--- Page 372 ---
Adi-lita, Chapter 11 371
TEXT 31
নিত্যানন্দ-প্রিয়ভূত্য পণ্ডিত aus |
खर} বিরক্ত, সদা কৃষ্ণপ্রেমময় ॥ ৩১ ॥
nityananda-priyabhrtya pandita dhanaiijaya
atyanta virakta, sada kyspa-premamaya
SYNONYMS
nityananda-priya-bhrtya—another dear servant of Nityananda Prabhu; pangdita
dhanaiijaya—of the name Pandita Dhanafjaya; atyanta—very much; virakta—re-
nounced; sadd—always; krspa-premamaya—merged in love of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
The sixteenth dear servant of Nityananda Prabhu was Dhananjaya Pandita. He was
very much renounced and always merged in love of Krsna.
PURPORT
Pandita Dhananjaya was a resident of the village in Katwa named Sitala. He was
one of the twelve gopalas. His former name, according to Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika,
was Vasudama. Sitala-grama is situated near the Marigalakota police station and
Kaicara post office in the district of Burdwan. On the narrow railway from Burdwan
to Katwa is a railway station about nine miles from Kutwa known as Kaicara. One
has to go about a mile northeast of this station to reach Sitala. The temple was a
thached house with walls made of dirt. Some time ago, the Zamindars of Bajaravana
13835, the Mulliks,constructed a big house for the purpose of a temple, but for the
last sixty-five years the temple has been broken down and abandoned. The founda-
tion of the old temple is still visible. There is a tulasi pillar near the temple, and
every year during the month of January the disappearance day of Dhananjaya is
observed. It is said that for some time Pandita Dhananjaya was in a sankirtana party
under the direction of इं Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and then he went to Vrndavana.
Before going 10 Vrndavana, he lived for some time in a village named Sancadapancada,
which is six miles south of the Memari railway station. Sometimes this village is also
known as the “place of Dhanafjaya’ (Dhananjayera Pata). After some time, he left
the responsibility for worship with a disciple and went back to Vrndavana. After
returning from Vrndavana to Sitala-grama, he established a Deity of Gaurasundara
in the temple. The descendants of Pandita Dhananjaya still live in Sitala-grama and
look after the temple worship.
TEXT 32
মহত্শে পণ্ডিত -लेटजन्न উদার গোপাল |
1 1/4 | নৃত্য করে প্রেমে মাতোয়াল ॥ ৩২ ॥


--- Page 373 ---
372 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
mahesa pandita—vrajera udara gopala
dhakka-vadye nrtya kare preme matoyala
SYNONYMS
mahesa pandita—of the name Mahesa Pandita; vrajera—of Vrndavana; udara—very
liberal; gopala—cowherd boy; gdhakka-vadye—with the beating of a kettledrum; (एच
kare—used to dance; preme—in love; matoyala—as if a madman.
TRANSLATION
Mahesa Pandita, the seventh of the twelve gopalas, was very liberal. In great love
of Krsna he danced to the beating of a kettledrum like a madman.
PURPORT
The village of Mahesa Pandita, which is known as Palapada, is situated in the
district of Nadia within a forest about one mile south of the Cakadaha railway sta-
tion. The Ganges flows nearby. It is said that formerly Mahesa Pandita lived on the
eastern side of Jirat in the village known as Masipura or Yasipura, and when Masi-
pura merged in the riverbed of the Ganges, the Deities there were brought to
Palapada, which is situated in the midst of various villages such as Beledariga,
Berigrama, Sukhasagara, Candude and 13173530013. (There are about fourteen
villages, and the entire neighborhood is known 25 Paficanagara Paragana.) It is men-
tioned that Mahesa Pandita joined the festival performed by Sri Nityananda Prabhu
at Papihati. Narottama dasa Thakura also joined in the festival, and Mahesa Pandita
saw him on that occasion. In the temple of Mahesa Pandita there are Deities of
Gaura-Nityananda, Sri Gopinatha, Sri Madana-mohana and Radha-Govinda as well
as a salagrama-$ila..
TEXT 33
নবদ্বীপে পুক্ুযোত্তম পণ্ডিত মহাশয় ।
নিত্যানন্দর-নামে যার মহোষ্মাদ হয় ॥ ৩৩ ॥
navadvipe purusottama pandita mahasaya
nityananda-name yanra mahonmada haya
SYNONYMS
navadvipe purusottama—Purusottama of Navadvipa; pandita mahasaya—a very
learned scholar; nityananda-name—in the name of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; yanra—
whose; maha-unmada—great ecstasy; haya—becomes.
TRANSLATION
Purusottama Pandita, a resident of Navadvipa, was the eighth gopala. He would
become almost mad as soon as he heard the holy name of Nityananda Prabhu.


--- Page 374 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 373
PURPORT
It is stated in the Caitanya-bhagavata that Purusottama Pandita was born in
Navadvipa and was a great devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu. As one of the twelve
gopalas, his former name was Stokakrsna.
TEXT 34
বলরাম দাস- কৃষ্ণপ্রেমরসাম্বাদী |
নিত্যানন্দ-নামে হয় পরম উন্মাদী ॥ ৩৪ ॥
balarama 0350---/0/500-2/6/77-0535৮3017
nityananda-name haya parama 0/777307
SYNONYMS
balarama-dasa—of the name Balarama dasa; krspa-prema-rasa—the nectar of
always merging in love of Krsna; asvadi—fully tasting; nityananda-name—in the
name of Sri Nityananda Prabhu; hgya—becomes; parama—greatly; unmadi—mad-
dened.
TRANSLATION
Balarama dasa always fully tasted the nectar of love of Krsna. Upon hearing the
name of Nityananda Prabhu he would become greatly maddened.
TEXT 35
মহাত্তাগবত যতুনাথ कविषएटटक |
যাহার হৃদয়ে নৃত্য করে নিত্যানন্দ ॥ ৩৫ ॥
maha-bhagavata yadunatha kavicandra
yanhara hrdaye nrtya kare nityananda
SYNONYMS
mahd-bhagavata—a great devotee; yadunatha kavicandra—of the name Yadunatha
Kavicandra; yanhdra—whose; hrdaye—in the heart; nrtya—dancing; kare—does;
nityananda—\Lord Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
Yadunatha Kavicandra was a great devotee. Lord Nityananda Prabhu always
danced in his heart.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-bhagavata Madhya-lila, Chapter One, it is said that a gentleman
known as Ratnagarbha Acarya was a friend of Sri Nityananda Prabhu’s father. They


--- Page 375 ---
374 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
were both residents of the same village, known as Ekacakra-grama. He had four sons—
Krsnapada-makaranda, Krsnananda, Jiva and Yadunatha Kavicandra.
TEXT 36
ates যার om কৃষ্ণনাস দ্বিজবর।
প্লরীনিত্যানন্দের (Stel পরম কিন্কুর ॥ ৩৬ ॥
radhe yanra janma Rrspadasa dvijavara
$ri-nityanandera tenho parama kifikara
SYNONYMS
raghe—in West Bengal; ydnra—whose; janma—birth; kfspadasa—of the name
Krsnadasa; dvijavara—the best brahmana; sri-nityanandera—of Nityananda Prabhu;
tennho—he; parama—first-class; kifnnkara—servant.
TRANSLATION
The twenty-first devotee of Sri Nityananda in Bengal was Krsnadasa Brahmana,
who was a first-class servant of the Lord.
PURPORT
Radha-desa refers to the part of Bengal where the Ganges does not flow.
TEXT 37
কালা-কৃষ্ণনাস বড় বৈষ্ণবপ্রধান।
নিত্যানম্দ-চন্দ্র विस्‌ নাহি জানে আম ॥ ৩৭ ॥
kala-krspadasa baga vaispava-pradhana
nityananda-candra vinu nahi jane ana
SYNONYMS
kala-krspadasa—of the name Kala Krsnadasa; bada—great; vaispava-pradhana—
first-class Vaisnava; nityananda-candra—\ ord Nityananda; vinu—except; nahi jane—
he did not know; ana—of anything 6156.
TRANSLATION
The twenty-second devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Kala Krsnadasa,
who was the ninth cowherd boy. He was a first-class Vaisnava and did not know
anything beyond Nityananda Prabhu.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khapda, Chapter Six, it is said that Krsnadasa,
who was known as Kaliya Krsnadasa, was formerly a gopdla (cowherd boy) of the


--- Page 376 ---
01413, Chapter 11 375
name Labariga. He was one of the twelve cowherd boys. Kaliya Krsnadasa had his
headquarters in a village named Akaihata, which is situated in the district of
Burdwan within the jurisdiction of the post office and police station of Katwa. 11 is
situated on the road 10 Navadvipa. To reach Akiihata, one has to go from the
Vyandela junction station to the Katwa railway station and then go about two
miles, or one has to get off at the Dariihata station and from there go one mile. The
village of Akaihata is very small. In the month of Caitra, on the day of Varuni, there
is a festival commemorating the disappearance day of Kala Krsnadasa.

TEXT 38
छित भिर কবিরাজ- বড় মহাশয় |
िशरकरटसाखमयक्राज - তাহার তনয় ॥ ৩৮ ॥
$ri-sadasiva kaviraja—bagda mahasaya
$ri-purusottama-dasa—tanhara tanaya
SYNONYMS
$ri-sadasiva kavirgja—of the name Sri Sadasiva Kaviraja; bada—great; mahasaya—
respectable gentleman; sri-purusottama-dasa—of the name Sri Purusottama dasa;
tanhara tanaya—his son.
TRANSLATION
The twenty-third and twenty-fourth prominent devotees of Nityananda Prabhu
were Sadasiva Kaviraja and his son Purusottama dasa, who was the tenth gopala.
TEXT 39
wife নিমগ্ন নিত্যানম্দের চরণে |
নিরস্তর বাল্য-লীল৷ করে কৃষ্ণ-সনে ॥ ৩৯ ॥
djanma nimagna nityanandera carane
nirantara balya-Iila kare krspa-sane
SYNONYMS
ajanma—since birth; nimagna—merged; nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu; carane—in the lotus feet; nirantara—always; balya-/ila—childish play; kare—
does; krsna-sane—with Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Since birth, Purusottama dasa was merged in the service of the lotus feet of Lord
Nityananda Prabhu, and he always engaged in childish play with Lord Krsna.
PURPORT
Sadasiva Kaviraja and Nagara Purugsottama, who were father and son, are described
in the Caitanya-bhagavata as maha-bhagyavan, greatly fortunate. They belonged to


--- Page 377 ---
376 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
the vaidya caste of physicians. The Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 156, says that
Candravali, a most beloved gop7 of Krsna, later took birth as Sadasiva Kaviraja. It is
said that Karhsari Sena, the father of Sadasiva Kaviraja, was formerly the 9007
named Ratnavali in Krsna’s pastimes. All the family members of Sadasiva Kaviraja
were great devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Purusottama dasa Thakura
sometimes lived at Sukhasagara, near the Cakadaha and Simurali railway stations.
All the Deities installed by Purusottama Thakura were formerly situated in
Beledariga-grama, but when the temple was destroyed the Deities were brought to
Sukhasagara. When that temple merged in the bed of the Ganges, the Deities were
brought with Jahnava-mata’s Deity to Sahebadanga Bedigrama. Since that place also
has been destroyed, all the Deities are now situated in the village named Candude-
grama, which is situated one mile up from Palapada, as referred to above.
TEXT 40
তার পুজ- गङानग्र erg ঠাকুর |
सौत्र দেহে ACE কৃষ্ণ-প্রেমামৃতপুৰু ॥ ৪০ ॥
tanra putra—mahasaya Sri-kanu thakura
yarnra dehe rahe krspa-premamrta-para
SYNONYMS
tanra putra—his son; mahasaya—a respectable gentleman; $ri-kdnu thakura—of the
name Sri Kanu Thakura; yanra—whose; dehe—in the body; rahe—remained; krsna-
prema-amrta-ptira—the nectar of devotional service to Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Sri Kanu Thakura, a very respectable gentleman, was the son of Purusottama
dasa Thakura. He was such a great devotee that Lord Krsna always lived in his body.
PURPORT
To go to the headquarters of Kanu Thakura, one has to proceed by boat from the
Jhikaragacha-ghata station to the river known as Kapotaksa. Otherwise, if one goes
about two or two and a half miles from the | hikaragacha-ghata station, he can see
Bodhakhana, the headquarters of Kanu Thakura. The son of Sadasiva was
Purusottama Thakura, and his son was Kanu Thakura. The descendants of Kanu
Thakura know him 25 Nagara Purusottama. He was the cowherd boy named Dama
‘during krspa-/ila. It is said that just after the birth of Kanu Thakura, his mother,
Jahnava, died. When he was about twelve days old, Sri Nityananda Prabhu took
him to His home at Khadadaha. It is ascertained that Kanu Thakura was born some
time in the Bengali year 942. It is said that he took birth on the Rathayatra
day. Because he was a great devotee of Lord Krsna from the very beginning of his
life, Sri Nityananda Prabhu gave him the name Sisu Krsnadasa. When he was five


--- Page 378 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 377
years old he went to Vrndavana with Jahnava-mata, and upon seeing the ecstatic
symptoms of Kanu Thakura, the Gosvamis gave him the name Kanai Thakura.

In the family of Kanu Thakura there is a Radha-Krsna Deity known as Prana-
vallabha. It is said that his family worshiped this Deity long before the appearance
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When there was a Maharastrian invasion of Bengal,
the family of Kanu Thakura was scattered, and after the invasion one Harikrsna
Gosvami of that family came back to their original home, Bodhakhana, and re-
established the Pranavallabha Deity. The descendants of the family still engage in
the service of Pranavallabha. Kanu Thakura was present during the Khetari-utsava
when Jahnava-devi and Virabhadra Gosvami were also present. One of Kanu
Thakura’s family members, Madhavacarya, married the daughter of Sri Nityananda
Prabhu, who was named Garigadevi. Both Purusottama Thakura and Kanu Thakura
had many disciples from brahmapa families. Most of the disciplic descendants of
Kanu Thakura now reside in the village named Gadabeta by the River Silavati in the
Midnapore district.

TEXT 41
মহাভাগবত-শপ্রেষ্ঠ দত্ত উদ্ধারণ।
সর্বভাবে সেবে নিত্যানন্দের চরণ ॥ ৪১ ॥
maha-bhagavata-srestha 00110 uddharana
sarva-bhave seve nityanandera carana

SYNONYMS

maha-bhagavata—great devotee; Srestha—chief; datta—the surname Datta;
uddharapa—of the name Uddharana; sarva-bhave—in all respects; seve—worships;
nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda; carana—Ilotus feet.

TRANSLATION

Uddharana Datta Thakura, the eleventh among the twelve cowherd boys, was an
exalted devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu. He worshiped the lotus feet of Lord
Nityananda in all respects.

PURPORT

The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 129, states that Uddharana Datta Thakura was
formerly the cowherd boy of Vrndavana named Subahu. Uddharana Datta Thakura,
previously known as Sri Uddharana Datta, was a resident of Saptagrama, which is
situated on the bank of the Sarasvati River near the Trisabigha railway station in the
district of Hugali. At the time of Uddharana Thakura, Saptagrama was a very big
town, encompassing many other places such as Vasudeva-pura, Bansabediya,
Krsnapura, Nityananda-pura, Sivapura, Sarikhanagara and Saptagrama.

Calcutta was developed under British rule by the influential mercantile commu-
nity and especially by the suvarpa-vapik community who came down from Sapta-


--- Page 379 ---
378 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta

grama to establish their businesses and homes all over Calcutta. They were known as
the Saptagrami mercantile community of Calcutta, and most of them belonged to
the Mullik and Sil families. More than half of Calcutta belonged to this community,
as did Srila Uddharana Thakura. Our paternal family also came from this district
and belonged to the same community. The Mulliks of Calcutta are divided into two
families, namely, the Sil family and De family. All the Mulliks of the De family
originally belong to the same family and gotra. We also formerly belonged to
the branch of the De family whose members, intimately connected with the
Mohammedan rulers, received the title Mullik.

In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khapda, Chapter Six, it is said that Uddharana
Datta was an extremely elevated and liberal Vaisnava. He was born with the right
to worship Nityananda Prabhu. It is also stated that Nityananda Prabhu, after stay-
ing for some time in Khadadaha, came to Saptagrama and stayed in the house of
Uddharana Datta. The suvarpa-vanik community to which Uddharana Datta be-
longed was actually a Vaispava community. Its members were bankers and gold
merchants (suvarpa means ‘‘gold,” and vapik means ‘““merchant”). Long ago there
was a misunderstanding between Balla Sena and the suvarpa-vapik community be-
cause of the great banker Gauri Sena. Balla Sena was taking loans from Gaurt Sena
and spending money extravagantly, and therefore Gauri Sena stopped supplying
money. Balla Sena took revenge by instigating a social conspiracy to make the
suvarpa-vapiks outcastes, and since then they have been ostracized from the higher
castes, namely, the brahmapas, ksatriyas and vaisyas. But by the grace of Srila
Nityananda Prabhu, the suvarpa-vanik community was again elevated. It is said in
the Caitanya-bhagavata, yateka vanik-kula uddharana haite pavitra ha-ila dvidha
nahika ihdte: there is no doubt that all the community members of the suvarpa-
vapik society were again purified by Sri Nityananda Prabhu. ॥

In Saptagrama there is still a temple with a six-armed Deity of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu that was personally worshiped by Srila Uddharana Datta Thakura. On
the right side of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is a Deity of Sri Nityananda Prabhu and
on the left side Gadadhara Prabhu. There are also a Radha-Govinda marti and
salagrama-sila, and below the throne is a picture of Sri Uddharana Datta Thakura.
In front of the temple there is now a big hall, and in front of the hall is a Madhavi-
lata plant. The temple is in a very shady, cool and nicely situated location. When we
returned from America in 1967, the executive committee members of this temple
invited us to visit it,and thus we had the opportunity to visit this temple with some
American students. Formerly, in our childhood, we visited this temple with our
parents because all the members of the suvarpa-vanik community enthusiastically
take interest in this temple of Uddharana Datta Thakura. In the Bengali year 1283
one 8৫8৫//7 of the name Nitai dasa arranged for a donation of twelve bighas of land
for this temple. The management of the temple later deteriorated, but then in 1306,
through the cooperation of the famous Balarama Mullik of Hugali, who was a sub-
judge, and many rich suvargpa-vapik community members, the management of the
temple improved greatly. Not more than fifty years ago, one of the family members
of Uddharana Datta Thakura named Jagamohana Datta established a wooden Deity
of Uddharapa Datta Thakura in the temple, but that Deity is no longer there; at


--- Page 380 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 379
present, a picture of Uddharana Datta Thakura is worshiped. It is understood,
however, that the wooden Deity of Uddharana Thakura was taken away by ऽन
Madana-mohana Dattaand is now being worshiped with a s@/agrama-sila by Srinatha
Datta.

Uddharana Datta Thakura was the manager of the estate of a big Zamindar in
Naihati, about one and a half miles north of Katwa. The relics of this royal family
are still visible near the Dainhata station. Since Uddharana Datta Thakura was the
manager of the estate, it- was also known as Uddharana-pura. Uddharana Datta
Thakura installed Nitai-Gaura Deities that were later brought to the house of the
Zamindar, which was known as Vanaoyaribada. Srila Uddharana Datta Thakura re-
mained a householder throughout his life. His father’s name was Srikara Datta, his
mother’s name was Bhadravati, and his son’s name was Srinivasa Datta.

TEXT 42
আচার্থ বৈষ্ণবানন্দ ভক্তি-অধিকারী |
পূর্বে নাম ছিল যার ‘agar পুরী” ॥ ৪২ ॥
dcdrya vaispavananda bhakti-adhikari
parve nama chila yanra ‘raghundtha puri’
SYNONYMS

acdrya—teacher; vaispavananda—of the name Vaispavananda; bhakti—devotional
service; adhikari—fit candidate; parve—previously; nama—name; chila— was; yanra—
whose; raghunatha puri—of the name Raghunatha 2011.

TRANSLATION

The twenty-seventh prominent devotee of Nityananda Prabhu was Acarya
Vaisnavananda, a great personality in devotional service. He was formerly known as
Raghunatha Puri.

PURPORT

In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 97, it is said that Raghunatha Puri was pre-
viously very powerful in the eight mystic successes. He was an incarnation of one of
the successes.

TEXT 43
विकृता ज, নন্দন, গন্কাদাস, তিন ভাই |
পুর্বে ষার ঘরে ছিলা ঠাকুর নিতাই ॥ ৪৩ ॥
vispudasa,nandana, gangadasa— tina bhai
parve yanra ghare child thakura nitai


--- Page 381 ---
380 Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta
SYNONYMS
vispudasa—of the name Visnudasa; nandana—of the name Nandana; gangadasa—
of the name Gangadasa; tina bhai—three brothers; piarve—previously; yanra—whose;
ghare—in the house; chila—stayed; thakura nitai—Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
Another important devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Visnudasa, who had
two brothers, Nandana and 00317830353. Lord Nityananda Prabhu sometimes stayed
at their house.
PURPORT
The three brothers Visnudasa, Nandana and Garigadasa were residents of
Navadvipa and belonged to the Bhattacarya brahmapa family. Both Visnudasa and
(0০317830393 stayed for some time with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri,
and the Caitanya-bhdgavata states that formerly Nityananda Prabhu stayed at their
house.
TEXT 44
নিত্যানম্দভূত্য--পরযানম্দ উপাধ্যায় |
897 পণ্ডিত নিত্যানম্দ-গুণ গায় ॥ 88 ॥
nityananda-bhrtya—paramananda upadhyaya
$ri-jiva pandita nityananda-gupa gaya
SYNONYMS
nityananda-bhrtya—servant of Nityananda Prabhu; paramdnanda upadhyaya—of
the name Paramananda Upadhyaya; $ri-jiva pandita—of the name Sri Jiva Pandita;
nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; guna—qualities; gaya—glorified.
TRANSLATION
Paramananda Upadhyaya was Nityananda Prabhu’s great servitor. Sri Jiva Pandita
glorified the qualities of Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
PURPORT
Sri Paramananda Upadhyaya was an advanced devotee. His name is mentioned
in the Caitanya-bhagavata, where Sri Jiva Pandita is also mentioned as the second
son of Ratnagarbha Acarya and a childhood friend of Hadai Ojha, the father of
Nityananda Prabhu. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 169, it is said that Sri Jiva
Pandita was formerly the gopi named Indira.
TEXT 45
পরমালম্দ গুপ্ত কৃষ্ণতক্ত মহামতি |
পূর্বে যার ঘরে নিত্যানন্দের বসতি ॥ ৪৫ ॥


--- Page 382 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 381
paramananda gupta—krspa-bhakta mahamati
parve yanra ghare nityanandera vasati
SYNONYMS
paramananda gupta—of the name Paramananda Gupta; krspa-bhakta—a great
devotee of Lord Krsna; mahdmati—advanced in spiritual consciousness; parve—
formerly; yanra—whose; ghare—in the house; nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu; vasati—residence.
TRANSLATION
The thirty-first devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Paramananda Gupta,
who was greatly devoted to Lord Krsna and highly advanced in spiritual conscious-
ness. Formerly Nityananda Prabhu also resided at his house for some time.
PURPORT
Paramananda Gupta composed a prayer to Lord Krsna known as Krsnpa-
stavavali. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 194, it is stated that he was formerly
the 40/27 named Manjumedha.
TEXT 46
নারায়ণ, FWA আর बटनांङ्त्र |
দেবালন্দ - চারি ভাই নিভাই-কিন্তর ॥ 8७ ॥.
ndrdyana, krspadasa ara manohara
devananda— cari bhai nitai-kinkara
SYNONYMS
nardayana—of the name Narayana; krspadasa—of the name 1৫015030353); ara—and;
manohara—of the name Manohara; devdnanda—of the name Devananda; cari bhai—
four brothers; nitai-kinkara—servants of Lord Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
The thirty-second, thirty-third, thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth prominent devotees
were Narayana, Krsnadasa, Manohara and Devananda, who always engaged in the
service of Lord Nityananda.
TEXT 47
হোড় কৃষ্ণদাস - নিত্যানজ্দপ্রভু-প্রাণ।
লিত্যানন্দ-পদ RY নাস্ছি জানে আন ॥ ৪৭ ॥
hoda krspadasa—nityananda-prabhu-prana
nityananda-pada vinu nahi jane ana


--- Page 383 ---
382 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
SYNONYMS
hoda krspaddsa—of the name Hoda Krsnadasa; nityananda-prabhu—of Lord
Nityananda; prana—Ilife and soul ; nityananda-pada—the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda;
vinu—except; nahi—does not; jane—know; dna—anything else.
TRANSLATION
The thirty-sixth devotee of Lord Nityananda was Hoda Krsnadasa, whose life and
soul was Nityananda Prabhu. He was always dedicated to the lotus feet of Nityananda,
and he knew no one else but Him.
PURPORT
The residence of Krsnadasa Hoda was Badagachi, which is now in Bangladesh.
TEXT 48
নক্ড়ি, gw, সূর্য, म। शव, वध्र ।
রামানম্থ বসু, জগন্নাথ, TEE ॥ 8४ ॥
nakadi, mukunda, sarya, madhava, sridhara
ramananda vasu, jagannatha, mahidhara
SYNONYMS
nakadi—of the name Nakadi; mukunda—of the name Mukunda; sirya—of the name
Strya; madhava—of the name Madhava; sridhara—of the name Sridhara; ramananda
vasu—of the name Ramananda Vasu; jagannatha—of the name Jagannatha; mahidhara
—of the name Mahidhara.
TRANSLATION
Among Lord Nityananda’s devotees, Nakadi was the thirty-seventh, Mukunda the
thirty-eighth, Stirya the thirty-ninth, Madhava the fortieth, Sridhara the forty-first,
Ramananda the forty-second, Jagannatha the forty-third and Mahidhara the forty-
fourth.
PURPORT
Sridhara was the twelfth gopala.
TEXT 49
xm, গোকু। দাস, grea ।
শিবাই, wie, অবধুত পরমানন্দ ॥ ৪৯ ॥
$/14770/710) gokula-dasa hariharananda
$ivai, nandai, avadhata paramananda


--- Page 384 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 383
SYNONYMS
$ri- manta—of the name Sri Manta; gokula-dasa—of the name Gokula dasa;
hariharananda—of the name Hariharananda; $/৮3/- ০01 the name Sivai; nandai—of the
name Nandai; avadhiita paramananda—of the name Avadhiita Paramananda.
TRANSLATION
Sri Manta was the forty-fifth, Gokula dasa the forty-sixth, Hariharananda the
forty-seventh, Sivai the forty-eighth, Nandai the forty-ninth and Paramananda the
fiftieth.
TEXT 50
ING, নৰনী হোড়, গোপাল, FAS |
বিষ্ণাই হাজর, कृकण नन्ब, স্থলোচন ॥ ৫০ ॥
vasanta, navani hoda, gopdla sanatana
vispai hdjara, krsnananda, sulocana
SYNONYMS
vasanta—of the name Vasanta; navani hoda—of the name Navani Hoda; gopala—of
the name Gopala; sandtana—of the name Sanatana; ৮/503/ hajara—of the name Vispai
Hajara; krspananda—of the name Krsnananda; su/ocana—of the name Sulocana.
TRANSLATION
Vasanta was the fifty-first, Navani Hoda the fifty-second, Gopala the fifty-third,
Sanatana the fifty-fourth, Visnai the fifty-fifth, Krsnananda the fifty-sixth and
Sulocana the fifty-seventh.
PURPORT
Navani Hoda appears to have been the same person as Hoda Krsnadasa, the son of
the King of Badagachi. His father’s name was Hari Hoda. One can visit Badagachi
by taking the Lalagola-ghata railway line. Formerly the Ganges flowed by Badagachi,
but now it has become a canal known as the Kalsira Khal. Near the Mudagacha sta-
tion is a village known as Saligrama in which King Krsnadasa arranged for the mar-
riage of $riNityananda Prabhu, as described in the Bhakti-ratnakara, Tarafiga Twelve.
Itis sometimes said that Navani Hoda was the son of Raja Krsnadasa. His descendants
still live in Rukunapura, a village near Bahiragachi. They belong to the daksina
radhiya kayastha community, but, having been reformed as brdhmanas, they still
initiate all classes of men.
TEXT 51
কংসারি সেন, AAW, রামচন্দ্র কবিরাজ্ব।
গোবিন্দ, Raw, মুকুন্দ, তিল কবিরাজ ॥ ৫১॥


--- Page 385 ---
384 Sri-Caitanya-caritaimrta
karhsari sena, ramasena, ramacandra kavirdja
govinda, 47८074८, mukunda, tina kavirdja
SYNONYMS
karisari sena—of the name Kamsari Sena; rdmasena—of the name Ramasena;
ramacandra kavirgja—of the name Ramacandra Kaviraja; govinda—of the name
Govinda; Srirariga—of the name Sriranga; mukunda—of the name Mukunda; tina
kavirdja—all three are Kavirajas, or physicians.
TRANSLATION
The fifty-eighth great devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Kamsari Sena, the
fifty-ninth was Ramasena, the sixtieth was Ramacandra Kaviraja, and the sixty-first,
sixty-second and sixty-third were Govinda, Sriranga and Mukunda, who were all
physicians.
PURPORT
Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja, the son of Khandavasi Ciradjiva and Sunanda, was a
disciple of Srinivasa Acarya and the most intimate friend of Narottama dasa Thakura,
who prayed several times for his association. His youngest brother was Govinda
Kaviraja. Srila Jiva Gosvami very much appreciated Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja's great
devotion to Lord Krsna and therefore gave him the title kavirdja. Sri Ramacandra
Kaviraja, who was perpetually disinterested in family life, greatly assisted in the
preaching work of Srinivasa Acarya and Narottama dasa Thakura. He resided at first
in Srikhanda but later in the village of Kumara-nagara on the bank of the Ganges.
Govinda Kaviraja was the brother of Ramacandra Kaviraja and youngest son of
Ciraijiva of Srikhanda. Although at first a $gkta, or worshiper of goddess Durga, he
was later initiated by Srinivasa Acarya Prabhu. Govinda Kaviraja also resided first in
Srikhanda and then in Kumara-nagara, but later he moved to the village known as
Teliya Budhari on the southern bank of the River Padma. Since Govinda Kaviraja,
the author of two books, Sangita-madhava and Gitamrta, was a great Vaisnava kavi,
or poet, Srila Jiva Gosvanii gave him the title kavirdja. He is described in the Bhakti-
ratnakara, Ninth Taranga.
Kamsari Sena was formerly Ratnavali in Vraja, as described in the Gaura-
ganoddesa-dipika, verses 194 and 200.
TEXT 52
পীতাত্বর, মাধবাচার্য, দাস দামোদর |
শঙ্কর, মুকুন্দ, জ্ঞানদাস, মনোহর ॥ ৫২ ॥
pitambara, madhavicarya, dasa damodara
Sankara, mukunda, jAiana-dasa, manohara


--- Page 386 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 385
SYNONYMS
pitambara—of the name Pitambara; madhavacarya—of the name Madhavacarya;
dasa damodara—of the name Damodara dasa; $ankara—of the name Sarikara;
mukunda—of the name Mukunda; jigna-dasa—of the name | ianadasa; manohara—of
the name Manohara.
TRANSLATION
Among the devotees of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, Pitambara was the sixty-fourth,
Madhavacarya the sixty-fifth, Damodara dasa the sixty-sixth, Sankara the sixty-
seventh, Mukunda the sixty-eighth, Jianadasa the sixty-ninth and Manohara the
seventieth.
TEXT 53
নর্তক গোপাল, কামভদ্র, গৌরাঙ্গঘাস |
নৃসিংহুচৈতন্ত, মীনকেতন IANA ॥ ৫৩ ॥
nartaka gopala, ramabhadra, gauranga-dasa
nysirhha-caitanya, minaketana rama-dasa
SYNONYMS
nartaka gopala—the dancer Gopala; ramabhadra—of the name Ramabhadra;
gauranga-dasa—of the name Gauranga dasa; nysirmha-caitanya—of the name
Nrsimha-caitanya; minaketana rama-dasa—of the name Minaketana Ramadasa.
TRANSLATION
The dancer Gopala was the seventy-first, Ramabhadra the seventy-second,
Gauranga dasa the seventy-third, Nrsimha-caitanya the seventy-fourth and
Minaketana Ramadasa the seventy-fifth.
PURPORT
The Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika, verse 68, describes Minaketana Ramadasa as an in-
carnation of Sarkarsana.
TEXT 54
বৃন্দাবনদাস--নারায়ণীর নন্দন |
“চৈতন্ত-মঙ্গল' যেঁহে। করিল রচন ॥ ৫৪ ॥
vrndavana-dasa—narayanira nandana
‘caitanya-mangala’ yenho karila racana


--- Page 387 ---
386 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
SYNONYMS
vrnddvana-ddsa—Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura; ndrdyapira nandana—son of
Narayani; caitanya-marngala—the book of the name Caitanya-mangala; yeriho—who;
karila—did; racana—composition.
TRANSLATION
Vindavana dasa Thakura, the son of Srimati Narayani, composed Sri Caitanya-
mangala [later known as Sri Caitanya-bhagavata].
TEXT 55
ভাগবতে কৃষ্ণলীল! fae বেদব্যাস।
TENANTS ব্যাস- বৃন্দাবন कम ॥ ৫৫ ॥
bhagavate krsna-Iila ৮০/0//3 vedavyasa
caitanya-lilate vyasa—yvyrndavana dasa
SYNONYMS
bhagavate—in the Srimad-Bhagavatam; krspa-lila—the pastimes of Lord Krsna;
varnild—described; vedavydsa—Dvaipayana Vyasadeva; caitanya-lilate—in the pas-
times of Lord Caitanya; vydsa—Vedavyasa; vrndavana dasa—Srila Vrndavana dasa
Thakura.
TRANSLATION
Srila Vyasadeva described the pastimes of Krsna in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. The
Vyasa of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was Vrndavana dasa.
PURPORT
Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura was an incarnation of Vedavyasa and also a friendly
cowherd boy named Kusumapida in krspa-/ila. In other words, the author of 1§r7
Caitanya-bhagavata, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura, the son of Srivasa Thakura’s
niece Narayari, was a combined incarnation of Vedavyasa and the cowherd boy
Kusumapida. There is a descriptive statement by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati’
Thakura in his commentary on 5/7 Caitanya-bhagavata giving the biographical details
of the life of Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
TEXT 56
সর্বশাখা-শ্রেষ্ঠ বীরভদ্র (भोगा |
তার উপশাখা सड, তার अख नादे ॥ ৫৬ ॥
sarvasakha-srestha virabhadra gosanii
tanra upasakha yata, tara anta nai


--- Page 388 ---
Adi-lila, Chapter 11 387
SYNONYMS
sarvasakha-srestha—the best of all the branches; virabhadra gosarni—of the name
Virabhadra (6052101; 1377৫ upasakha—His sub-branches; yata—all; tara—of them;
anta—limit; ndi-there is not.
TRANSLATION
Among all the branches of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, Virabhadra (60571 was the
topmost. His sub-branches were unlimited.
TEXT 57
खन्रख निरग्ानत्कभेन (क ककर গণন।
আত্মপৰিত্রভা-হেতু লিখিলাঙ কত জন ॥ ৫৭ ॥
ananta nityananda-gana—Rke karu ganana
atma-pavitrata-hetu likhilan kata jana
SYNONYMS
ananta—unlimited; nityananda-gapa—followers of Sri Nityananda Prabhu; ke karu
—who can; gapana—count; atma-pavitrata— of self-purification; hetu—for the reason;
likhilan—| have written; kata jana—some of them.
TRANSLATION
No one can count the unlimited followers of Nityananda Prabhu. | have men-
tioned some of them just for my seif-purification.
TEXT 58
এই FLT] পূর্ণ शङ CORT |
যারে দেখে, তারে দিয়। ভাসাইল সকলে ॥ ৫৮ ॥
ei sarva-$akha pidrna—pakva prema-phale
yare dekhe, tare diya bhasaila sakale
SYNONYMS
ei—these; sarva-$akha—all branches; pdrpa—complete; pakva prema-phale— with
ripened fruits of love of Godhead; yare dekhe—whomever they see; tare diya—dis-
tributing to him; bhasaila—overflooded; sakale—all of them.
TRANSLATION
All these branches, the devotees of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, being full of ripened
fruits of love of Krsna, distributed these fruits to all they met, flooding them with
love of Krsna.


--- Page 389 ---
388 Sri-Caitanya-caritimrta
TEXT 59
অনর্গল প্রেম সবার, চেষ্টা सनर्भल |
প্রেম দিতে, কৃষ্ণ দিতে ধরে মছাবল ॥ ৫৯ ॥
anargala prema sabara, cesta anargala
prema dite, krspa dite dhare mahabala
SYNONYMS
anargala—unchecked; prema—love of Krsna; sabara—of every one of them; cesta—
activity; anargala—unchecked; prema dite—to give love of Krsna; krsna dite—to de-
liver Krsna; dhare—they possess; mahabala—great strength.
TRANSLATION
All these devotees had unlimited strength to deliver unobstructed, unceasing love
of Krsna. By their own strength they could offer anyone Krsna and love of Krsna.
PURPORT
52 Bhaktivinoda Thakura has sung, krsna se tomdra, krsna dite para, tomara
$akati ache. In this song, Bhaktivinoda Thakura describes that a pure Vaisnava, as the
proprietor of Krsna and love of Krsna, can deliver both to anyone and everyone he
likes. Therefore to get Krsna and love of Krsna one must seek the mercy of pure
devotees. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura also says, yasya prasaddd bhagavat-
prasado yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto ‘pi: ‘‘By the mercy of the spiritual master one
is benedicted by the mercy of Krsna. Without the grace of the spiritual master one
cannot make any advancement.” By the grace of a Vaisnava or bona fide spiritual
master one can get both love of Godhead, Krsna, and Krsna Himself.
TEXT 60
সংক্ষেপে কহিলাঙ এই নিত্যানম্মগণ |
যাহার অবধি না পায় 'সহঅ-বদন” ॥ ৬০ ॥
sanksepe kahilan ei nityananda-gana
yanhara avadhi na paya ‘sahasra-vadana’
SYNONYMS
sanksepe—in brief; kahilan—described; ei—these; nityananda-gana—devotees of
Lord Nityananda; yanhara—of whom; avadhi— limitation; na—does not; paya—get;
sahasra-vadana—the thousand-mouthed Sesanaga on whom Lord Visnu lies.


--- Page 390 ---
01413, Chapter 11 389
TRANSLATION
1 have briefly described only some of the followers and devotees of Lord
Nityananda Prabhu. Even the thousand-mouthed Sesanaga cannot describe all of
these unlimited devotees.
TEXT 61
জীরপ-রখুনাখ-পদে বার আশ |
চৈতন্তচরিতাষ্ৃত কছে कृकलाज ॥ ৬১ ॥
$ri-ripa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-riipa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghundtha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; dSa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—the
book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspa-dasa—Srila Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
With an ardent desire to serve the purpose of Sri ९२००३ and Sri Raghunatha, 1,
Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-lild, Chapter
Eleven, in the matter of the expansions of Lord Nityananda.


--- Page 391 ---
References

The statements of Sri Caitanya-caritamyta are all confirmed by standard Vedic
authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this book on the pages
listed. Numerals in bold type refer the reader to Sr7 Caitanya-caritmrta’s trans-
lations. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
Aitareya Upanisad Krspa-karpamyrta
99 138
Anubhasya Mahabharata
15,20,52,57 155, 161, 167, 243
Bhagavad-gita Mandakya Upanisad
1, 9, 22, 31, 41, 49, 55, 57, 67, 69, 117-118, 124
80, 89, 91, 97, 98, 99, 100, 103, 104, Narada-paricaratra
105,107, 108-109, 109-110, 111, 113, 62,124
115, 118, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 164, Padma Purana
167,169, 174, 181, 241, 242, 257 94-95,104,178
Bhagavat-sandarbha Paramatma-sandarbha
124 118
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu Prasna Upanisad
75,78-79, 86-87, 169, 242 99
Bhakti-ratnakara Rg Veda
303, 356-357, 359, 367, 369, 383 99, 103
Bhakti-sandarbha Siva Purana
62 95
Brahma-samhita Skanda Purana
98 88
Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad Srimad-Bhagavatam
98,125,132 4, 26, 56, 58, 60, 62, 69, 72, 74,
Caitanya-bhagavata 83-84,97,100, 102, 124, 134, 136,
221-222, 273, 363 137, 139, 140,163, 170, 171, 172,
Caitanya-carita-mahakdvya 174-175, 188, 199, 239, 244, 280
338-339 Svetasvatara Upanisad
Caitanya-caritamrta 98,99, 115
11, 108, 134, 219-220, 247 “Taittirlya Upanisad
Chandogya Upanisad 115-116
114,115,117,125 Upadesamrta
Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 15
79 Vayu Purana
Hari-bhakti-vilasa 88
36,189 Vedartha-sahgraha
Isopanisad 133
118,132 Visnu Purana
Kalisantarana Upanisad 99, 106, 109, 113, 241
62
Katha Upanisad
8, 99, 125

391


--- Page 392 ---
Glossary

A
Abhidheya—acting according to one’s constitutional relationship with God.
Acdrya—an authorized teacher who instructs by his own example.
Adhama paguydas—scholars who consider devotional activities material.
Advaita-vada—philosophy of monism.
Ajfnata-sukrti—pious activities that one executes without his knowledge.
Akificana—one who possesses nothing in the material world.
Apara prakrti—material energy.
Arcana-marga—Deity worship.
Artha—economic development.
Asuras—demons.
Avesa—an incarnation of God, partially empowered.

B
Bhagavata-jivana—the life of a devotee.
Bhadgavata-saptaka—seven-day readings of Bhdgavatam.
Bhajandnandi—devotee who is satisfied to cultivate devotional service for himself.
Bhakta—devotee.
Bhakti-lata—devotional creeper.
Bhdva- the stage of transcendental ecstacy experienced after transcendental affection.
Brahma-bhiita—stage of liberation from material entanglement when one becomes

joyous beyond any hankering or lamentation and gains a universal vision.

Brahma-jiiana—knowledge of the Supreme.
Brahmdnanda—pleasure derived from impersonal Brahman realization.
Bubhuksus—those who desire to enjoy the material world.

€
Caitya-guru—the spiritual master within.
Cid-vilasa—spiritual pleasure.

D
Dharma—religiosity.

G
Godasa—servant of senses.
Gopis—cowherd girlfriends of Krsna.
Gosarii—See Gosvami.

393


--- Page 393 ---
394 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Gosthy-anandi—devotees who desire to preach glories of holy name.
Gosvami—one who has control over mind and senses.

1
1[90-1011৮0--076 Supreme Lord.
Tsvara—the supreme controller.

J
Jiva—the soul; or atomic living entity.
Jiva-bhita—See [iva
JAana—transcendental knowledge.
Jiva-tattva—See Jiva

K
Kama—sense gratification.
Kanistha-adhikari—devotee in lowest stage of Vaisnava life.
Karma-kanga—fruitive activities.
Karma-nisthas—those who consider devotional service to be fruitive activities.
Krpa-siddha—perfection by the mercy of superior authorities.
Krsna-lila— pastimes of Krsna.
Krsna-prema—love of Godhead.
Ksetrajfia—the living entity.
Kutarkikas—false logicians.

L
Lobha—greed.

M
Madhurya-bhaktas—devotees engaged only in conjugal love.
Maha-bhdgavata—See Uttama-adhikarr.
Mahaprabhu—supreme master of all masters.
Maha-vadanyavatira—Lord Caitanya, the most magnanimous incarnation.
Madhyama-adhikari—devotee with firm faith who preaches to innocent and avoids

atheists.

Mayd—the external illusory energy of the Lord.
Moksa—Iliberation.
Mumuksus—those who desire liberation from material world.
Magha—fool, rascal.

N
Ndamaparadha—offense against holy names.
Nindakas—blasphemers.


--- Page 394 ---
Glossary 395

Nirgupa—without material qualities.
Nitya-siddha—eternal perfection attained by never forgetting Krsna at any time.

P
Parakiya-rasa—paramour love.
Parampara—disciplic succession.
Para-prakrti—spiritual energy.
Pasapdis—nondevotees who consider devotional activities material.
Patita-pavana—Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of the fallen souls.
Prabhu—master.
Pradhana—the chief principle of creation.
Prakrta-bhaktas—materialistic devotees not advanced in spiritual knowledge.
Prayojana—the ultimate goal of life, to develop love of God.
Preyas—activities which are immediately beneficial and auspicious.

R
Rajo-gupa—mode of passion.
Rasabhasa—incompatible mixing of rasas.
Rasadi-vilasi—the enjoyer of the rasa dance.
Rasas—spiritual humors.

S
Sagbhuja—six-armed form of Lord Caitanya.
Sadhana-bhakti—the prescribed duties of service to the Lord.
Sadhana-siddhas—perfection attained by executing rules and regulations of devo-

tional service.
Sadhu—a saintly person or Vaisnava.
Sahajiyas—those who do not follow the scriptural injunctions, considering God to
be cheap.

Salokya-mukti—liberation of residing on the same planet as the Lord.
Samadhi—trance, or absorption in the service of the Lord.
Sambandha-jiana—establishing one’s original relationship with the Lord.
Sarsti-mukti—liberation of having equal opulences with the Supreme.
Saraipya-mukti—liberation of having same bodily features as the Lord.
Sarva-jia—omniscient.
Sastras—scriptures.
Sattva-gupa—mode of goodness.
Sayujya-mukti—liberation of merging in Brahman effulgence.
Srauta-vakya—acceptance of the words of the spiritual master.
Sravapari kirtanam—hearing and chanting.
Sreyas—activities which are ultimately beneficial and auspicious.
Satra—a code expressing the essence of all knowledge in minimum words.


--- Page 395 ---
396 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
T
Tamo-guna—mode of ignorance.
চা
Uttama-adhikari—devotee in highest stage of devotional life.
॥ /
Vaikuptha—the spiritual world which is without anxiety.
Vastra-harana-Iila—Kysna's pastime of stealing the clothes of the 405.
Vedanti—a person who perfectly knows Krsna.
Visnu-bhakti—See Bhakti.
Visvambhara—one who maintains the entire universe; name of Lord Caitanya.
Vivarta—illusion.
Y
Yogesvara—master of all mystic powers, Krsna.


--- Page 396 ---
Bengali Pronunciation Guide
BENGALI DIACRITICAL EQUIVALENTS AND PRONUNCIATION
Vowels
we আঃ: i Fi Bu Vo A
श T এ এ 2 ও০ ও au
চা m (anusvara) ৩ 1 ( candra-bindu) ९ h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutterals: কু 13 খ kha Qi ga Yq gha 8 18
Palatals: DB ० চু cha । ja A jha এঁও iia
Cerebrals: ট ta ¥ tha छ da ए dha § a
Dentals: छ ta थ 1112 क्त da धु dha न्‌ na
1 8301215; भं pa ख pha वु ba © bha মল ma
Semivowels: Yya qn A la नु ५2
Sibilants: =f sa gq sa ज sa 2 ha
Vowel Symbols
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
13 {चै ou =a <] ईह Ge Cai © Yo ¢ Ya
For example: কার কিম Fw Fru Fro क्तु
क | 3६ क्‌ ke = kai কো ko = kau
397


--- Page 397 ---
398 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
The letter व is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virama (~) indicates that there is no final vowel. Ed k
The letters above should be pronounced as follows:
a —like the © in hot; sometimes like the ০ in go; 9 —like the d in dawn.
final « is usually silent. dh —like the dh in good-house.
a —like thea in far. n —like the nn in gnaw.
i,T like the ee in meet. t—as in ralk but with the tongue against the
u, u —like the u in rule. the teeth.
r —like the ri in rim. th—as in hor-house but with the tongue against
ह —like the ree in reed. the teeth.
€ —like the ai in pain; rarely like 6 in bet. d—as in dawn but with the tongue against the
ai —like the of in boil. teeth.
© —like the ০ in go. dh—as in good-house but with the tongue
au —like the ow in owl. against the teeth.
m —(anusvara) like the ng in song. n—as in nor but with the tongue against the
h —(visarga) a final h sound like in Ah. teeth.
7 — (candra-bindu) a nasal n sound p —like the p in pine.
like in the French word bon. ph —like the ph in philosopher.
k like the ^ in kite. b like the b in bird.
kh —like the kh in Eckhart. bh —like the bh in rub-hard.
g —like the g in got. m —like the m in mother.
gh —like the gh in big-house. y —like the j in jaw. §
n like then in bank. y —like the y in year. যু
¢ —like the ch in chalk. r —like the ^ in run.
ch —like the chh in much-haste. I like the / in law
i —like thejin joy. ५ —like the b in bird or like the w in dwarf.
jh —like the geh in college-hall. इ, ऽ like the sh in shop.
n —like the n in bunch. s _like the s in sun.
t —like the z in ralk. h—like the h in home.
th —like the th in hot-/1ouse.

This is a general guide to Bengali pronunciation. The Bengali transliterations in this
book accurately show the original Bengali spelling of the text. One should note, however,
that in Bengali, as in English, spelling is not always a true indication of how a word is
pronounced. Tape recordings of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
chanting the original Bengali verses are available from the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034.


--- Page 398 ---
Map of Bengal
Indicating the important sites related to
Lord Caitanya and His associates.
SN
AN
S, ` 4
Co ZINN ५. ८
A ^ ০
BIHAR ie । /
<| ^ ~€
= স্দল ১ ন্ট
০ ৬ \ ny
| ६ BF টা! Qe ॥ ~ A
SN x <. ¢ । ५१
SERVER ८. ४ भह (\.
21 १३, a ৮ ५५८५५ ৬ 2
इ be SRY + ২ (> A ~ ५
) ८2 | 8 1 Vg {1 Nae \
(की 11.01 (1 a ua J
¬ ও ० ५
( व 8 4 Y ग ৪ E N © 4 ८ \
399


--- Page 399 ---
INDEX TO THE MAP OF BENGAL
MAP NAME of PAGE | MAP NAME of PAGE
NO. PLACE NO. NO. PLACE NO.
1. Akaihata—Near Katwa 375 33. Krsnanagara
2. Ajimaganja 324 34. Krsnapura 312
3. Atapura 369 35. Kulina-Grama 278-279, 300-301
4. Ambika-Kalana | 367, 368 36. Mahesa 320, 365, 366
5. Badagachi—Near Saligrama 382, 383 37. Mahesapura 364-365
6. Baghiya 259 | 38. Maldah 302
7. Benapola 39. Manakara RRS 357
8. Berhampore 40. Mangaladihi 365
9. Bhagavangola RRS 384 | 41. Mangalakota 370
10. Bhudhana—Near Sataksira 276 | 42. Memari RRS 371
11. Burdwan 43. Midnapore
12. Canditala 369, 370 | 44. Naihati 302
13. Canpadanga 359 45. Navadvipa 334
14. Calcutta 46. Panihati 265, 332
15. Cakadaha 376 47. Phateyabad 302
16. Cattagrama 259 48. Parvasthali RRS 275
17. Cattrabhoj 49. Ramakeli 302
18. Dacca 50. Rana-ghata
19. Danihata 360, 375,379 51. Saligrama 367,383
20. Endiyadaha-Grama 282,284 | 52. Sancadapancada 371
21. Gadabeta 377 | 53. Santipura
22. Galasi RRS 363 | 54. Saptagrama 377,378
23. Halisahara 220 | 55. Sar 325
24. Hatahajari 259 | 56. Sataksira 276
25. Hugali 57. Siudi
26. Howrah 58. Srikhanda 229,323, 384
27. )alesvara 274 59. Sriramapura 203, 365
28. Jhamatapura 356 | 60. Sylhet
29. Jhikaragacha 376 | 61. Tamluk
30. Katwa 223,283 | 62. Teliya Budhari 384
31. Khadadaha 357, 369, 376 63. Vidyanagara 333
32. Khanakila-Krsnanagara 359, 360 64. Yasohara 302
400


--- Page 400 ---
Numerals in bold type indicate references to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s verses. Numerals in regular
type are references to its purports.
A Aharh sarvasya prabhavo
verses quoted, 67, 98
Aharikara itiyarh me
Abhinnatvan nama-naminoh verses quoted, 10 ~
quoted, 125 Aho bata $vapaco 110 gariyan
Abhirama Thakura verses quoted, 56
See Ramadisa AikantikT harer bhaktir
Abhyutthanam adharmasya verses quoted, 84, 188
verses quoted, 164 Aitad atmyam (40/77 sarvam
Absolute Truth quoted, 115
beyond reach of imperfect senses, 167 Aitareya Upanisad
described as person by Vyasa, 99, 115 quoted on creation of Visnu, 99
full of six opulences, 97, 131-134 Ajo ‘pi sann avyayatma
has inconceivable energies, 107, 115, 118, verses quoted, 109
133 A-kdrepocyate [500
has spiritual body, 100 verses quoted, 125
indicated by ०/7 tat sat, 123 Akhyata-candrika
ornkdra as, 124 as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303
partially understood by devotees, 122 Akifcana-gocara
realized by devotional service, 84 Lord known as, 2
understood in three features, 97, 131 Akrara
Aciryaratna as Gopiniatha Simha, 297
See Candrasekhara Acarya Alankara-kaustubha
Acaryas as book by Karnapira, 290
accept orikdra as Absolute Truth, 124 Alpaksaram asandigdham
actually independent, 43 verses quoted, 88
break teeth of Mayavadis, 123 Amanind manadena kirtaniyah
importance of serving, 161 verses quoted, 39, 52, 168, 307
must understand Vedanta philosophy, 83-85 Amyta-pravaha-bhasya
preach according to time and circumstances, Chapter Nine of Caitanya-caritamrta summa-
23-24 rized in, 213
progress by strictly following, 155 Amrta-praviha-bhasya
Acintyah khalu ye bhava na tars summary of Eighth Chapter of Caitanya-
quoted, 167 _ caritamyta in, 157
Acyutananda Ananda-vrndavana-campia
as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 346 as book by Karnapira, 290
Adav ante ca madhye ca harih Ananta Acarya
verses quoted, 128 as disciple of Gadadhara Pandita, 200
Adhitas tena yenoktam Anarpita<arirh cirdt karunayavatirnah
verses quoted, 56 verses quoted, 234
Advaita Acirya Anarthopa$amarn saksad
Acyutananda as son of, 346 verses quoted, 58
as predominator, 10-12 Andsaktasya visayan yatharham
as trunk of Caitanya tree, 226 verses quoted, 75
belongs to Visnu category, 5 Aniruddha
Caitanya performed dramas with, 258 Vakresvara Pandita as, 261
in form of bhakta incarnation, 4, 5, 10 Antavanta ime deha nityasyoktah
is very merciful, 158 verse quoted, 167
rasas of servitors of, 13 Anubhasya
Abhaituky apratihaha cited on appropriate student for Vedanta
verses quoted, 72 study, 52


--- Page 401 ---
402 Sit Caitanya-caritamrta
Anubhdsya Atreya Rsi
cited on seed of material enjoyment, 20 as contemporary of Vyasadeva, 89
on actual effect of knowledge, 57 Audulomi
quoted on Pafnca-tattva, 15 as contemporary of Vyasadeva, 89
Anupama Avadhuta
as branch of Caitanya tree, 301-306 Nityananda as, 272
as father of Jiva Gosvami, 302 Avaispava-mukhodgirnam
Anya-devasraya nai, tomare verses quoted, 188
verses quoted, 256 Avajananti marh madha
Apani dcari ‘bhakti karila verses quoted, 22
quoted, 247
Apani-pado javano grahita B
quoted, 99
Apareyam itas tv anyam Bada Haridasa
verses quoted, 105 as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 244
Apartharh Sruti-vakyanam Badardyana-satra
verses quoted, 96 See Vedanta-satra
Apasyat purusarh parpam ৪3031
verse quoted, 111 as contemporary of Vyasadeva, 89
Ara kabe nitaicandera karupa Bahanarh janmanam ante
verses quoted, 14, 184 verse quoted, 108, 133
Arcanari vandanarih dasyam Balabhadra Bhattacarya
verses quoted, 134 as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 344
Arcye vispau Siladhir gurusu. Balarama
verses quoted, 104 Caitanya in ecstasy of, 295, 296
Arjuna Balarama dasa
accepted Krsna as Supreme Lord, 23 as branch of Nityananda, 373
as devotee and friend of Krsna, 37 Bengal
Krsna as chariot driver of, 172 Lord Nityananda famous in, 153
Lord became chariot driver of, 138 most devotees of Caitanya lived in Orissa and,
Arjuna (cowherdboy) 330
Paramesvara dasa as, 371 Bhagavad-gita
Aruhya krcchrena parari padam actual words of Lord found in, 33
_ verses quoted, 60, 102, 136, 172 as preliminary study of Bhdgavatam, 69
Asmarathya cited on appearance of Krsna, 9
_ ascontemporary of Vyasadeva, 89 cited on eternality of soul, 105
ASsramas cited on Krsna as goal of Vedas, 57
named, 24 cited on Krsna's energy, 99, 103
Astobhamanavadyar ca satram cited on only devotee knowing Krsna, 122
verses quoted, 88 commented on by rascals, 94
Atah $ri-kfsna-namadi copy of written by Caitanya, 368
verses quoted, 86 describes Krsna as energetic, 106
Atattvato’ nyatha-buddhir vivarta indirect interpretation of, 121, 126
verses quoted, 118 Mayavadis don't accept principles of, 30
Athato brahma-jijiiasa one can understand Krsna as He is by, 168
quoted, 88, 139, 237 quoted on approaching spiritual master, 41
Atheists quoted on Brahma-sitra, 89
don’t care about next life, 110 quoted by Caitanya, 107, 109
those who worship demigods are, 256-257 quoted on appearance of Krsna, 109-110, 164
worship Visnu for material success, 165 quoted on demigod worship, 104, 257
Atmarama verse quoted on destinations after death, 241
explained to Sanatana Gosvami, 305 quoted on developing bhava, 67
Atma va idam agra asit quoted on devotees’ freedom from sinful life,
quoted, 116 181


--- Page 402 ---
Index 403
Bhagavad-gita Bhakti
quoted on disciplic succession, 91 considered mental speculation by Mayavadis,
quoted on eternality of soul, 167 83
quoted on fate of envious, 127 develops in persuance of Vedanta philosophy,
quoted on fools who deride Krsna's advent, 83-85
22 devotee’s only attachment to Krsna in, 136
quoted on full surrender to Krsna, 69 See also Devotional service
quoted on glories of ormkara, 122, 123 Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
quoted on Krsna as Absolute Truth, 97 as book by Ripa Gosvami, 303
quoted on Krsna as compiler of Vedanta, 31 cited on auspiciousness of devotional service,
quoted on Krsna as goal of Vedas, 123 242
quoted on Krsna as knower of Vedas, 55 Jiva Gosvami’s commentary on, 306
quoted on Krsna as origin of everything, 98 Krsna’s qualities described in, 198
quoted on living beings’ control of material quoted on bliss of devotional service, 78-79
world, 105 quoted on Lord revealing Himself, 86-87
quoted on Lord in heart, 124, 190 quoted on service of holy name, 169
quoted on miscreants who don’t surrender, 80 quoted, 75
quoted on modes of nature, 100 taking shelter of, 184
quoted on offering leaf, fruit, etc. to God, Bhakti-ratnakara
169, 242 cited, 369
quoted on om, 125 cited, 356-357
quoted on principles of miserable life, 1 cited, 359
quoted on purpose of Vedas, 49 cited, 367
quoted on separated energy of Lord, 110 cited, 383
quoted on soul as spiritual particle, 118 quoted onAnupama’sdevotion to Ramacandra,
quoted on spiritual activities of devotional 303
service, 108 | Bhakti-sandarbha
quoted on strength of material energy, 104 as book by Jiva Gosvami, 307
quoted on superiority of Visnu, 103 quoted on chanting holy names, 62
quoted on surrender to Krsna, 104, 108-109, Bhaktir parasyanubhavo viraktir
111,133 quoted, 136, 179
quoted on transcending modes of nature, 113 Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
quoted on transmigration, 111 cited on actual effect of knowledge, 57
quoted on working of material nature, 110 cited on appropriate student for Vedanta
quoted on women etc. approaching Supreme, study, 52
174 cited on change of heart by chanting, 180,
understood by Arjuna, 37 cited on compilation of Vedanta, 89
Bhagavan cited on directand indirect meanings of Vedas,
Absolute ultimately understood as, 97 95
Bhagavan Acarya cited on false ecstatic symptoms, 71
as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 338 cited on genealogical table of Virabhadra
Bhagavan Pandita Gosani, 357
as branch of Caitanya tree, 293 cited on hearing from spiritual master, 55
Bhagavatacarya cited on humanitarian activities of Caitanya,
as branch of Caitanya tree, 324-325,328 167
Bhagavat-sandarbha cited on Mayavadis, 29
as book by | ५2 Gosvamf, 307 cited on players in transcendental dramas, 258
cited on glories of orhkara, 124 cited on seed of material enjoyment, 20
Bhagavat-priti-riapa cited on success in chanting Hare Krsna, 168
verses quoted, 72 cited on taking shelter of Caitanya, 184
Bhagavaty-uttama-sloke cited on truth about Parnca-tattva, 5, 12, 15
verses quoted, 174-175 cited on variegated personal feature of Abso-
Bhakti lute, 103
common man can’t write books on, 190 cited on worship of Radha-Krsna, 185


--- Page 403 ---
404 Srt Caitanya-caritamrta
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Bilvamangala Thakura
established branch at Vrajapattana, 258 quoted on insignificance of devotional service,
explained term ‘‘Mayavadi, 25 138
his description of Sivananda Sena, 287-288 quoted on liberation of devotees, 172
his order to his disciples, 77 Body, material
his paper Sajjana-tosani mentioned, 289 subject to destruction, 167
presented philosophy of iva Gosvami, 83 Body, spiritual
quoted on fulfillment of spiritual master’s after death Vaisnavas get, 53
mission, 73 Brahma
quoted on identity of Caitanya, 164 receives power from Govinda, 147
quoted on imitating activities of great devotees, worshiped by Mayavadis, 146-148
74-75 Brahmacarya
quoted on Mayavadi impersonalism, 82 four divisions of, 26
quoted on message of Caitanya, 165 Brahmajyoti
quoted on symptoms of internal devotees, 13 rests on personal form of Lord, 133
visited temple at Vallabhapura, 203 See also Brahman
Bhaktivinoda Thakura Brahman
cited on doctrine of transformation of energy, Absolute vaguely understood as, 97
117 as bodily effulgence of Lord, 84, 133
cited on form of Krsna, 98 as expansion of potency of Lord, 131
cited on living beings as energy of Lord, 112 as original cause, 116, 121
quoted on association of pure devotee, 87 cannot possess energies, 103
quoted on doctrine of transformation, 114 defined by Sadananda Yogindra, 101
quoted on mercy of pure devotee, 388 entire world as, 115
quoted on purpose of sankirtana, 233 indicated by orh-tat-sat, 123
summarized Chapter Eight of Caitanya- liberation of merging in, 172-173
caritampgta, 157 Brahmanga bhramite kona
summarized Chapter Nine of Caitanya- verses quoted, 81
caritamgta, 213 Brahmananda Bharati
Bhakti-yoga as root of tree of devotional service, 221, 224,
based on becoming humble and submissive, 338
141 Brahmananda Puri
everyone attracted to, 21 as root of tree of devotional service, 221,
See also Devotional service 223
Bharata-varsa Brahmanando bhaved esa
See India verses quoted, 78
Bhasvan yathasma-sakalesu Brahmanas
verses quoted, 147 association of pure devotee makes, 36-37
Bhava by qualification not birth, 51
development of described, 67-68 engagements of, 280
pleasure of, 69 Vaignavas greater than, 18
Seealso Love of God Brahmanas caparari rapam
Bhavananda Raya verses quoted, 94-95
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri,.335- Brahmands tena vedas ca
337 verses quoted, 123
as Pandu, 335-337 Brahmanpo hi pratisthaham
Bhavartha-siicaka-campii quoted, 125
as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306 Brahman realization
Bhugarbha Gosani insignificant happiness of, 78-79
identified, 204 Brahma-puccharh pratisthd
Bhamir dpo’ nalo vayuh quoted
verses quoted, 110 Brahma-sarhhita
Bhatani yanti bhitejya Jiva Gosvami’s commentary on, 306
verses quoted, 241 quoted on form of Krsna, 98


--- Page 404 ---
Index 405
Brahma-sarhhita Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Vaisnavas worship demigods on principles of, eternal philanthropic activities of, 167-168
147-148 exhibited His Varaha form, 279-280
Brahma satyari jagan-mithya exhibited mystic powers, 45
quoted, 116 five tattvas incarnate with, 3-5
Brahma-satra freely distributed love of God, 168
quoted, 114 His body not materially tinged, 8-9
See also Vedanta-siitra, 88 His gift to human society, 173-175
Brahma-sitra-padais caiva inaugurated Krsna consciousness movement,
quoted, 89 163
Brahma ya esa jagadapda in ecstasy of Balarama, 295-296
verses quoted, 147 in householder life for twenty-four years, 25
Brahmeti paramatmeti instructed Sanatana Gosvami, 36-38
verses quoted, 97 intolerant of behavior of )agai and Madhai, 39
Brhad-arapyaka Upanisad introduced Hare Krsna mantra, 113
quoted, 125 known as Gaurasundara, 144, 158, 214
quoted on six opulences of Lord, 132 known 25 mahd-vadanyavatara, 4
quoted on spiritual body of Lord, 98 known as Patita-pavana, 329
Brhad-vaispava-tosani known as Visvambhara, 217
as book by Santana Gosvami, 304 modern so-called followers of, 245
Brhaspati Pafica-tattva important factor in understanding,
Sarvabhauma as incarnation of, 334 154-155
Buddhimanta Khan performed dramas with associates, 258
as branch of Caitanya tree, 296 presented Himself as number one fool, 54
Buddhism quoted on duty of Indians, 238
Mayavada philosophy as covered, 95 quoted on function of real teacher, 247
quoted on Mayavadi commentaries, 126
८ quoted on offenses of Mayavadis, 127
quoted on rareness of devotional service, 137
Caitanya dasa quoted on real identity of living being, 108
identified, 204 quoted on relation of Lord and living being,
wrote commentary on Krsna-karpamrta, 289 89-90, 135
Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches us to be tolerant like trees, 244
accepted direct meaning of Vedanta, 95-96 three features of, 285-288
accepted food at house of Tapana Misra, 35 took position of disciple, 55
appeared as Ramacandra, 279 recommends Brahma-sarnhita, 147
appeared as spiritual master of entire world, spoke through writings of Vrndavana 0353
176 Thakura, 189
as form of a devotee, 5 stayed at house of Candrasekhara, 34-35
as goal of materially impoverished, 1-2 stressed importance of hearing, 134
as ideal acarya, 27, 45, 65 three and a half confidential devotees of, 340
as Krspa Himself, 6, 8-10, 16, 23, 155 took sannydsa in Bharati-sampradaya, 48
as most magnanimous incarnation, 142-143, reasons for his descent, 234
168, 234 visited temple of Visvesvara, 146-148
as Narayana, 86 Caitanya-bhagavata
as only shelter for conditioned souls, 1-2 as book by Vyndavana dasa Thakura, 157
as predominator, 10-12 Bhagavatam quoted in, 188
as supreme master of all masters, 2 cited on Caitanya’s arguments with Mukunda
as tree of love of Krsna, 216, 254 Datta, 273
ate Visnu's foodstuffs on Ekadasi, 294-295 glories of described, 186-190
becomes mad chanting holy name, 63-66 originally called Caitanya-mangala, 186
belongs to Visnu category, 5 quoted on Murari Caitanya dasa, 363
deprecated misinterpretation, of Vedas, 92 quoted on Paramananda Puri, 221-222
devised methods to deliver fallen souls, 28 Vasudeva Datta described in, 274-275


--- Page 405 ---
406 Srt Caitanya-caritamrta
Caitanya-candrodaya-ndataka Conditioned souls
as book by Karnapura, 290 Caitanya as only shelter for, 1-2
written under direction of Prataparudra, 338 in atmosphere of helplessness, 1
Caitanya-carita See also Living beings, human beings
as book by Murari Gupta, 279 Conjugal love
Caitanya dasa as author of, 289 development of devotional service to, 14
Caitanya-carita-mahdkavya devotees in best situated, 13-14
cited, 338-339 4005 serve Krsna in, 172
Caitanya-caritamgta Krsna accepts form of devotee to relish, 9-10
as dictation of Madana-mohana, 209-210 tasted by Lord with internal devotees, 15
quoted on function of real teacher, 247 tasted even in present life, 137-138
quoted on hearing, 134 Creation
quoted on [5५213 puri, 219-220 as temporary not false, 116
quoted on only supreme master, 11 by glance of Lord, 98, 115
quoted on real identity of living being, 108 none in spiritual world, 105
Caitanyakhyar prakatam adhund Cupid
verse quoted, 10 Ramananda Raya vanquished power of, 304
Caitanya-mangala
as book by Locana dasa Thakura, 186 D
as former name of Caitanya-bhdgavata, 186
Caitanya-sataka Dadami buddhi-yogarir tam
as book by Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, 334 verse quoted, 190
Candramukha Daivi hy esd gupamayT mama
See Caitanya Mahaprabhu verse quoted, 104
Candrasekhara Acarya Damayanti
as branch of Caitanya tree, 257-258, 347 as dear maidservant of Caitanya, 265-266
as kanistha-adhikari, 40 Damodara dasa
blasphemy of Caitanya intolerable to, 38-41 as devotee of Nityananda, 385
Caitanya stayed at house of, 34-35 Damodara Pandita
Candrasekhara Vaidya as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332
as branch of Caitanya tree, 324 as branch of Caitanya tree, 268
Candraval? noted for objectivity as critic, 304
Sadasiva Kaviraja as, 376 Damsels of Vraja
Capitalism Krsna as leader of, 7
meant for vaisyas, 175 See also Gopis
Carvaka Muni Dana-carita
atheistic theory of, 111 as book by Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, 312
Chandogya Upanisad Danakeli
quoted, 125 as drama enacted by Nityananda, 361
quoted by Sarikaracarya, 114 Dana-keli-kaumudr?
quoted on eternal individuality of soul, as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303
117 Dasya-rasa
quoted on world as Brahman, 115 Krsna's servants serve Him in, 172
Chota Haridasa Death
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 344 material possessions can’t save one from, 1
Chagiya vaisnava-seva nistdra remembering orkara at, 122
verse quoted, 161, 170 Vaisnavas get spiritual body after, 53
Ciranjiva Deity worship
as branch of Caitanya tree, 299, 328 kinds of, 184-185
Civilization, Vedic material devotees attracted to, 85
considers all aspects of human life, 240 necessity of, 63
prepares one for next life, 241 Demigods
Communism as servants of Krsna, 148
as movement of sizdras, 175 devotees don’t worship, 256-257


--- Page 406 ---
Index 407
Demigods Demigods
never equal to Visnu, 178 liberation stands at doorstep of, 172
offense of considering them equal to Lord, 59 Lord submissive to, 138
Visnu not in category of, 103 manifest Krsna’s qualities, 198-199
worshiped by Mayavadis, 143, 146-148, 256- no distinction between higher and lower, 254
257. i „ offense of blaspheming, 59
worshiped by Vaignavas on principles of only attachment of is Krsna, 136
Brahma-sarhhita, 147-148 relate to Lord in five rasas, 57-58
worshipers of go to planets of, 104, 241 should combine to distribute maha-mantra, 232
Devananda রা three classes of, 85
as branch of Nityananda, 381 transcendental to social gradations, 24
Devananda Pandita two classes of unalloyed, 74
as branch of Caitanya tree, 298 Dhananjaya Papdita
Devotional service as branch of Nityananda,
above liberation, 2, 137 Dharmah projjhita-kaitavo’ tra
Absolute Truth realized by, 84 quoted, 69, 137
as activity of spirit soul, 108 LY itah purisd
as cause of love of God, 81, 180-181 Rive ion drs म
as only means to approach Lord, 134-135 Dhanistha ’
(क of, 242-243 Raghava Pandita formerly the 9021, 265
155 OF, চা _ Dharmasya tattvari nihitam
clearly indicated by Vedanta, 102 v ted 161
compared to creeper, 218 h erse quo ’
considered maya by Mayavadis, 25, 30, 82-83 Dhatu-sargral a व
descri क . as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306
escribed in Caitanya-bhagavata, 188 ति
3 Dina-hina yata chila
desire tree of brought to earth, 218 verses quoted, 173
development of to conjugal love, 14 Disciplic পাই
fruits of tree of, 228-230 accepted by Krsnadasa Kaviraja, 186
functions of tongue in, 169 as actually authoritative, 206
Lord submissive to devotee due to, 138 supreme science received in, 91
Madhavendra Puri as storehouse of all, 218- Durgadevi ॥
219 as shadow of cit potency, 147
makes one free, 113 worshiped by Mayavadis, 143, 146-148
mitigates material miseries, 58 Dvdparddau yuge bhatvi
nine kinds of, 134, 228 verses quoted, 95
rareness of, 170-173 Dvidparizyair janair vispuh
Sariraka-bhasya devoid of, 90 verses quoted, 62
test of advancement in, 136 Durvasa Muni ”
that ignores Vedas, 188 त his disciples satisfied by Krsna, 243
transcendental to four goals of life, 69 Dvipara-yuga
under direction of spiritual master, 135-136 parampara honored in, 59
Devotees i y i
t | | ded 62
Absolute Truth partially understood by, 122 09811316258 "ip recommended in,
as actual followers of Vedanta, 56 as Branch of Caitanya tres, 334
bodily symptoms of called dvesa, 287 #॥ ^
compared to bees, 251 E
development of bhdva in, 67-68
difference between pure and internal, 15 Education
different typesof,6 ~~ faults of modern, 240, 241
don’t waste time with Mayavadis, 33 Ei chaya gosani yafra
don't worship demigods, 256-257 verses quoted. 161
go back to Godhead, 104 Ekadadt qa ^
imitation of advanced, 7475 Caitanya ate Vignu’s foodstuffs on, 294-
in conjugal love best situated, 13-14 295
internal potential, 13


--- Page 407 ---
408 Sr Caitanya-caritamrta
Ekadesa-sthitasyagner Gangadasa Pandita
verses quoted, 113 as branch of Nityananda, 380
Ekald Tsvara krsna, ara saba as branch of Caitanya tree, 267
quoted, 148 Gangadevi
Eko bahiinar yo vidadhati kaman as daughter of Nityananda, 328-329
verses quoted, 99 Gapoddesa-dipika
Enechi ausadhi maya nasibara as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303
verses quoted, 233 Garbhodakasayi Visnu
Energy, material accompanies Lord in sankirtana, 15
as energy of darkness, 110 Garuda Pandita
as energy of Visnu, 103 as branch of Caitanya tree, 297
deludes conditioned souls, 1 Gaudiya-sampradaya
difficult to overcome, 104 Vedanta commentary in, 57
eight divisions of, 110 Gaura-gapoddesa-dipika
love of God not under jurisdiction of, 72 as book by 1৫031030013, 290
works as if independent, 110 cited on identity of Ananta Acarya, 200
Energy, transformation of cited on Bhagavatacarya, 325 '
as proven fact, 118-119 cited on Caitanya’s changing name of
doctrine of discussed, 114-122 Pradyumna Brahmacari, 270
Evarir parampara-praptam cited on identity of Caitanya dasa and Rama-
verse quoted, 91 dasa, 289-290
cited on identity of Damayanti, 265
F cited on identity of Devananda 020५112, 298
cited on identity of Dhanaijaya Pandita, 371
Faith cited on identity of Gadadhara, 260
in Lord and spiritual master, 38 cited on identity of Gadadhara dasa, 282
Form cited on identity of Gauridasa Pandita, 367
as spiritual, 98-99, 100 cited on identity of Ghosh brothers, 327
considered material by Mayavadis, 25, 80, 82, cited on identity of Gopala-Bhatta Gosvami,
102 319
greater than Brahman and Paramatma, 133 cited on identity of Gopinatha Simha, 297
never deteriorates, 110 cited on identity of Jagai and Madhai, 329
cited on identity of Jagannatha Acarya, 322
G cited on identity of Jahnava, 363
cited on identity of Jiva Gosvami, 306
Gadadhara cited on identity of Jiva Papdita, 380
as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332 cited on identity of Kamalikara Pippalai
as incarnation of Krsna’s pleasure potency, 260 cited on identity of Kamsari Sena, 384
as internal potency of Caitanya, 4, 6 cited on identity of Kast Misra, 335
as learned scholar, 158 cited on identity of Kasinatha and Rudra, 320
as worshiper of three predominators, 12 cited on identity of Kasi$vara and Govinda,340
devotees headed by, 13 cited on identity of Kasi$vara Gosaii, 203
Pundarika Vidyanidhi as spiritual master of, cited on identity of Kesava Bharati, 223
259 cited on identity of Madhavacarya, 329
Gadadhara dasa cited on identity of Minaketana Ramadasa,
as branch of Caitanya tree, 282-284 385
in ecstasy as 407, 361 cited on identity of Mukunda dasa and
lived with Virabhadra 60571, 359 Ciranjiva, 299
Gandharvas cited on identity of Mukunda Datta and
as celestial singers, 262 Vasudeva Datta, 273
Ganesa cited on prowess of Nakula Brahmacari, 287
destroys obstacles on path of progress, 147- cited on identity of Narayani, 191
148 cited on identity of Paramananda Gupta, 381
worshiped by Mayavadis, 143, 146-148 cited on identity of Paramananda Puri, 222


--- Page 408 ---
Index 409
Gaura-gagoddesa-dipikd Gopala
cited on identity of Prataparudra and Sikhi as devotee of Nityananda, 383
Mahiti, 338 as seventy-first devotee of Nityananda, 385
cited on identity of Pundarika Vidyanidhi, 259 Gopala Acarya
cited on identity of Raghava Pandita, 264 as branch of Caitanya tree, 326
cited on identity of Raghunatha Bhatta, 349 Gopila Bhatta Gosvami
cited on identity of Raghunatha 0353 Gosvami, as branch of Caitanya tree, 319
312 as nephew of Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142
cited on identity of Ramai and Nandai, 343 constructed Radharamana temple, 152
cited on identity of Ramananda Riya, 336 Gopala-campa
cited on identity of 003 Gosvami, 303 as book by |> Gosvami, 307
cited on identity of Sadasiva Kaviraja, 376 Gopala-tapani-tika
cited on identity of Sanatana, 304 as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306
cited on identity of Sarriga Thakura, 325 Gopala-virudavall
cited on identity of Sarvabhauma and Gopi- as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306
natha Acarya, 334 Gopinatha Acarya
cited on identity of Sridhara, 293 Tévara Purf lived in house of, 220
cited on identity of Srikanta Sena, 290 as branch of Caitanya tree, 333-334
cited on identity of Srinatha Misra and Kavi- Gopinatha Simha
candra, 322 as branch of Caitanya tree, 297
cited on identity of Sri Ramadasa, 359 Gopis
cited on identity of Srivasa and Sri Rama as best lovers of God, 15
Pandita, 255 serve Krsna in conjugal love, 172
cited on identity of Sundarananda, 364 Gosvamis
cited on identity of Uddharana Datta Thakura, chanting and dancing of, 17
377 Krsnadasa Kaviraja glorifies, 215
cited on identity of Vakresvara Pandita, 261 orikara analyzed by, 125
cited on identity of Virabhadra 60551, 356 one must be submissive student of, 185-186
Gaurahari taking shelter of, 184
Caitanya known as, 214 transcendental activities of, 316
Gaura-kfspodaya Govinda
Sri Govinda 0353 as author of, 261 as eighty-second branch of Caitanya tree, 326,
Gauranga 328
See Caitanya Mahaprabhu Govinda
Gauranga balite ha’be pulaka feeling separation from, 66
verses quoted, 14; 184 See also Krsna
Gauranga dasa Govinda-bhasya
as devotee of Nityananda, 385 as Vaisnava Vedanta commentary, 32, 57
Gaurasundara Govinda Datta
Caitanya known as, 144, 158 as branch of Caitanya tree, 291
Gauridasa Pandita Govinda Gosani
as branch of Nityananda, 367-368 A a
টম ष्‌ identified, 203
Gayatri-mantra A
Jiva Gosvami’s commentary on, 306 Govinda Kaviraja a.
Gitamrta as devotee of Nityananda, 384
as book by Govinda Kaviraja, 384 Govindananda
Gokula dasa as branch of Caitanya tree, 291
as devotee of Nityananda, 383 Grhasthas
Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhato four divisions of, 26
verse quoted, 113 must not make livelihood by begging, 280-281
Golokera prema-dhana Guru-Gauranga
verse quoted, 60 worship of, 184-185
Goodness, mode of Guru-kfspa-prasade
has nothing to do with spiritual varieties, 100 verses quoted, 81


--- Page 409 ---
410 ওরা Caitanya-caritamrta
Gurvastaka Haridasa Thakura
quoted on mercy of spiritual master, 220 noted for his forbearance, 304
Hariharananda
H as devotee of Nityananda, 383
Hari-namamgta-vyakarapa
Hadai Ojha as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306
as father of Nityananda, 380 Hearing
Harnsadita as most important process, 134-135
as book by 1২003 Gosvami, 303 Hindu religion
Hare Krsna mantra as philosophical hodge-podge, 257
always chanted by 9५211102 Damodara, 222 Hiranya Mahasaya
as medicine to cure material disease, 281 as branch of Caitanya tree, 294
as reality of all Vedanta, 62 Hoda Krsnadasa
attachment to by reading Bhdgavatam, 58-59 as branch of Nityananda, 382
- benefits even lower species of life, 236 Holy name
chanted by | 2831 and Madhai, 329 as essence of Vedic hymns, 54, 57, 59-60
chanted by sweepers of Kulina-grama, 301 as only means of deliverance in Kali-yuga, 54,
chanted constantly by Murari Caitanya dasa, 61-63, 287
363 beyond material contamination, 60
chanted offenselessly, 180-181 Caitanya becomes mad by chanting, 63-66
chanting Pafca-tattva mantra before chanting, Caitanya blessed Mayavadi sannydsis with,
4 142
counteracted effects of poison, 297 Caitanya taught us to be servants of, 77
ecstatic symptoms while chanting, 67-68, 72 called mahd-mantra, 68
even one without money can preach, 243 chanted in humble state of mind, 39
intoxicating, 246-249 distributed by Parica-tattva throughout uni-
introduced by Caitanya, 113 verse, 151-152
lotus feet of Lord seen by chanting, 57-58 fallen souls delivered by, 73-75
ocean of bliss by chanting, 78-79 frees one from material existence, 57-58
offenses while chanting, 4, 157, 177-179, 183 identical with Lord, 56, 57, 59, 60, 68, 122-
one must beg from Lord, 234 126, 169
perfection by chanting, 165 success in chanting, 168-169
preaching glories of, 68 ten offenses against listed, 59
real change of heart while chanting, 180 See also Hare Krsna mantra
should be chanted fully, 155 Hrdayananda
success in chanting, 168-169 as branch of Caitanya tree, 323
to be distributed by combined forces, 232 Human beings
See Holy name four types of, 84
Harer nama harer nama just like animals, 112
verses quoted, 54, 113 love of God as fifth goal of, 137
Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya love of God ultimate benediction for, 2
verse from quoted by Caitanya, 79 meant for elevation, 241
Hari-bhakti-vildsa must be God conscious, 240
as book by Sanatana Gosvami, 304 questions must arise in hearts of, 139
edited by Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, 319 See also Living beings
quoted on proper initiation of brahmanas, 36
quoted on writing of pure devotee, 189 1
Haridasa Pandita
qualities of described, 196-198, 200-202 Icchanurapam api yasya ca
Haridasa Thakura verses quoted, 147
as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332 (4/7 hi visvari bhagavin
as branch of Caitanya tree, 276-277 verses quoted, 124
cited on potency of mahd-mantra, 236 1000 haite sarva-siddhi haibe
compared to Prahlada Maharaja, 277 quoted, 165


--- Page 410 ---
Index 411

Impersonalists Jagannatha Tirtha

accept Krsna as ordinary human, 22 as branch of Caitanya tree, 326

illusioned by material energy, 95 Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka

See also Mayavadis as book by Ramananda Raya, 337
Incarnations Jahnavidevi

described in scripture, 22-23 as pleasure potency of Nityananda, 307, 363
India Jaimini

duty of those born in, 237-239 as contemporary of Vyasadeva, 89

holy places in, 238 Janma-mytyu-jara-vyadhi
Indira verse quoted, 1

as Jiva Pandita, 380 Janma sarthaka kari’ kara
Indradyumna verse quoted, 238

as Prataparudra, 338 Janmady asya yato’ nvayad
International Society for Krishna Consciousness verse quoted, 94, 103, 107, 121

as branch of Caitanya tree, 225 Jarasandha

constructed temple at Mayapur, 330 worshiped Visnu, 162
Tsana Jiva Gosvami

as branch of Caitanya tree, 323 as greatest philosopher in world, 83
Isopanisad as son of Anupama, 302

-quoted on completeness of God, 118 as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 306-308

quoted on six opulences of Lord, 132 cited on Brahman as origin of everything,
Tsvara Pur? 121

as disciple of Madhavendra Puri, 219-220 cited on glories of orikara, 124

as spiritual master of Kasisvara, 340-341 cited on omikdra as Absolute Truth, 124
Isvarah paramah krsnah his books listed, 306-307

verse quoted, 98 on association of pure devotee, 37
Isvara-purf kare $ri-pada sevana quoted on chanting holy names, 62-63

verses quoted, 219 quoted on love of God, 72
Tsvarah sarva-bhitanam three accusations against, 307

verses quoted, 124 Jiva-bhatar maha-baho
Iti matva bhajante mam verses quoted, 105

verses quoted, 67 Jiva Pandita

as branch of Nityananda, 380
1 Jivera nistara lagi’ 50170 kaila
verses quoted, 102

Jagadananda Pandita Jivera ‘svarapa’ haya-krspera

as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332 quoted, 89-90, 108, 135

as incarnation of Satyabhama, 263-264 JAanadasa
Jagadisa Pandita as devotee of Nityananda, 385

as branch of Caitanya tree, 294 JfAanena dharmena svarapam
Jagadisa Pandita verses quoted, 133

as branch of Nityananda, 370 Jhanis
Jagai and Madhai are transcendental, 84

as branches of Caitanya tree, 329

converted by Caitanya, 29, 173-174 K
Jagannatha

as devotee of Nityananda, 382 Kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti
Jagannatha Acarya verses quoted, 184

as branch of Caitanya tree, 322 Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
Jagannatha dasa verses quoted, 54,113

as branch of Caitanya tree, 324 Kalau sadra sambhava
Jagannatha Puri quoted, 51

devotees of Caitanya in, 331-346 Kalau tu nama-matrepa

Sagdbhuja Deity in temple at, 334 verses quoted, 62 ५


--- Page 411 ---
412 Sri Caitanya-caritamyta
Kalisantarapa Upanisad Katha Upanisad
quoted on Hare ।< {52 mantra, 62 quoted on Absolute Truth as person, 99
Kaliya ।< {5724252 quoted on supreme eternal, 8
as branch of Nityananda, 374-374 Kavicandra
Kali-yuga as branch of Caitanya tree, 322, 324
affects even so-called followers of Caitanya, Kavikarnapira
245 as author of Gaura-ganoddesa-dipikd, 191
as age of fools and rascals, 54 Kesava Bharati
atheistic conclusion of, 165 as root of tree of devotional service, 221, 223
Caitanya descends in, 142-143 Caitanya accepted sannydsa from, 26
holy name to be broadcast in, 59-60, 61-63, Sandipani Muni as, 223
287 Kesava Puri
Jagai and Madhai epitomize population of, 174 as root of tree of devotional service, 221
material activities expanded in, 110 Khandavasi Mukunda
Siva appears as Sankara in, 95 as branch of Caitanya tree, 299
Kamabhatta Kholaveca Sridhara
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 345 See Sridhara
Kamais tais tair hrta-jianah Kintu svarapa-Saktyananda+apa
verse quoted, 257 verses quoted, 72
Kamalakanta Kirtanad eva krspasya mukta-
as branch of Caitanya tree, 328-329 verse quoted, 62, 163
Kamalakara Pippalai Knowledge
as branch of Nityananda, 365-366 chanting holy name as essence of Vedic, 54-57
Kamala-nayana of living beings covered, 111
as branch of Caitanya tree, 323 of Mayavadis stolen by Krsna, 101
Kamsa orikadra as basic principle of Vedic, 125
Jarasandha as father-in-law of, 162 real culminates in surrender to Krsna, 108-
Kamsari Sena 109
as devotee of Nityananda, 384 scientific must be supported by S$ruti and
Kanu Thakura smyti, 89
376-377 spiritual potency full of, 109-110
Karanodakasayi Visnu useless acquired by material senses, 91
accompanies Lord in sankirtana, 15 Vedas as source of real, 94
Karmandibhiksu Kotimukta-madhye ‘durlabha’
discussed Vedanta before Vyasadeva, 89 verse quoted, 137
Karmis Krama-sandarbha
are materialistic, 84 as book by Jiva Gosvami, 307
1৫311030013 Krsna
as son of $ivananda Sena, 289-290 appears as son of Nanda, 7
books of named, 290 as compiler of Vedanta, 31
Kargnajini as energetic, 55, 106-107
as contemporary of Vyasadeva, 89 as enjoyer of rasa dance, 7
Kasakrtsna as reservoir of all pleasure, 7, 106
as contemporary of Vyasadeva, 89 as son of Vasudeva, 75
Kasi Misra Caitanya as, 6, 8-10, 16, 55
as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 334-335 demanded one surrender to Him, 16, 168
Kasinatha fully represented by oritkdra, 125
as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 320 known as Yogesvara, 45
Kasisvara no one equal to or above, 99
as devotee of Lord in ] 38317173173 Puri, 340-342 presented to Western world as woman hunter,
Kasisvara 0052071 188
identified, 203 situated in His own abode, 113
Katha Upanisad storehouse of love came with, 16
quoted, 125 See also Supreme Lord, CaitanyaMahaprabhu


--- Page 412 ---
Index 413
Krsna consciousness Krsna-lilamrta
as only hope for humanity, 113, 241 recited to Caitanya by 5५273 Puri, 220
based on principle of preaching, 74 Krsna-nama
benefits even lower species of life, 236 See Holy name
can inundate entire world, 19-20 Krsnananda
chanting and dancing in, 17 as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 338
debauchees becoming saints by, 238 as devotee of Nityananda, 383
doesn’t approve demigod worship, 257 Krsnananda Puri
following in footsteps of Caitanya, 141, 143, as root of tree of devotional service, 221
163 Krsna-prema-tarangini
follows injunctions of Bhdgavatarn, 51 as book by Bhagavatacarya, 325
includes consciousness of Caitanya, 162-163 Krsna-sakti ving nahe
instructed in Siksastaka, 165 verse quoted, 68, 178
meant to make people intelligent, 108 Krsna se tomara, kspa dite
meant to save world from degradation, 126 verse quoted, 388
never under control of Mayavadis, 30 Krsna-stavavali
only for very fortunate, 81 as prayer by Paramananda Gupta, 381
scarcity of in world, 235 Krsna-varparh tvisakrspnam
success in by worship of Parica-tattva, 166 verses quoted, 4
sum and substance of described, 175 Krsnarca-dipika
supplies proper spiritual medicine and diet, as book by jiva Gosvami, 306
281 Krsnotkirtana-gana-nartana
transcendental to material considerations, 18- quoted, 17,316
19 Ksatriyas
Krspa-sandarbha benefits derived from, 244
as book by }iva Gosvami. 307 engagements of, 280
Krsnadasa Ksipamy ajasram aSubhan
identified, 204 verses quoted, 127
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 343 (<57/0/7 yatha dadhi vikara
as thirty-fourth branch of Nityananda, 381 verses quoted, 147
Krsnadasa Brahmana KsirodakasayT Visnu
as branch of Nityananda, 374 accompanies Lord in sankirtana, 15
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Virabhadra 00531 as, 356-358
accepted disciplic succession, 186 Kulina-grama
as branch of Caitanya tree, 292 inhabitants of dear to Caitanya, 300-301
as Vyasa of Caitanya’s pastimes, 211 Kuruksetra
his reason for leaving hime, 153 actually exists, 92
on preaching glories of maha-mantra, 68
Raghunatha dasa as special guide of, 318 L
wrote on order of Madana-mohana, 157
Krsnadasa Sarakhela l.abanga
as branch of Nityananda, 366-367 Kaliya Krsnadasa as, 374-375
Krsnadasa Thakura Laghu-bhagavatamrta
sacred thread ceremony performed in family as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303
of, 35 Laghu-tosanT
Krsnadasa Vaidya* as book by Sanatana Gosvami, 304
as branch of Caitanya tree, 322 Lalita-madhava
Krsna-janma-tithi-vidhi as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303, 304
as book by Ripa Gosvami, 303 taking shelter of, 184
Krsna-karpampta Liberation
Caitanya dasa wrote commentary on, 289 by offering obeisances to Caitanya, 164
Gopala Bhatta Gosvami wrote commentary on, devotional service above, 137
319 five kinds of, 172
quoted on insignificance of liberation, 138 holy names only way to achieve, 77-78


--- Page 413 ---
414 Srt Caitanya-caritamrta
Liberation Love
stands at doorstep of devotee, 171, 172 storehouse of increases as distributed, 18
symptomized by spiritual activities, 108 tasted by chanting and dancing, 17, 168
Life Vaisnavas can deliver, 175, 388
Caitanya as goal of, 1 Love, conjugal
four orders of spiritual, 26 See Conjugal love
four goals of human, 68-69
Living beings M
as eternally true, 117
as eternal servants of God, 8, 90 Madana-gopala
as transformations of [010 5 energy, 115, 106- See Madana-mohana
107 Madana-mohana
compared to sparks of fire, 105 worshipers of, 209
conditioned by material body, 36 Caitanya-caritamrta as dictation of, 157, 206-
Lord displays pleasure potency as, 106 210
Krsna’s qualities minutely present in, 198 Madhava
should perform welfare activities, 239-240 as devotee of Nityananda, 360, 382
subject to bewilderment, 109 as principle performer of kirtana, 362
sustain universe, 105, 107 Madhava
taken 25 Lord by Mayavadis, 112-113 as eighty-third branch of Caitanya tree,
transmigration of, 233 326,328
very minute in quantity, 8 Madhavacarya
Locana dasa Thakura as branch of Caitanya tree, 328-329
as author of Caitanya-marigala, 185 as devotee of Nityananda, 385
as disciple of Narahari, 299 Madhvacarya
Lokanatha 605४8111" broke teeth of Mayavadis, 123
constructed Gokulananda temple, 152 his philosophy a stumbling block to Mayavadis,
Lokasyajanato vidvaris 95
verses quoted, 58 Madhavendra Puri in disciplic succession of,
Lotus feet of Krsna 218-219
attachment to, 136 quoted on holy names, 62
attained by chanting holy name, 57-58, 77 Madhavendra Purf
greatest offender at, 103-104 as spiritual master, of Isvara Puri, 219-220
greed to achieve, 70 as spiritual mastef of Paramananda Puri, 221
held by Ganesa on his head, 147-148 seed of devotional service first fructified in,
learned think only of, 99 218-219
neglected by Mayavadis, 102, 127, 135 Madhavidevi
taking shelter of, 1-2 as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 339-340
Love . Madhurya-rasa
above salvation, 2 gopis serve Krgna in, 172
as conclusion of all scriptures, 70 Madhyama-adhikart
as fifth goal of human life, 2, 58, 68-69, 137 must be learned in Vedanta, 84
awakened by talking of Nityananda, 177 Mahabharata
Bhagavatam teaches only, 69 only Hari explained in, 128
bodily symptoms of, 182 quoted on following dcaryas, 155, 161
Caitanya as tree of, 216 quoted on imperfection of logic, 167
causes detachment to everything else, 136 story of Durvasa Muni's disciples in, 243
developed by hearing, 134, 135 Maha-jano yena gatah sa
devotional service as cause of, 81, 180-181 verse quoted, 155
distributed freely by Pafnca-tattva, 2, 16, 17- Mahda-mantra
21,168 holy name of Krsna called, 68
induces transcendental symptoms, 70-72 See also Holy name
intoxication of, 245-249 Mahan prabhur vai purusah
on favored by fortune attains, 81 quoted, 98


--- Page 414 ---
Index 415
Mahdprabhu $ri-caitanya, radha krspa Mayavada philosophy
verse quoted, 164 advocates theory of impersonalism, 98
Mahato mahiyan aputo’ piyan as covered Buddhism, 95
quoted, 105 as mental speculation, 136
Mahesa Pandita takes living beings to be Lord, 112-113
as branch of Caitanya tree, 323 Mayavadam asac-chastram
Mahesa Pandita verses quoted, 94-95
as branch of Nityananda, 372 Mayavadi-bhasya Sunile haya
Mahidhara verses quoted, 102, 126
as devotee of Nityananda, 382 Mayavadr krspe aparddhT
Mahiyasarmpada-rajo’ bhisekam quoted, 30, 127
Makaradhvaja Kara Mayavadis
as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 264 accept Sarfraka-bhasya, 82
Mamaivarnso jiva-loke address each other as Narayana, 53, 86
quoted, 118 as greatest offenders of Lord, 30, 127
Marn ca yo 'vyabhicarepa Caitanya devises trick to attract, 23-25
verses quoted, 108 consider form of Krsna material, 25,80, 82-83
Mam eva ye prapadyante mayam consider material world false, 22
verse quoted, 104 consider themselves jagad-gurus, 49
Marn hi partha vyapasritya don’t approve of chanting and dancing, 52, 78
verses quoted, 174 deny spiritual varieties, 100
Mangakya Upanisad differentiate between Lord and His name, 60
cited on expansion of ormkdra, 124 equate Lord and living beings, 8
example of mistaking rope for snake in, 117- Kasira and Saranatha described, 29-30
118 misinterpret all 55/05, 48
Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto moved by hearing Caitanya, 80
quoted, 127 neglect lotus feet of Lord, 135
Manohara rasa dance imitated by, 7
as branch of Nityananda, 381 Sadinanda Yogindra -most prominent scholar
Manohara of, 101
as seventieth devotee of Nityananda, 385 teeth of broken by dcaryas, 123
Materialists try to defy Vaisnavas, 80
can’t have faith in chanting, 60 two groups of, 101
inefficient senses of, 91 worship demigods, 143, 146-148, 256-257
See also Atheists Mayayapahrta-jiana
-Materialism verses quoted, 80
Mayavadis as advocates of utter, 30 Mental speculation
Mathura-mahima Mayavada philosophy is merely, 136
as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303 Mercy
Matir na krsne paratah svato va of Caitanya necessary to become Krsna con-
verses quoted, 170 scious, 163
Mattah paratarari nanyat of Vaisnavas, 388
quoted, 97, 103 perfection attained by spiritual master’s, 160,
Maya 220
Bhagavatam relieves one from, 58-59 Minaketana Ramadasa
controlled by Lord, 103 as devotee of Nityananda, 385
Mayavadis consider Krsna's body, 82-83 Misra Bhagavan
orhkdra saves one from, 124 as branch of Caitanya tree, 323
sahkirtana dispells illusion of, 233 Mitho 'bhipadyeta grha-vratanam
showy display of Vedanta study as feature of, verses quoted, 170
55-56 Mlecchas
two potencies of, 101 became devotees, 29
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih Modes of nature
verses quoted, 110 See Nature, modes of


--- Page 415 ---
416 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Mohammedans Nandai
converted by Caitanya, 29 as devotee of Lord in jagannatha Puri, 342-
Mukhya-vrttye sei artha 343
~ verse quoted, 94 Nandai
Muktacarita as devotee of Nityananda, 383
as book by Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, 312 Nandana
Muktih svayarih mukulitanjali as branch of Nityananda, 380
verse quoted, 138, 172 Nandana Aciarya
Mukunda as branch of Caitanya tree, 272-273
as devotee of Nityananda, 382 Nanu bhagavan-namatmaka
Mukunda verses quoted, 62
as sixty-third devotee of Nityananda, 384 Narada
Mukunda accepts brahmanas by qualification, 50
as sixty-eighth devotee of Nityananda, 385 Bhdgavatam composed on instruction of, 90
Mukunda cited on Deity worship, 63
as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 320 quoted on Krsna as servant of devotee, 171
Mukunda Datta Srivasa as incarnation of, 255
as branch of Caitanya tree, 273-274 Ndrada-paricaratra
Mukundananda Cakravarti cited on chantingastaksara, 124
identified, 204 holy name called mahd-mantra in, 68
Murari Caitanya dasa quoted on Hare Krsna mantra, 62
slapped tigers, 362-363 Narahari
Murari Gupta as branch of Caitanya tree, 299
as branch of Caitanya tree, 279-281 Narayana
Murari Mahiti Caitanya appeared as brilliant as, 53, 86
as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 338- in form of Vyasadeva, 88
339 Mayavadi sannyadsis address each other 25, 53,
Mystic powers 186
exhibited by Caitanya, 45 Vedas emanate from breathing of, 89
misuse of, 46 Narayana
as branch of Nityananda, 381
Narayana Pandita
N as branch of Caitanya tree, 271
Narayani
Naisari matis (0৮00 urukramanghrim Vindavana dasa Thakura born of, 191
verses quoted, 170 Narottama dasa Thakura
Nakadi inspired by Jiva Gosvami, 307
as devotee of Nityananda, 382 quoted on demigod worship, 256
Nakula Brahmacari quoted on development of devotional service,
Caitanya’s appearance in, 285-287 14
Na mari dugkrtino miidhah quoted on following Gosvamis, 185
verses quoted, 80 quoted on holy name, 60
Némnam akéri bahudhd quoted on service of pure devotees, 161, 170
verses quoted, 124 quoted on story of Jagai and Madhai, 172-
Namo mahd-vadanydya 173
verse quoted, 168 quoted on taking shelter of Caitanya, 184
Naitat samdcarej jatu Ramacandra Kaviraja as most intimate friend
verse quoted, 75 of, 384
Naiti bhakti-sukhambhodheh: Nasta-prayesv abhadresu
verses quoted, 78 verses quoted, 174-175
Naivodvije para duratyaya Nataka-~candrika
verses quoted, 74 as book by Rapa Gosvami, 303
Nanda Nature, modes of
Krsna appears as son of, 7 can’t act in spiritual world, 100


--- Page 416 ---
Index 417
Nature, modes of Nrsimhadeva
effect of associating with, 174 manifest in heart of Pradyumna Brahmacari
transcended by devotional service, 113 270
See also Energy, material Ngsimbhatirtha
Navadvipa as root of tree of devotional service, 221
Caitanya began garden at, 217
Navadvipa-sataka 0
as book by Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142
Navani Hoda Om ity ekaksararh brahma
as devotee of Nityananda, 383 verses quoted, 122, 123
sacred thread ceremony performed in family Ornkdra वि
of, 35 analyzed in terms of alphabetical constituents,
Nilacala 125
See )agannatha Puri as resting place of everything, 125
Nilambara as sound representation of Lord, 122-126
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 345 Bhagavatam begins with, 124
Nirbandhah krspa-sambandhe has all potencies of Lord, 124
verses quoted, 75 Ori namo bhagavate vdsudevdya
Nirloma Gangadasa verse quoted, 94
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 346 Ori piarpam adah pirpam idam
Nityo-nityanarh cetanas verses quoted, 132
verse quoted, 8,99, 125 Ori tad vispoh paramarh padam
Nityananda quoted, 103
as elder brother of Caitanya, 6,10 Orn-tat-sad iti nirdeso
as personified spiritual bliss, 6, 158 verses quoted, 123
as plenary expansion of Caitanya, 4 Orissa
as predominatog, 10-12 most disciples of Caitanya lived in Bengal and,
as son of Hadai Ojha, 380 330
as trunk of Caitanya tree, 226, 354 See also Jagannatha Puri
belongs to Visnu category, 5
broke sannydsa rod of Caitanya, 274
cursed Sivinanda Sena’s son to die, 288 टि
devotees of, 353-389
Gadadhara dasa as chief assistant of, 283 Padma Purana
Garigadevi as daughter of, 328-329 quoted on blaspheming devotees, 178
His associates cowherdboys, 363 quoted on offenses of Mayavadis, 104
in form of devotee’s spiritual master, 5 quoted on Siva as Sarikara, 94-95
Jahnavidevi as pleasure potency of, 307 Padyavali
love of God awakened by talking of, 177 as book by Riipa Gosvami, 303
Madhava Ghosh dear to, 327 Pafica-tattva
rdsas of servitor of, 13 as important factor in understanding Caitanya,
sent to Bengal, 153 154-155
thief tries to steal jewels of, 294 Caitanya descends with, 3-5
Virabhadra Prabhu as son of, 321, 356 distributed holy name throughout universe,
Nondevotees 151-152
compared to dogs, 251 how they distributed love of God, 17-21
See also Atheists Krsnadasa Kavirdja teaches us to offer respect
Notpadayed yadi ratim to, 159
verses quoted, 140 one should chant names of full, 4
Nrsimhananda Brahmacari plundered storehouse of love of Krsna, 16
Pradyumna Brahmacari’s name changed to, worship of, 166, 184-185
270 Paica-tattva mahd-mantra
Ngsimha-caitanya must be chanted fully, 155
as devotee of Nityananda, 385 potency of, 4


--- Page 417 ---
418 Srt Caitanya-caritamrta
Pancaratriki-vidhi | Peace
Deity worship stressed in, 63 K(sna consciousness only means of, 175
Pandavas Perfection
Krsna’s relationship with, 172 by chanting Hare Krsna, 165
Pandu three ways for, 160
Bhavananda Raya as, 335-337 Pitaham asya jagato
Parabhavas tavad abodha-jato verses quoted, 123
verses quoted, 139 Pitambara
Paramananda as devotee of Nityananda, 385
as fiftieth devotee of Nityananda, 383 Prabha vispave namah
Paramananda Gupta quoted, 37
as branch of Nityananda, 381 Prabodhananda Sarasvati
Paramananda Mahapatra belonged to Ramanuja-sampradaya, 142
as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 338 cited on influence of K(sna consciousness, 21
Paramananda Puri describes merging as hell, 172
as associate of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, Pradyumna Brahmacari
332 as branch of Caitanya tree, 270
as root of tree of devotional service, 221-332, given name Ngsimhananda Brahmacari, 286-
224 287
Uddhava as, 222-223 Pradyunina Miéra
Paramananda Upadhyaya as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 335
as branch of Nityananda, 380 Prahlada Maharaja
Paramatma chanted in sankirtana, 80
Absolute partially understood as, 84, 97 cited on fulfillment of life's mission, 136
as expansion of potency of Lord, 131 Haridasa Thakura compared to, 277
Paramatma-sandarbha his prayer to deliver fallen souls, 74
as book by | ५३ Gosvami, 307 on serving pure devotee, 170
quoted on inconceivable potencies of Lord, Prakasananda Sarasvati
118 belonged to Sankaracarya-sampradaya, 142
Parari bhavam ajananto converted by Caitanya, 29, 47-143
verses quoted, 22 Prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih
Paramesvara dasa verse quoted, 174
as branch of Nityananda, 371 Prakytirh svam adhisthaya
Parampara verses quoted, 109
instructions in based on Vedas, 37 Prapava
neglected in Kali-yuga, 59-60 See Ornkdra
Parasari Prapavah sarva-vedesu
discussed Veddnta before Vyasadeva, 89 quoted, 125
Parasya brahmanah saktis Prapte sannihite khalu marape
verses quoted, 113 quoted, 48
Pardsya saktir vividhaiva sriyate Prasada
quoted, 5, 6, 98, 109, 115 as diet to cure material disease, 281
Parvata Muni importance of taking, 134-135
57 Rama 02114113 as incarnation of, 255 taken by devotees, 169
Pasyanty atmani catmanam Prasna Upanisad
verses quoted, 83-84 quoted on creation of Visnu, 99
Patrari puspari phalari toyam Prataparudra Maharaja
verses quoted, 169, 242 as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri,
Patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad., 338
verses quoted, 60, 102, 136, 172 Prema pumartho mahan
Patita-pavana quoted, 2, 58, 69
Caitanya known as, 329 Priti-sandarbha :
Peace as book by Jiva Gosvami, 307
found in sankirtana love of God explained in, 72


--- Page 418 ---
Index 419
Pundarika Vidyanidhi Radharani
as Radharani’s father, 259 Gadadhara dasa as luster of body of, 282-283
as spiritual master of Gadadhara Pandita, 259 Radha-rasa-sudha-nidhi
Puranas as book by Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142
only Hari explained in, 128 Radhika
Purandara Acarya See Radharani
as branch of Caitanya tree, 267-268 Raghava Pandita
Purandara Pandita as branch of Caitanya tree, 264-266
as branch of Nityananda, 368-369 Raghunandana Thakura
Pure devotees as branch of Caitanya tree, 299
association of purifies anyone, 174 sacred thread ceremony performed in family
becoming brahmana by association with, 36-37 of, 35
can offer anyone Krsna, 388 Raghunatha Bhattacarya
cats and dogs liberated by association of, 251- as devotee of Lord at Varanasi, 347-349
252 Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
don’t accept any kind of mukti, 172 as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332
necessity of approaching, 170 as branch of Caitanya tree, 311-318
guided by Lord in heart, 210 as special guide of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, 318
headed by Srivasa, 13 as worshiper of Madana-mohana, 209
players in transcendental dramas all, 258 Krsnadasa Kaviraja prays at feet of, 212
transcendental literature written only by, 189- put in care of Sivananda Sena, 288
190 Raghunatha Puri
Parpam adah parpam idam Vaisnavananda formerly known as, 379
verse quoted, 98 Raghunatha (Upadhyaya)
Parpasya parpam adaya as branch of Nityananda, 364
verse quoted, 118, 132 Raghunatha Vaidya
Parpat parpam udacyate as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332
verse quoted, 115 Ramabhadra Acirya
Purusottama as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 345
as branch of Caitanya tree, 295 Ramacandra
Purusottama Anupama’s devotion to, 303
as branch of Caitanya tree, 300 Caitanya appeared to Murari Gupta as,
Purusottama 279
as branch of Caitanya tree, 324 Ramacandra Kaviraja
Purusottama Pandita as devotee of Nityananda, 384
as branch of Nityananda, 372-373 Ramadasa
in fraternal love of God, 361
र lived with Virabhadra Gosani, 359
Ramadasa
Radha-Damodara temple as branch of Caitanya tree, 324
established by Jiva Gosvami, 307 Ramadasa
Radha-Krsna as son of Sivananda Sena, 289-290
worship of Deities of, 184-185 Ramadasa Abhirama
Radhakunda as branch of Caitanya tree, 327
excavated by Gosvamis, 311 Ramai
Raghunatha dasa resided at, 312 as devotee of Lord at | 22072113 Puri, 342-
very dear to Krsna, 15 343
Radharamana Deities Ramananda Raya
installed by Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, 319 as branch of Caitanya tree, 300
Radharant as energy of Lord, 6
as best of gopis, 15 undisturbed by women, 336
as pleasure potency of Krsna, 125 vanquished power of Cupid, 304
Caitanya as Krsna and, 10, 164 Ramananda
Caitanya tried to taste love of, 234 as devotee of Nityananda, 382


--- Page 419 ---
420 Srt Caitanya-caritimrta
Ramanujacarya Rapa Gosvami
broke teeth of Mayavadis, 123 quoted on methods of different dcaryas, 27
his philosophy a stumbling block to Mayavadis, quoted on rareness of devotional service, 81
95 sent to Vrndavana, 152
quoted on energies of Absolute, 133 understood Caitanya as Krsna, 16
quoted on individuality of soul, 116 Rapa-raghunatha-pade haibe akuti
Ramanuja-sampradaya verses quoted, 14, 185
Prabodhananda Sarasvati belonged to, 142
Ramasena 1
as devotee of Nityananda, 384
Rarmiyana Sacidevi
only Hari explained in, 128 , See Sacimata
Rasa dance Sacimata
imitated by rascals, 7 Caitanya ate foodstuffs offered at home by,
K(sna as enjoyer of, 7 285
Rasas Damodara Pandita carried messages from, 268
developed by gopis, 172 T$ana as servant of, 323
devotees relate to Lord in five, 57-58 Sadananda Yogindra
Rasikananda-deva his Mayavadi philosophy, 82, 101-102
sacred thread ceremony performed in family Sadasiva Kaviraja
of, 35 as branch of Nityananda, 377
Rasamrta-sesa Sadasiva Pandita
as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306 as branch of Caitanya tree, 269
Ratnabahu 95390817013
Vijaya dasa named by Caitanya, 292 seen by Sarvabhauma, 334
Religion Sa gunan samatityaitan brahma
as first concern of humanity, 240 verses quoted, 108
best described in Bhdgavatam, 72 Sakhya-rasa
four principles of, 69 , Krsna's cowherd friends serve Him in, 172
Revati Salagrama-$ila
Raghunatha Vaidya as incarnation of, 332 worship of, 35
Rg-veda Salvation
quoted on Lord as person, 99 devotional service above, 2
quoted on superiority of Visnu, 103 See also Liberation
Rg-vedo ‘tha yajur-vedah . Samadhi
verses quoted, 56 defined, 85
Rudra $ambu
as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 320 See Siva
Rapa Gosvamt Sanatana Gosvami
addresses Caitanya as most magnanimous in- as branch of Caitanya tree, 301-306
carnation, 142, 168, 234 as worshiper of Madana-mohana, 152, 209
as branch of Caitanya tree, 301-306 books by, 304
as worshiper of Madana-mohana, 209 preached in western India, 310
books by, 303-304 quoted on’ proper initiation of brdhmapas,
cited on auspiciousness of devotional service, 36
242 quoted on writing of pure devotee, 189
constructed Govindaji temple, 152 Ramananda Raya considered equal to by Lord,
describes jagad-guru, 49 337
distinguishes between pure and internal devo- sent by Caitanya to Vndavana, 150
tees, 15 taught devotional service by Caitanya, 36-38
quoted on bhakti without reference to Vedas, Sanatana
84 as devotee of Nityananda, 383
quoted on devotional service ignoring Vedas, Sandipani Muni
188 as Kesava Bharati, 223


--- Page 420 ---
Index 421
Sangita-madhava Santa-rasa
as book by Govinda Kaviraja, 384 cows, trees, etc. serve Krspa in, 172
Safijaya Sariraka
as branch of Caitanya tree, 295 See Vedanta-satra
Sangita-madhava Sariraka-bhasya
_ as book by Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142 accepted by Mayavadis as real Vedanta com-
Sankara mentary, 82
as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332 Sariraka-bhasya
Sankara as unauthorized commentary, 90, 94
, as devotee of Nityananda, 385 denies doctrine of transformation of energy,
Sarikara 114
, as branch of Caitanya tree, 269, 300 one who follows is doomed, 96
Sankaricarya rejected by Vaignavas, 83
accepted tattvamasi as mahd-vikya, 125-126 Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
as incarnation of Siva, 94-96, 100, 148 as branch of Caitanya tree, 333-334
cheated atheists, 94-96,112 converted by Caitanya, 29
condemned word jugglery, 48, 58 Sarva-dharman parityajya
considered Vyasa mistaken, 114-117 verse quoted, 69, 111
covers real meaning of Vedas, 93-96, 128 Sarva-karma-paribhrarhsan
especially stresses Vedanta study, 32 verses quoted, 96
his monist explanations of Vedanta, 82 Sarvam astaksarantahstham
his theory of illusion, 115 verses quoted, 62
Sarkara-sampradiya Sarva-vedanta-sararthah
Kesava Bharati belonged to, 26 verses quoted, 62
Prakasananda belonged to, 142 Sarve vidhi-nisedha
Sarikarsana verses quoted, 27
„ Minaketana Ramadasa as, 385 Sasthivara
Sankararanya as branch of Caitanya tree, 322
as branch of Caitanya tree, 320 Sastras
Sankirtana Mayavadis misinterpret all, 48
as only means of deliverance in modern so- See also Scriptures
ciety, 174 Satarir ninda namnah paramam
continues despite opponents, 80-81, 143 verses quoted, 177
dispells illusion of maya, 233 Sa-tattvato ‘nyatha-buddhir
everyone intoxicated by, 248-249 verse quoted, 115
executed by Caitanya, 3-4 Sat-kriya-sara-dipika
meant to be spread all over world, 245 as book by Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, 319
meant to make people happy, 243 Satvata-paiicardtra
peace found in, 237 as supplement of Vedas, 89
propounded with internal devotees, 15 Sat-sandarbha
sannyadsls necessary to expand, 151-152 Gopila Bhatta Gosvami wrote forward to,
should be preached without .discrimination, 319
230 Satyabhama
spiritual master desires disciples to spread, Jagadananda Pandita as incarnation of, 263
74 Satyaraja
San-maldh saumyemdh prajah as branch of Caitanya tree, 300
verse quoted, 117 Satya-yuga
Sannydsa parampard honored in, 59
accepted by Lord Caitanya, 24-26, 163-164 Sa vai (2407527 paro dharmo
four divisions of, 26 verses quoted, 72
Sannyasira madhye i$varera Sa vrksa-kalakrtibhih paro ‘nyo
verses quoted, 221-222 verses quoted, 98
Sannyasis Scientists
essential for preaching work, 151-152 lack complete knowledge, 91


--- Page 421 ---
422 Srt Caitanya-caritamrta
Scriptures Spiritual master
love of God as conclusion of all, 70 as servitor God, 12
spiritual master speaks according to, 38 becoming brdhmapa by initiation by,36
understood from spiritual master, 37-38 desires disciples to preach sankirtana, 73-74
Sekhara Pandita devotional service under direction of, 108,135-
as branch of Caitanya tree, 322 136
Senayor ubhayor madhye ratham doubts must be referred to, 65
verse quoted, 138 feels obliged to advanced disciple, 73
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam hearing from and serving, 37-38, 41, 55
verse quoted, 86, 169 met by grace of Krsna, 81
Sense gratification must be gosvami, 10-11
achieved by pious activities, 170 necessity of faith in, 77
Krsna immediately delivers to devotee, 171 offense of considering him material, 178
Senses offense of neglecting orders of, 59
Absolute beyond reach of imperfect, 167 perfection attained by mercy of, 160, 220, 338
, of materialists inefficient, 91 Sravanadi-suddha-citte karaye
Sikhi Mahiti verse quoted, 134
as devotee of Lord at Jagannatha Puri, 338- Sravaparh kirtanarh vispoh
339 verses quoted, 134, 228
Siksdstaka Sravapari naiva kartavyam
devotional service instructed in, 165 „ verses quoted, 188
quoted, 52, 65-66, 307 Sridama
quoted on chanting holy name, 168-169 < Ramadasa formerly, 359
quoted on perfectional stage of chanting, 248 Sridhara
Simhesvara as branch of Caitanya tree, 292-293
as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 345 as devotee of Nityananda, 382
Sins Sridhara Svami
committed on strength of chanting, 59 accepts brdhmanas by qualification, 51
of modern civilization, 244 describes oritkdra as seed of deliverance, 124
Sirigabhatta Sri Galima
, as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 345 “as branch of Caitanya tree, 324
Siva Sri 60312 dasa
in form of Safkaricarya, 94-96, 100, 148 as branch of Caitanya tree, 324
worshiped by Mayavadis, 143, 146-148 $ri Gopikanta
Siva Purana as branch of Caitanya tree, 323
, quoted on Siva’s appearance as Sarikara, 95 Sri Govinda dasa
Sivai as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 340.
as devotee of Nityananda, 383 341
Sivananda Cakravarti $i Govinda dasa
identified, 204 ` ¡ 25 author of Gaura-krsnodaya, 261
Sivananda Sena Sri Janakinatha
as branch of Caitanya tree, 284-285, 287-290, _ as branch of Caitanya tree, 326
338 Srikanta Sena
experienced three features of Caitanya, 287- , as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 290
288 Srikara
his three heroic sons, 289-290 as branch of Caitanya tree, 323
Skanda Purana Sri-krspa-caitanya 78073 krspa nahe anya
satra defined in, 88 verse quoted, 10
Soce tato vimukha-cetasa Srimad-Bhagavatam
verses quoted, 74 as natural commentary on Vedanta, 32, 33,
Spirit soul 90, 94, 188
devotional service as activity to, 108 beginning words of, 94
eternally individual, 116-117, 167 cited on chanting holy name, 56
love of God original function of, 69 cited on executing occupational duty, 280


--- Page 422 ---
Index 423
Srimad-Bhagavatam $riman Sena
cited on two kinds of sannyadsis, 26 as branch of Caitanya tree, 282
compiled by Vyasadeva, 58 Sri Manta
first verse of quoted, 121-122 as devotee of Nityananda, 383
Gita as preliminary study of, 69 $rinatha Misra
Jiva Gosvami fond of from childhood, 306 ~~ 25 branch of Caitanya tree, 323
Krsna consciousness follows injunctions of Srinatha Pandita
meant for those aloof from jealousy, 137 as branch of Caitanya tree, 321
professional readers of, 188 Srinidhi
quoted in Caitanya-bhagavata, 188 as branch of Caitanya tree, 255
quoted on acting in knowledge, 136 Srinidhi
quoted on best religion, 72 as branch of Caitanya tree, 323
quoted on chanting holy name, 62, 163 Srinivasa Acirya
quoted on cheating religious systems, 69 blessed by ২3801731073 dasa, 312
quoted on Caitanya, 4 describes six Gosvamis, 17,316
quoted on compilation of Vedic literature, 58 inspired by Jiva Gosvami, 307
quoted on cosmos as Lord's energy, 124 Sripati
quoted on development of bhakti, 83-84 as branch of Caitanya tree, 255
quoted on effects of associating with modes पात
of nature, 174 as branch of Caitanya tree, 323
quoted on falldown of Mayavadis, 102 € Rima Pandita
quoted on falling from brahmajyoti, 172 as incarnation of Parvata Muni, 255
quoted on goal of human life, 139 $rirariga
quoted on good qualities of devotees, 199 as devotee of Nityananda, 384
quoted on good qualities of trees, 244 3ri Sankalpa-kalpavrksa
quoted on instructions of Prahlada, 170 „ as book by Jiva Gosvami, 306
quoted on Krsna as servant of devotee, 171 Srivasa Prabhu
quoted on nine kinds of devotional service, as incarnation of Narada Muni, 255
134 as marginal potency of Caitanya, 4
quoted on offenses to holy name, 60 asjpure devotee, 5 वि
quoted on purpose of Vyasadeva, 102 as worshiper of three predominators, 12
quoted on 21317130315 desire to save fallen Caitanya performed dramas with, 258
souls, 74 devotees headed by, 13, 215
quoted on promotion to Vaispava platform, dogs in household of liberated, 252
174-175 Narayana Pandita as associate of, 271
quoted on real understanding of Vedanta, 140 Srou devi pravaksyami
quoted on real welfare activities, 239 verses quoted, 96
quoted on spiritual varieties, 100 Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sidhana
quoted on superiority of devotional service, verses quoted, 147
137 Sruti-smrti-purapadi
quoted on three features of Absolute, 97 verses quoted, 84, 187
recited constantly by Raghunatha Bhatticarya, Sthana-nirapana
Sanatana Gosvami instructed on, 37-38 as book by Raghunatha Vaidya, 332
349 Stavamala
studied by Sanatana Gosvami at home, 304- as book by Ripa Gosvami, 303
305 Stavavali
teaches only love of God, 69 as book by Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, 312
verse from quoted by Caitanya, 76 ৩0013100903
677 Madhava-mahotsava Purusottama Pandita as, 373
as book by [1५२ Gosvami, 306 Striyo vaiSyds tatha sadrds
Sri Madhusiidana verses quoted, 174
as branch of Caitanya tree, 323 Sukhananda Puri
$rimin Pandita as root of tree of devotional service,
as branch of Caitanya tree, 271 221


--- Page 423 ---
424 Set Caitanya-caritamrta
Svardpa Damodara Supreme Lod
always chanted Hare Krsna, 222 possesses limited and unlimited energies, 105-
as associate of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 332 106
cited on identity of Caitanya, 10 submissive to devotees, 138
considers Mayavadis insane, 96 under influence of transcendental bliss, 72
Pundarika Vidyanidhi as friend of, 259 See also Krsna, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Raghunatha dasa as assistant of, 313 Sdryadasa Sarakhela
Svetasvatara Upanisad as branch of Nityananda, 366-367
described Absolute with no hands or legs, Satra-malika
99 as book by ४2 Gosvamf, 306
quoted on Lord’s multifarious energies, 98
quoted on inconceivable energies of Lord, 115 T
Syamakunda
„ very dear to Krsna, 15 Tac chraddadhdna munayo
Syamananda Gosvami verses quoted, 83-84
constructed Syamasundara temple, 152 Tad aharh bhakty-upahrtam
५9५021५ verses quoted, 169, 242
Uddharana Datta Thakura as, 377 Tad ananyatvam drambhana
Subala verse quoted, 114
Gauridasa Pandita as, 367 Tad rajas-tamo-bhavih kama
Subhananda verse quoted, 174-175
as branch of Caitanya tree, 323 Tad evar priter laksapam
Subuddhi Misra verses quoted, 72
as branch of Caitanya tree, 323 Tad viddhi pranipdtena
Sudama verse quoted, 41
Sundarananda as, 364 Tad vispoh paramari padam
Suddha-bhakata-carana-renu quoted, 99
verse quoted, 87 Tan 00073 dvisatah kraran
Sadras verses quoted, 127
can approach Supreme, 174 Tan-sabdra pada-renu mora
communism as movement of, 175 verses quoted, 161
, everyone at present born, 51 Taittiriya Upanisad
Suklambara Brahmacari quoted on Brahman as original cause, 115-
as branch of Caitanya tree, 272 116
Sulocana Tapana Acarya
as branch of Caitanya tree, 299 as devotee of Lord in Jagannatha Puri, 345
Sulocana ` Tapana Misra
as devotee of Nityananda, 383 as devotee of Lord at Varanasi, 347
Sundarananda as kanistha-adhikari, 40
as branch of Nityananda, 364-365 blasphemy of Caitanya intolerable to, 39
Sanyayitari jagat sarvam Caitanya accepted food at house of, 35
verses quoted, 65-66, 248 Tasyaite kathita hy arthah
Supersoul verses quoted, 38, 77
Lord guides from within as, 210 70100 diksa-vidhanena
Supreme Lord verses quoted, 36
as Parabrahman, 133 Tatrarpita niyamitah smarane
compared to blazing fire, 105 verses quoted, 124
compared to sun, 120-122 Tattvamasi
compared to touchstone, 120 accepted as mahd-vikya by Sarikara, 125-126
full of spiritual potencies, 99-100 as partial explanation of Vedas, 126-127
has multifarious energies, 98 Tattva-sandarbha
identical with His name, 169 as book by iva Gosvami, 307
known as Akificana-gocara, 2 Te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
opulent in all respects, 119 verses quoted, 180


--- Page 424 ---
Index 425
Tepus tapas te juhuvuh Uttara-mimarisd
verses quoted, 56 See Vedanta-satra, 88
Thakura Sarariga dasa
as branch of Caitanya tree, 324-325 ॥ /
Tirumalaya Bhatta
as brother of Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142 Vairdgya-vidyd-nijabhaktiyoga
Traigupya-visaya veda verse quoted, 334
verse quoted, 100 Vaisnavananda
Transcendentalists as branch of Nityananda, 379
three classes of, 84 Vaispava-maijusa
Transformation of energy cited on Caitanya taking sannydsa, 223
See Energy, transformation of Vaisnavas
Transmigration as greatest philosophers in world, 83-85
described in Gita, 111 can deliver Krsna to everyone, 388
99.9% of Indians believe in, 237-238 can't tolerate Mayavada philosophy, 96
of living beings, 233 consider creation temporary not false, 116
understanding science of, 167-168 follow orders of guru and Krsna, 206-207
Trayo vedah sad-angani get spiritual body after death, 53
verses quoted, 62 greater than brdhmanpas, 18
Tretd-yuga know how to approach Lord directly, 134
parampard honored in, 59 Mayavadis try to defy, 80
71000 api sunicena never accept sdyujya-mukti, 172
verses quoted, 39, 52, 168, 307 never see faults of others, 201
Tulasi one should not tolerate blasphemy against;
dog has no respect for, 251 308
Tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha only can write transcendental literature, 206-
verses quoted, 100 207, 215-216
Tyaktva deharh punar janma respectful to everyone, 45
verses quoted, 241 second-class described, 50-51
should be conversant with Vedanta, 56-57
u tolerant as trees, 39
various philosophies of, 82
worship demigods on principles of Brahma-
Uddharana Datta Thakura sarnhitd, 147-148
as branch of Nityananda,377-379 See also Devotees
Uddhava Vaispava-tosani
Paramananda Puri as, 222-223 as book by Sanatana Gosvami, 304
Uddhava-sandesa Vaisyas
as book by Ripa Gosvami, 303 can approach Supreme, 174
Ujjvala-nilamani capitalism meant for, 175
as book by Ripa Gosvami, 303 engagements of, 280
Jiva Gosvami's commentary on, 306 Vakresvara
U-karepocyate radha as associate of Lord in ] 38317731073 Puri, 332
verses quoted, 125 Vakresvara Pandita
Upadesamrta could dance for seventy-two hours, 261-262
cited on development of devotional service, 15 Devananda Pandita saved by grace of, 298
Upanisads Vallabha
bhakti developed on basis of, 84 as former name of Anupama, 302
explained impersonally by Mayavadis, 82 Vallabha Sena
meant to establish personal feature of Abso- as sub-branch of Caitanya tree, 290
lute, 95 VanamaliPandita
must be understood as they are, 91-92 as branch of Caitanya tree, 295-296
108 listed, 92-93 Vidnaprastha
quoted on six opulences of Lord, 132 four divisions of, 26


--- Page 425 ---
426 Srt Caitanya-caritamrta
Vaninatha Vedanta-satra
as branch of Caitanya tree, 326 meant to deliver fallen souls, 102
৬3011731073 Vasu meant to establish personal feature of Abso-
as dear servant of Caitanya, 300 lute, 95
Varaha must be understood as it is, 91-92
Caitanya manifest His form as, 279 no one in Kali-yuga able to study, 55
Varanasi quoted on doctrine of transformation of ener-
Caitanya met with Mayavadis at, 34 gy, 115
devotees of Lord in, 347-349 quoted on purpose of human life, 237
impersonalists of, 29 Vedanta-darsana
residents of Lord Caitanya, 144-149 See Vedanta-satra, 88
Varpas Vedanta-sara
named, 24 as impersonalist book by Sadananda Yogindra,
Vasanta 82,101
as devotee of Nityananda, 383 Vedanta-vakyesu sada
Vasudama verse quoted, 32
Dhananjaya Pandita as, 371 Vedanta tu maha-sastre
Vasudeva verses quoted, 94-95
Krsna as son of, 75 Vadanti tat tattva-vidas
Vasudeva verses quoted, 97
as full-fledged Absolute Truth, 84 Vedanto nama upanisat
Vasudeva text quoted, 82
as devotee of Nityananda, 360 Vedartha-sangraha
made wood and stone melt, 362 quoted on diverse energies of Absolute, 133
Vasudeva Vedas
as eighty-fourth branch of Caitanya tree, 326- emanate from breathing of Narayana, 89
328 Krsna known by and knower of, 31, 49, 55,
Vasudev Datta 123
as branch of Caitanya tree, 274-275 misinterpretation of deprecated by Caitanya,
Vatsalya-rasa 92
elderly 0075 serve Krsna in, 172 offense of minimizing authority of, 59
Vayu Purapa person who chants Hai has already studied,
satra defined in, 88 56
Vedaham 61077 purusarh mahantam quoted on faith in spiritual master, 38, 77
verse quoted, 98 quoted on varieties of Lord’s energies, 5
Vedais ca sarvair aham Sarikara’s indirect explanation of, 128-129
verse quoted, 31, 49, 123, 126 Vede ramdyane caiva purane
Vedanta-satra verses quoted, 128
appropriate candidate for study of, 52 Vedic hymns
as words spoken by Lord in form of Vyasadeva, holy name essence of, 54,59, 59-60
88 Vedic literature
Bhdgavatam as natural commentary on, 90, as source of real knowledge, 94
94, 188 blasphemy of, 178
Caitanya’s direct explanation of, 95-96, 131- compiled by Vyasadeva, 58
140 describes Krsna as energetic, 106
contents of described, 89-90 devotional service that ignores, 188
different names of, 88 explained impersonally by Mayavadis, 82
doctrine of transformation of energy in, 114- indirectly described by Sarikara, 93-96
117 madhyama-adhikari must be learned in, 84
emanated from breathing of Narayana, 89 orikara as principle word in, 122-126
explained impersonally by Mayavadis, 82 only Hari explained in, 128
fully understood by Vaisnava dcdryas, 83-85 Supreme Lord as goal of, 132
Hare Krsna mantra as reality of all, 62 thousands of references to Visnu’s energy in,
Krsna as compiler of, 31 103


--- Page 426 ---
Index 427
Vedic literature Visnusvami
understood only in disciplic succession, 37-38 Mayavadis took advantage of his philosophy,
Vedyarn pavitram orikara 95
verses quoted, 123 Visvanatha
Vedyarn vastavam atra vastu quoted on mercy of spiritual master, 220
verses quoted, 137 Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura
Vicitra-$aktih purusah puranah cited on accepting words of spiritual master,
verse quoted, 98 55
Vidagdha-madhava quoted on mercy of Vaisnavas, 388
as book by Ripa Gosvami, 303, 304 Visvarapa
taking shelter of, 184 as elder brother of Caitanya, 320
Vidyananda Vindavana
as branch of Caitanya tree, 300 devotee attracted to residents of, 172
Vijaya dasa Govinda worshiped in, 195-196
as branch of Caitanya tree, 291-292 mission of Ripa and Sanatana in, 311
Virabhadra 60571 Ripa and Sanatana sent by Caitanya to, 150,
as branch of Nityananda Prabhu, 356-359 152
as son of Nityananda Prabhu, 321 seen by purified mind, 184
as topmost branch of Nityananda, 387 Vrndavana dasa Thakura
Visaya chagiya kabe’ Suddha as author of Caitanya-bhagavata, 157, 186
verses quoted, 14, 184 as incarnation of Vyasa, 386
Visnai as son of Narayani, 190
as devotee of Nityananda, 383 depicted pastimes of Caitanya, 187
Visnu Vrndavana-sataka
as maintainer of universe, 56 as book by Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142
as predominator, 5 Vndavanesvari
as supreme living force, 8 See Radharani
changes body of devotee, 37 Vyasadeva
considered product of ignorance by Sadananda as compiler of Vedic literature, 58
Yogindra, 101 his doctrine of transformation of energy, 114-
demigods never equal to, 103, 178 117
learned think only of, 99 Narayana in form of as author of Veddnta, 88
not product of material energy, 103-104 saw separated energy of Lord, 111
ormikdra as good as, 124-125 Vndavana dasa as incarnation of, 386
three categories of His potency, 109-112 wrote to deliver fallen souls, 102
worshiped by Jarasandha, 162 Vyasa-siitra
worshiped for material success by atheists, See Vedanta-siitra, 88
143, 146-148, 165 VyenkataBhatta
Visnudasa as brother of Prabodhananda Sarasvati, 142
as branch of Nityananda, 380
Visnupriya w
as wife of Caitanya, 296
Vispu Purapa Women
cited on two energies of Lord, 99 can approach Supreme, 174
describes Krsna as energetic, 106 World, material
quoted on energies of Visnu, 109 actually no scarcity in, 235
quoted on expansion of Lord's energies, 113 as Brahman, 115
quoted on welfare work for all, 241 as eternally true, 117
Visnu-Puri as reflection of spiritual world, 108
as root of tree of devotional service, 221 chanting and dancing not of, 17
Vispu-tattva considered false by Mayavadis, 22
Caitanya in ecstasy as, 294-295 created by glance of Lord, 115
Visvambhara everyone's body temporary in, 98
Caitanya known as, 217 everything limited in, 105


--- Page 427 ---
428 $rt Caitanya-caritamrta
World, material Yatha karicanatarm yadti
extinguishes fiery quality of soul, 105 verses quoted, 36
Supreme Lord beyond, 98 Yato va imani bhitani jayante
tree of bhakti not of, 228 verses quoted, 115, 116
Visnu’s name all-auspicious in, 178 Yavanas
World, spiritual became devotees, 29
as expansion of potency of orikdra, 124 Yavam na jijidsata atma-tattvam
considered void by Mayavadis, 29 verses quoted, 139
material world as reflection of, 108 Yaya sammohito jiva atmanam
no creation in, 105 quoted, 111
soul retains identity in, 116 Yena tena prakarena
spiritual potency manifested in, 109 verses quoted, 27
spiritual varieties in, 5 Ye ‘nye’ ravindaksa vimukta
storehouse of love never depleted in, 18 verses quoted, 100
tree of bhakti grows in, 228 Yesarm tv anta-gatam
Visnu belongs to, 104 verses quoted, 180
Yoga
Y as imperfect means of realizing Absolute, 84
Yogasarastava
Yac caksur esa savita sakala Jiva Gosvami’s commentary on, 306
verses quoted, 148 ৮০০5
Yadavacarya Gosvami as transcendental, 84
identified, 203 Yudhisthira
Yada yada hi dharmasya Krsna acted as order-carrier of, 171
verses quoted, 111, 164 Yugayitarin nimesena caksusa
Yadunandana verses quoted, 65-66, 248
as branch of Caitanya tree, 328
Yadunandana Acarya
initiated by Vasudeva Datta, 275
Yadunatha
as branch of Caitanya tree, 300
Yadunatha Kavicandra
as branch of Nityananda, 373
Yah prayati tyajan deham
verses quoted, 122, 123
Yah sambhutam api tatha
verses quoted, 147
Yah sarva-jiah sarva-vit
quoted, 133
Yajriaih sankirtana-prayair
verses quoted, 4
Yanti deva-vrata devan
quoted, 104, 241
Yasoda
Krsna appears as son of, 7
Yasya deve para bhaktir
verses quoted, 38, 77
Yasydjnay  bhramati sambhrta
verses quoted, 148
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado
verses quoted, 220, 388
Yatah khyatirh yatarn katham
verses quoted, 177


--- Page 428 ---
^ नन क Se তম gre. Sn TE TT ERE TERRE hig a)
{ s ADI-LILA
WY) र § ॥ ans Cf Volume 2
१५.६११ ^ . i | 4
BPN it gy ॥ || i 18
RIB ALLY Hest ड fb 1 H
Res dh!  ॥
$ ২২১ So छ বলি भ i
4 | ४ ¢ 5 ~ টড ¢. oR sel ण
4 १ AP +4 ~ = ] ১
+ #@ . TER, CEE
- 77 1. +S <
০ ; Pep Ww The
ग्र ` 1 = > Fe Ea र তা ८ 11
५4 ’ - AN / 1 < ष
{7 £; (द च ( . १६ Lond Catenyr
i ~क 9. 2१ 00
4 ॥. क ~ जि fl «> 8
५ ॐ. wt 1 be
| | 1% ६ We छ \%
VIR ১- প্‌ १० E
I’ ভি ০১ 5) 4 ५
৫ | ¢ 4. “লে HIS DIVINE GRACE
h— iad py ५ AL Braktivedanta
ध १ ¬, = 1 Swami
CRA अ ४ / | >
Ld Ng). পা
+: , शश). च ই
£. ५ = / KA ৫ ध
< । i আদ
১1 GoD SY ৷ |
१९४} উ Ee LEN 4
৮.১ 5: 4 i नर A © ४ -
i ২২১: त्र ChE মক ८ द
(२ न + 5 Pl ih ক ৬৩ ~र
भै A पः ॐ র্‌
 । । कक र # pr Fc ৫ ত্য arg
০০৬ ও 51
Bc sl Lk dae
; 1 | / ५ न
9 (31(40/2- 62/11/3112 is the authorized work on the life and teachings of भा /
Krsna Caitanya—the philosopher, saint, spiritual preceptor, mystic and divine
incamation who pioneered a great social and religious movement in Sixteenth |
Century India. His teachings, which embody the highest philosophical and 1
theolgoical truths, have affected centuries of religious and philosophical
4 thinkers until the present day.
This translation and commentary on the original Bengali text is the work of |
His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (pictured above), the
world's most distinguished scholar and teacher of Indian thought and culture
and author of the best-selling Bhagavad-gita As It Is. This translation of Sri
Caitanya-caritamta represents a contribution of major importance to the BH 116 ANTA
intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man. BOOK TRUST

