
--- Page 1 ---
.
Introduction

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is the principal work on the life and teachings of ri
Krsna Caitanya. ऽ Caitanya is the pioneer of a great social and religious move-
ment which began in India a little less than five hundred years ago and which has
directly and indirectly influenced the subsequent course of religious and phi-
losophical thinking not only in India but in the recent West as well.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu is regarded as a figure of great historical significance.
However, our conventional method of historical analysis —that of seeing a man as
a product of his times —fails here. 67 Caitanya is a personality who transcends the
limited scope of historical settings.

At a time when, in the West, man was directing his explorative spirit toward
studying the structure of the physical universe and circumnavigating the world in
search of new oceans and continents, Sri Krsna Caitanya, in the East, was in-
augurating and masterminding a revolution directed inward, toward a scientific
understanding of the highest knowledge of man’s spiritual nature.

The chief historical sources for the life of $ri Krsna Caitanya are the kadacas (di-
aries) kept by Murari Gupta and Svaripa Damodara Gosvami. Murari Gupta, a
physician and close associate of ri Caitanya’s, recorded extensive notes on the
first twenty-four years of इत Caitanya’s life, culminating in his initiation into the
renounced order, sannyasa. The events of the rest of Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s for-
ty-eight years are recorded in the diary of Svaripa Damodora Cosvami, another of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s intimate associates.

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is divided into three sections called lilas, which literally
means “pastimes” — Adi-lila (the early period), Madhya-lila (the middle period)
and Antya-lila (the final period). The notes of Murari Gupta form the basis of the
Adi-lila, and SvarGpa Damodara’s diary provides the details for the Madhya- and
Antya-lilas.

The first twelve of the seventeen chapters of Adi-lila constitute the preface for
the entire work. By referring to Vedic scriptural evidence, this preface establishes
Sri Caitanya as the avatdra (incarnation) of Krsna (God) for the age of Kali—the
current epoch, beginning five thousand years ago and characterized by material-
ism, hypocrisy and dissension. In these descriptions, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
is identical with Lord Krsna, descends to liberally grant pure love of Cod to the
fallen souls of this degraded age by propagating sarnkirtana—literally,
“congregational glorification of God” —especially by organizing massive public
chanting of the maha-mantra (Great Chant for Deliverance). The esoteric purpose
of Lord Caitanya’s appearance in the world is revealed, his co-avataras and prin-
cipal devotees are described and his teachings are summarized. The remaining
portion of Adi-lila, chapters thirteen through seventeen, briefly recounts his
divine birth and his life until he accepted the renounced order. This includes his
childhood miracles, schooling, marriage and early philosophical confrontations, as
well as his organization of a widespread sankirtana movement and his civil disobe-
dience against the repression of the Mohammedan government.

vi


--- Page 2 ---
$ri Caitanya-caritaimrta

The subject of Madhya-lila, the longest of the three divisions, is a detailed nar-
ration of Lord Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels throughout India as a
renounced mendicant, teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and mystic. Dur-
ing this period of six years, ri Caitanya transmits his teachings to his principal dis-
ciples. He debates and converts many of the most renowned philosophers and
theologians of his time, including Sankarites, Buddhists and Muslims, and incor-
porates their many thousands of followers and disciples into his own burgeoning
numbers. A dramatic account of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's miraculous activities at
the giant Jagannatha Cart Festival in Orissa is also included in this section.

Antya-lila concerns the last eighteen years of $f Caitanya’s manifest presence,
spent in semiseclusion near the famous Jagannatha temple at Jagannatha Puri in
Orissa. During these final years, $ri Caitanya drifted deeper and deeper into
trances of spiritual ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and literary history,
Eastern or Western. ऽग Caitanya’s perpetual and ever-increasing religious
beatitude, graphically described in the eyewitness accounts of Svanipa Damodara
Gosvami, his constant companion during this period, clearly defy the investigative
and descriptive abilities of modern psychologists and phenomenologists of
religious experience.

The author of this great classic, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, born in the year
1507, was a disciple of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, a confidential follower of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Raghunatha dasa, a renowned ascetic saint, heard and
memorized all the activities of Caitanya Mahaprabhu told to him by Svaripa
Damodara. After the passing away of $ri Caitanya and Svarupa Damodara,
Raghunatha dasa, unable to bear the pain of separation from these objects of his
complete devotion, traveled to Vrndavana, intending to commit suicide by jump-
ing from Govardhana Hill. In Vrndavana, however, he encountered Rapa Gosvami
and Sanatana Gosvami, the most confidential disciples of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
They convinced him to give up his plan of suicide and impelled him to reveal to
them the spiritually inspiring events of Lord Caitanya'’s later life. Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Gosvami was also residing in Vrndavana at this time, and Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami endowed him with a full comprehension of the transcendental life of ऽन
Caitanya.

By this time, several biographical works had already been written on the life of
शआ Caitanya by contemporary and near-contemporary scholars and devotees.
These included 97 Caitanya-carita by Murari Gupta, Caitanya-marigala by Locana
dasa Thakura and Caitanya-bhagavata. This latter text, a work by Vindavana dasa
Thakura, who was then considered the principal authority on Sri Caitanya'’s life,
was highly revered. While composing his important work, Vrndavana dasa, fearing
that it would become too voluminous, avoided elaborately describing many of
the events of ऽ Caitanya's life, particulary the later ones. Anxious to hear of these
later pastimes, the devotees of Vindavana requested Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami,
whom they respected as a great saint, to compose a book to narrate these

vii


--- Page 3 ---
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
episodes in detail. Upon this request, and with the permission and blessings of the
Madana-mohana Deity of Vindavana, he began compiling 97 Caitanya-caritamrta,
which, due to its biographical excellence and thorough exposition of Lord
Caitanya's profound philosophy and teachings, is regarded as the most significant
of biographical works on 91 Caitanya.

He commenced work on the text while in his late nineties and in failing health,
as he vividly describes in the text itself: “I have now become too old and dis-
turbed in invalidity. While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot remember any-
thing, nor can | see or hear properly. Still | write, and this is a great wonder.” That
he nevertheless completed, under such debilitating conditions, the greatest liter-
ary gem of medieval India is surely one of the wonders of literary history.

This English translation and commentary is the work of His Divine Grace A. C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of In-
dian religious and philosophical thought. His commentary is based upon two
Bengali commentaries, one by his teacher Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami,
the eminent Vedic scholar who predicted, “The time will come when the people
of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,” and the other by
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta'’s father, Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is himself a disciplic
descendant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he is the first scholar to execute
systematic English translations of the major works of Sri Caitanya's followers. His
consummate Bengali and Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with the
precepts of Sri Krsna Caitanya are a fitting combination that eminently qualifies
him to present this important classic to the English-speaking world. The ease and
clarity with which he expounds upon difficult philosophical concepts lures even a
reader totally unfamiliar with Indian religious tradition into a genuine understand-
ing and appreciation of this profound and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, presented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, represents a contribution of major im-
portance to the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man.

—The Publishers
viii


--- Page 4 ---
CHAPTER 4
Sanatana Gosvami
Visits the Lord at Jagannatha Puri

The Fourth Chapter of Antya-lila is summarized by Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his
Amrta-praviha-bhasya as follows. Srila Sanatana Gosvami came alone from
Mathura to Jagannatha Puri to see Lord Caitanya. Because of bathing in bad water
and not getting enough food every day while traveling on the path through
Jharikhanda Forest, he developed a disease that made his body itch. Suffering
greatly from this itching, he resolved that in the presence of $i Caitanya
Mahaprabhu he would throw himself under the wheel of Jagannatha’s car and in
this way commit suicide.

When Sanatana Gosvami came to Jagannatha Puri, he stayed under the care of
Haridasa Thakura for some time, and 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very happy to
see him. The Lord informed Sanatana Gosvami about the death of his younger
brother, Anupama, who had great faith in the lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra. One
day ঠা Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Sanatana Gosvami, “Your decision to com-
mit suicide is the result of the mode of ignorance. One cannot get love of God
simply by committing suicide. You have already dedicated your life and body to
My service; therefore your body does not belong to you, nor do you have any
right to commit suicide. | have to execute many devotional services through your
body. | want you to preach the cult of devotional service and go to Vrndavana to
excavate the lost holy places.” After having thus spoken, 6 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu left, and Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana Gosvami had many talks
about this subject.

One day Sanatana Gosvami was summoned by $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
wanted him to come to Yame$vara-tota. Sanatana Gosvami reached the Lord
through the path along the beach by the sea. When 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
asked Sanatana Gosvami which way he had come, Sanatana replied, “Many servi-
tors of Lord Jagannatha come and go on the path by the Sirmha-dvara gate of the
Jagannatha temple. Therefore, | did not go by that path, but instead went by the
beach.” Sanatana Gosvami did not realize that there were burning blisters on his
feet because of the heat of the sand. ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu was pleased to
hear about Sanatana Gosvami's great respect for the temple of Lord ऽ Jagan-
natha.

Because his disease produced wet sores on his body, Sanatana Gosvami used to
avoid embracing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but nevertheless the Lord would

1


--- Page 5 ---
2 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lili, Ch. 4
embrace him by force. This made Sanatana Gosvami very unhappy, and therefore
he consulted Jagadananda Pandita about what he should do. Jagadananda ad-
vised him to return to Vrndavana after the cart festival of Jagannatha, but when Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard about this instruction, He chastised Jagadananda
Pandita and reminded him that Sanatana Gosvami was senior to him and also
more learned. 57 Caitanya Mahaprabhu informed Sanatana Gosvami that because
Sanatana was a pure devotee, the Lord was never inconvenienced by his bodily
condition. Because the Lord was a sannyasi, He did not consider one body better
than another. The Lord also informed him that He was maintaining Sanatana and
the other devotees just like a father Therefore the moisture oozing from
Sanatana’s itching skin did not affect the Lord at all. After speaking with Sanatana
Cosvami in this way, the Lord again embraced him, and after this embrace,
Sanatana Gosvami became free from the disease. The Lord ordered Sanatana
Gosvami to stay with Him for that year, and the next year, after seeing the Ratha-
yatra festival, he left Purusottama-ksetra and returned to Vrndavana.

After meeting Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, $ri Rapa Gosvami also returned to
Bengal, where he remained for one year. Whatever money he owned, he dis-
tributed among his relatives, the brahmanas and the temples. In this way he com-
pletely retired and returned to Vrndavana to meet Sanatana Gosvami.

After narrating these incidents, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami has given a list of
the main books of Sanatana Gosvami, Srila Rapa Gosvami and Jiva Gosvami.

TEXT 1
বৃন্দাবনাৎ পুলঃ প্রাপ্তং ল্রীগৌরঃ প্রীসনাতনম্‌ |
দেহুপাতাদবন্‌ ८प्र ९. শুদ্ধং BCT “HTT ॥ > ॥
vrndavanat punah praptam
$ri-gaurah sri-sanatanam
deha-patad avan snehat
Suddharn cakre pariksaya
SYNONYMS

vrndavanat—from Vrndavana; punah—again; praptam —received; $ri-gaurah—
Lord 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sri-sanatanam—Sri Sanatana Gosvami; deha-
patat—from giving up his body; avan—protecting; snehat—by affection; sud-
dham—pure; cakre—made; pariksaya—by examination.


--- Page 6 ---
Text 3] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 3
TRANSLATION
When Sanitana Gosvami returned from Vrndavana, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu affectionately saved him from his determination to commit
suicide. Then, after testing him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu purified his body.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় প্রীচৈতন্ত৷ জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; $ri-caitanya—to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—to Nityananda Prabhu; jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to
Sri Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of
Lord ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Caitanya! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All glories to
Advaitacandra! And all glories to all the devotees of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 3
নীল।চল হৈতে রূপ (रौद যবে (नेन ।
মধুর হৈতে সনাতন নীলাচল আইলা ॥ ৩ ॥
nilacala haite rapa gaude yabe gela
mathura haite sanatana nilacala aila
SYNONYMS
nilacala haite—from Nilacala (Jagannatha Puri); rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami;
gaude—to Bengal; yabe—when; gela—went; mathura haite—from Mathura;
sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; nilacala aila—came to Jagannatha Pur.
TRANSLATION
When Srila Rapa Gosvami returned from Jagannatha Puri to Bengal,
Sanatana Gosvami went from Mathura to Jagannatha Puri to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 7 ---
4 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 4
ঝারিখণ্ড-বনপথে আইলা একেলা एलिन्चा ।
Fg উপবাস, কভু চর্বণ করিয়া ॥ ৪ ॥
jharikhanda-vanapathe aila ekela caliya
kabhu upavasa, kabhu carvana kariya
SYNONYMS
jharikhanda—known as Jharikhanda; vana-pathe—through the path of the
forest of central India; aila—came; ekela—alone; caliya—walking; kabhu—
sometimes; upavasa—fasting; kabhu—sometimes; carvana kariya—chewing.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami walked alone on the path through Jharikhanda Forest in
central India. Sometimes he fasted, and sometimes he would eat.
TEXT 5
ঝারিখণ্ডের জলের দোষে, উপবাস হৈতে |
भेदम कथ হৈল, TA পড়ে খাজুয়াইতে ॥ ৫ ॥
jharikhandera jalera dose, upavasa haite
gatre kandu haila, rasa pade khajuyaite
SYNONYMS
jharikhandera—at the place known as Jharikhanda; jalera—of the water;
dose—by the fault; upavasa haite—by fasting; gatre—on the body; kandu—
itches; haila—there were; rasa—fluid; pade —oozes out; khajuyaite —by itching.
TRANSLATION
Because of bad water in Jharikhanda and because of fasting, Sanatana
Gosvami contracted a disease that made his body itch. Thus he was afflicted
with itching sores from which fluid oozed.
TEXT 6
निर्वह হুইল পথে, করেন বিচার ।
“নীচ-জাতি, দেহ মোর-_ অত্যন্ত অসার ॥ ৬ ॥
nirveda ha-ila pathe, karena vicara
‘nica-jati, deha mora——atyanta asara


--- Page 8 ---
Text 8] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 5
SYNONYMS
nirveda ha-ila—there was disappointment; pathe—on the path; karena
vicara—he considered; nica-jati—of a lower caste; deha mora—my body; atyan-
ta—completely; asara—useless for devotional service.
TRANSLATION
In disappointment, Sanatana Gosvami considered, “| am of a low caste, and
my body is useless for devotional service.
TEXT 7
জগন্নাথে গেলে তার দর্শন না পাইনু ।
প্রভুর দর্শন সদ| করিতে নারিমু॥ ৭ ॥
jagannathe gele tanra darsana na paimu
prabhura darsana sada karite narimu
SYNONYMS
jagannathe —to Jagannatha Purl; gele—when | go; tanra—His; darsana—uvisit;
na paimu—l shall not get; prabhura darsana—seeing Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sada —always; karite—to do; narimu—I shall not be able.
TRANSLATION
‘When | go to Jagannatha Puri, | shall not be able to see Lord Jagannatha,
nor shall | always be able to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 8
মন্দির-নিকটে শুনি Sta বাসা-স্থিতি।
মন্দির-নিকটে যাইতে মোর নাহি শক্তি ॥ ৮ ॥
mandira-nikate Suni tarrra vasa-sthiti
mandira-nikate yaite mora nahi sakti
SYNONYMS
mandira-nikate—near the temple; suni—I hear; tanra—His; vasa-sthiti—resi-
dential place; mandira-nikate—near the temple; yaite—to go; mora—my; nahi
sakti—there is no power.


--- Page 9 ---
6 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
“1 have heard that the residential quarters of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are
near the temple of Jagannatha. But I shall not have the power to go near the
temple.
TEXT 9
জগন্নাথের সেবক ফেরে কার্য-অন্ুরোধে |
ভার স্পর্শ হৈলে মোর হবে অপরাধে ॥ > ॥
jagannathera sevaka phere karya-anurodhe
tanra sparsa haile mora habe aparadhe
SYNONYMS
jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; sevaka—different servants; phere—move
about; karya-anurodhe—because of different duties; tarira—of them; sparsa—
touch; haile—if there 15; mora—my; habe —there will be; aparadhe —offense.
TRANSLATION
“The servants of Lord Jagannatha generally move about tending to their
duties, but if they touch me I shall be an offender.
TEXT 10
তাতে যদি এই দেহ ভাল-স্থানে দিয়ে!
তুঃখ-শাস্তি হয় আর সদগতি পাইয়ে ॥ ১০ ॥
tate yadi ei deha bhala-sthane diye
duhkha-santi haya ara sad-gati paiye
SYNONYMS
tate —therefore; yadi—if; ei—this; deha—body; bhala-sthane—in a good
place; diye—I sacrifice; duhkha-santi—appeasement of unhappiness; haya—
there is; ara—and; sat-gati—good destination; paiye—I get.
TRANSLATION
“Therefore if | sacrifice this body in a good place, my unhappiness will be
mitigated, and I shall attain an exalted destination.


--- Page 10 ---
Text 13] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 7
TEXT 11
জগন্নাথ রথযাত্রায় হইবেন বাহির ।
ভার রথ-চাকায় ছাড়িমু এই শরীর ॥ ১১ ॥
jagannatha ratha-yatraya ha-ibena bahira
tanra ratha-cakaya chadimu ei sarira
SYNONYMS
jagannatha ratha-yatraya—on the occasion of the car festival of Lord Jagan-
natha; ha-ibena bahira—He will be out; tanra—of Him; ratha-cakdya—under the
wheel of the cart; chadimu—I shall give up; ei sarira—this body.
TRANSLATION
‘During the Ratha-yatra festival, when Lord Jagannatha comes out of the
temple, 1 shall give up this body under the wheel of His cart.
TEXT 12
মহাপ্রভুর আগে, আর দেখি” জগন্নাথ ।
রথে দেহ ছাড়িমুঃ- এই পরম-পুকুষার্থ'। ১২ ॥
mahaprabhura age, ara dekhi’ jagannatha
rathe deha chadimu, — ei parama-purusartha’
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura age—in front of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dra—and; dekhi’
jagannatha—after seeing Lord Jagannatha; rathe—under the cart; deha
chadimu—1 shall give up this body; ei—this; parama-purusa-artha—the highest
benediction of life.
TRANSLATION
“After seeing Lord Jagannatha, | shall give up my body under the wheel of
the cart in the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This will be the highest
benediction of my life.”
TEXT 13
এই ऊ' নিশ্চয় করি' নীলাচলে আইল। |
লোকে व्रि হরিদাস-স্থানে উত্তরিল। ॥ ১৩ ॥


--- Page 11 ---
8 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
ei ta’ niscaya kari’ nilacale aila
loke puchi’ haridasa-sthane uttarila
SYNONYMS
ei ta’—in this way; niscaya kari’—ascertaining; nilacale aila—came to Jagan-
natha Purl; loke puchi’—inquiring from people; haridasa-sthane—the place of
Haridasa Thakura; uttarila—approached.
TRANSLATION
Having made this resolution, Sanatana Gosvami went to Nilicala, where he
inquired directions from people and approached the residence of Haridasa
Thakura.
TEXT 14
হরিদাসের কৈলা তেঁহ চরণ वन्न |
জানি” হরিদাস Sica टेकन। আলিঙ্গন ॥ ১৪ ॥
haridasera kaila tenha carana vandana
jani’ haridasa tanre kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
haridasera—of Haridasa Thakura; kaila—did; tenha—he; carana vandana—
worshiping the lotus feet; jani’—knowing; haridasa—Haridasa Thakura; tarre—
him; kaila alingana—embraced.
TRANSLATION
He offered his respects to the lotus feet of Haridasa Thakura, who knew him
and thus embraced him.
TEXT 15
মহাপ্রভু দেখিতে তার উৎকণ্ঠিত मन |
হরিদাস কহে,- “প্রভু আসিবেন এখন” ॥ ১৫ ॥
mahaprabhu dekhite tanra utkanthita mana
haridasa kahe, — ‘prabhu asibena ekhana’
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu—Sri  Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhite—to see; tanra—his;
utkanthita—anxious; mana—mind; haridisa kahe —Haridasa said; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asibena ekhana—will come here.


--- Page 12 ---
Text 17] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 9
TRANSLATION
Sanitana Gosvami was very eager to see the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Therefore Haridasa Thakura said, “The Lord is coming here very
soon.”
TEXT 16
হেনকালে প্রভু 'উপলভ্যোগ' দেখিয়া ।
হরিদাসে মিলিতে আইল ভক্তগণ न्‌ ॥ ১৬ ॥
hena-kale prabhu ‘upala-bhoga’ dekhiya
haridase milite dila bhakta-gana lana
SYNONYMS
hena-kale —at this time; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; upala-bhoga—the
upala-bhoga offering to Lord Jagannatha; dekhiya—after seeing; haridase—
Haridasa; milite —to meet; dila—came; bhakta-gana lana —with other devotees.
TRANSLATION
At that very moment, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, after visiting the temple of
Jagannatha to see the offering of upala-bhoga [morning refreshments], came
with His other devotees to see Haridasa Thakura.
TEXT 17
প্রভু দেখি” दं TT পড়ে দণ্ডবঙ হঞা |
প্রভু আলিঙ্গিল৷ হরিদাসেরে 81431 ॥ ১৭ ॥
prabhu 09/001 00705 pade dandavat hana
prabhu alingila haridasere uthana
SYNONYMS
prabhu dekhi’—seeing Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; durnhe —both of them;
pade—fell down; dandavat hana—flat like rods; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; alingila—embraced; haridasere—Haridasa Thakura; uthana—after
lifting.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they both immediately fell flat like rods to
offer obeisances. The Lord then lifted Haridasa and embraced him.


--- Page 13 ---
10 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 18
হরিদাস কহে,-_ “সনাতন করে ANF)
সনাতনে দেখি” প্রভু टर्न চমৎকার ॥ ১৮ ॥
haridasa (८2/1९, — ‘sanatana kare namaskara’
sanatane dekhi’ prabhu haila camatkara
SYNONYMS
haridasa kahe —Haridasa said; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; kare namaskara—
is offering his obeisances; sanatane dekhi’—seeing Sanatana Gosvami; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; haila camatkara—became very surprised.
TRANSLATION
Haridasa Thakura said to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, “11216 is Sanatana
Gosvami offering his obeisances.” Seeing Sanatana Gosvami, the Lord was
greatly surprised.
TEXT 19
সনাতনে আলিঙ্গিতে প্রভু আগু হৈল। |
পাছে ভাগে সনাতন কহিতে লাগিল ॥ >> ॥
sanatane alingite prabhu 380 haila
pache bhage sanatana kabhite lagila
SYNONYMS
sanatane—Sanatana Cosvami; alingite—to embrace; prabhu—5ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; agu haila—came forward; pache —back; bhage —runs; sanatana—
Sanatana Gosvami; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came forward to embrace him, Sanatana
backed away and spoke as follows.
TEXT 20
“মোরে না ছুইহ, প্রভু, পড়ে। তোমার পায় ।
একে নীচজাতি অধম, আর FAA! গায় ॥” ২০ ॥
“more na chuniha, prabhu, 03907 tomara paya
eke nica-jati adhama, ara kandu-rasa gaya


--- Page 14 ---
Text 22] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 11
SYNONYMS
more —me; na chuniha—please do not touch; prabhu—my Lord; padon—I fall
down; tomdra paya—at Your feet; eke—on one side; nica-jati—of a low caste;
adhama—the lowest of mankind; dra—and; kandu-rasia—a disease of wet, itch-
ing infections; gaya—on the body.
TRANSLATION
‘My Lord, please do not touch me. | fall at Your lotus feet. | am the lowest of
men, having been born of a low caste. Besides that, | have infections on my
body.”
TEXT 21
বলাৎকারে প্রভু তারে আলিঙ্গন কৈল।
কুক্লেদ মহাপ্রভুর Ewe লাগিল ॥ ২১ ॥
balatkare prabhu tanre alingana kaila
kandu-kleda mahaprabhura sri-ange lagila
SYNONYMS
balatkare —by force; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre —him; alingana
kaila—embraced; kandu-kleda—the moisture of weeping itches;
mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $ri—transcendental; ange —body;
lagila—touched.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, embraced Sanatana Gosvami by force.
Thus the moisture oozing from the itching sores touched the transcendental
body of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 22
সব ভক্তগণে প্রভু মিলাইল! ARSC |
সনাতন বৈলা সবার চরণ বন্দনে ॥ ২২ ॥
saba bhakta-gane prabhu milaila sanatane
sanatana kaila sabara carana vandane
SYNONYMS
saba—all; bhakta-gane—devotees; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
milaila—introduced; sandtane—to Sandtana Gosvami; sanitana—Sandtana
Gosvami; kaila—did; sabara—of all of them; carapa vandane —worshiping the
lotus feet.


--- Page 15 ---
12 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
The Lord introduced all the devotees to Sanatana Gosvami, who offered his
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of them all.
TEXT 23
প্রভু नग वजिन। পিণ্ডার উপরে std |
পিণ্ডার তলে afer হরিদাস সনাতন ॥ ২৩ ॥
[01980013803 vasila pindara upare bhakta-gana
pindara tale vasila haridasa sanatana
SYNONYMS
prabhu lada—with $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vasila—sat down; pindara
upare—upon the raised platform; bhakta-gana—all the devotees; pindara tale—
below the platform; vasila—sat down; haridasa sanatana—Haridasa Thakura and
Sanatana Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
The Lord and His devotees sat on a raised platform, and below that sat
Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 24
কুশলবার্তা মহাপ্রভু পুছেন जनांङटन |
তেঁহ কহেন,-_ “পরম Twa দেখিন্ু চরণে” ॥ ২৪ ॥
kusala-varta mahaprabhu puchena sanatane
tenha kahena,— ‘parama mangala dekhinu carane’
SYNONYMS
kusala—of well-being; varta—news; mahaprabhu—>Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
puchena—inquires; sanatane—from Sanatana Gosvami; (27709 kahena—he said;
parama mangala—everything is auspicious; dekhinu carane—!| have seen Your
lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from Sanatana about news of his well-
being. Sanatana replied, ‘Everything is auspicious because | have seen Your
lotus feet.”


--- Page 16 ---
Text 27] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 13
TEXT 25
মথুরার বৈষ্ণব-সবের কুশল Yee ।
সবার কুশল সনাতন জানাইল। ॥ ২৫ ॥
1773100//3/3 vaisnava-sabera kusala puchila
sabara kusala sanatana jandila
SYNONYMS
mathurdara—of Mathura; vaispava-sabera—of all the Vaisnavas; kusala
puchila—inquired about the auspiciousness; sabdra kusala—the well-being of all
of them; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; janailda—informed.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord asked about all the Vaisnavas at Mathura, Sanatana Gosvami
informed Him of their good health and fortune.
TEXT 26
শ্রভু কহে, “RE! রূপ ছিল দশমাস।
ইহ। হৈতে গৌড়ে গেলা, হৈল দিন দশ ॥ ২৬ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “ihan rapa chila dasa-masa
ihan haite gaude gels, haila dina dasa
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; ihan—here; rapa—Rapa
GCosvami; chila—was; dasa-masa—ten months; ihan haite—from here; gaude
gela—has gone to Bengal; haila—it was; dina—days; dasa—ten.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu informed 53113103113 Gosvami, “Srila ९००० Gosvami
was here for ten months. He left for Bengal just ten days ago.
TEXT 27
তোমার ভাই অনুপমের হৈল গঙ্গা-প্রাপ্তি।
ভাল ছিল, রঘুনাথে দৃঢ় তার ভক্তি ॥” ২৭ ॥
tomara bhai anupamera haila ganga-prapti
bhala chila, raghunathe 01009 tara bhakti”


--- Page 17 ---
14 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
tomara bhai—your brother; anupamera—of Anupama; haila—was; ganga-
prapti—death; bhala chila—he was a very good man; raghu-nathe—unto Lord
Raghunatha (Lord Ramacandra); drgdha—firm; tara bhakti—his devotion.
TRANSLATION
‘Your brother Anupama is now dead. He was a very good devotee who had
firm conviction in Raghunatha [Lord Ramacandral.”
TEXT 28
সনাতন কহে,-“নীচ-বংশে মোর জন্ম |
অধম অন্যায় যত, আমার কুলধর্ম ॥ ২৮ ॥
sanatana kahe, — “nica-varhse mora janma
adharma anyaya yata, —amara kula-dharma
SYNONYMS
sandtana kahe —Sanatana Gosvami said; nica-varmse—in a low family; mora
janma—my birth; adharma—irreligion; anyaya—sinful activities; yata—all;
amara—my; kula-dharma—family business.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami said, “| was born in a low family, for my family commits
all kinds of irreligious acts that violate the scriptural injunctions.
TEXT 29
হেন বংশ Fell ছাড়ি' কৈল। অঙ্গী কার।
তোমা র ক্বপায় বংশে মঙ্গল আমার ॥ ২৯ ॥
hena vamsa 80103 00301 kaila angikara
tomara krpaya varnse marigala amara
SYNONYMS
hena—such; vamsa—family; ghrna—hatred; chadi’—giving up; kaila—You
have done; angikara—acceptance; tomara—Your; krpaya—by mercy; vanmse —in
the family; marngala—auspiciousness; amara—my.


--- Page 18 ---
Text 31] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 15
TRANSLATION
“My Lord, without hatred for my family You have accepted me as Your ser-
vant. Only by Your mercy is there good fortune in my family.
TEXT 30
সেই অনুপম-ভাই निकाल হৈতে।
রঘুন।থ-উপাসনা করে দৃঢ় চিত্তে ॥ ৩০ ॥
sei anupama-bhai Sisu-kala haite
raghunatha-upasana kare drdha-citte
SYNONYMS
sei—that; anupama-bhai—brother named Anupama; sisu-kala haite—from the
beginning of childhood; raghu-natha—of Lord Ramacandra; upasanda—worship;
kare —performs; drdha-citte—with great determination.
TRANSLATION
“From the very beginning of his childhood, my younger brother Anupama
was a great devotee of Raghunatha [Lord Ramacandral, and he worshiped Him
with great determination.
TEXT 31
রাত্রি-দিনে রখুনাথের “নাম” আর “ধ্যান”।
রামায়ণ নিরবধি শুনে, করে গান ॥ ৩১ ॥
ratri-dine raghunathera ‘nama’ ara ‘dhyana’
ramdyana niravadhi sune, kare gana
SYNONYMS
ratri-dine—day and night; raghu-nathera—of Lord Ramacandra; nama—holy
name; ara—and; dhyana—meditation; ramayana—the epic about the activities
of Lord Ramacandra known as the Ramayana; niravadhi—continuously; sune—
hears; kare gana—chants.
TRANSLATION
‘’He always chanted the holy name of Raghunatha and meditated upon Him.
He continuously heard about the activities of the Lord from the Ramayana and
chanted about them.


--- Page 19 ---
16 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 32
আমি আর ক্ূপ-_তার জো্যেষ্ট-সহোদর |
আমা-রেঁ।হা-সঙ্গে ode রহে निन्न खन्न ॥ ৩২ ॥
ami ara rapa—-tara jyestha-sahodara
ama-donha-sange tenha rahe nirantara
SYNONYMS
ami—I|; ara—and; rapa—Rapa Cosvami; tara—his; jyestha-sahodara—elder
brothers; ama-dorha—the two of us; sarge —with; tenha—he; rahe —remains;
nirantara—continuously.
TRANSLATION
‘Rapa and I are his elder brothers. He stayed with us continuously.
TEXT 33
আমা-সবা-সঙ্গে FPF, ভাগবত শুনে |
তাহার “Awl কৈন্যু' আমি-তুইজনে ॥ ৩৩ ॥
ama-saba-sange krsna-katha, bhagavata sune
tahara pariksa (८1141) ami-dui-jane
SYNONYMS
ama-saba—all of us; | sange—with; krsna-katha—talks about Lord Krsna;
bhagavata sune —hears Srimad-Bhagavatam; tahara—his; pariksa—examination;
kailun—did; ami-dui-jane —both of us.
TRANSLATION
‘He heard Srimad-Bhagavatam and talks about Lord Krsna with us, and both
of us examined him.
TEXT 34
“শুনহ WS, কৃষ্ণ _ পরম-মধুর |
সৌন্দর্য, মাধুর্য, প্রেম-বিলাস-_ প্রচুর ॥ ৩৪ ॥
Sunaha vallabha, krsna——parama-madhura
saundarya, madhurya, prema-vilasa— pracura


--- Page 20 ---
Text 36] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 17
SYNONYMS
Sunaha—please hear; vallabha—dear Vallabha; krspa—Lord Krsna; parama-
madhura—supremely attractive; saundarya—beauty; madhurya—sweetness;
prema-vilasa—pastimes of love; pracura—without limitation.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Dear Vallabha,’ we said, ‘please hear from us. Lord Krsna is supremely at-
tractive. His beauty, sweetness and pastimes of love are without limit.
TEXT 35
কৃষ্ণভজন কর তুমি আমা-দুহীর ACH |
তিন ভাই একত্র রহিমু কৃষ্ণকথা-রজে ॥” ৩৫ ॥
krsna-bhajana kara tumi ama-dunhara sange
tina bhai ekatra rahimu krsna-katha-range”
SYNONYMS
krsna-bhajana—devotional service to Lord Krsna; kara—engage in; tumi—you;
ama-dunhara—the two of us; saige—with; tina bhai—three brothers; ekatra—in
one place; rahimu—we shall stay; krsna-katha—of the pastimes of Lord Krsna;
range—in enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Engage yourself in devotional service to Krsna with both of us. We three
brothers shall stay together and enjoy discussing the pastimes of Lord Krsna.’
TEXT 36
এইমত বারবার কহি দুইজন ।
আমা-দু'হার গৌরবে কিছু ফিরি” গেল মন ॥ ৩৬ ॥
ei-mata bara-bara kahi dui-jana
ama-dunhara gaurave kichu phiri’ gela mana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; bara-bara—again and again; kahi—we speak; dui-jana—
two persons; ama-dunhara—of us both; gaurave —out of respect; kichu —some-
what; phiri’ gela—turned; mana—mind.


--- Page 21 ---
18 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
“111 this way we both spoke to him again and again, and because of this per-
suasion and his respect for us, his mind turned somewhat toward our instruc-
tions.
TEXT 37
“তো মা-তুইার আজ্ঞা আমি কেমনে লডিঘমু ?
দীক্ষা-মন্ত্র দেহ” কৃষ্ণ-ভজন করিমু ॥” ৩৭ ॥
“toma-dunhara aja ami kemane langhimu?
diksa-mantra deha’ krsna-bhajana karimu”
SYNONYMS
toma—of you; dunhara—of both; ajra—the order; ami—I; kemane—how;
langhimu—shall disobey; diksa—initiation; mantra—mantra; deha’—just give;
krsna-bhajana—devotional service to Krsna; karimu—I shall perform.
TRANSLATION
“‘Vallabha replied, ‘My dear brothers, how can | disobey your orders? Ini-
tiate me into the Krsna mantra so that | may perform devotional service to
Lord Krsna.’
TEXT 38
এত FF রাত্রিকালে করেন চিন্তন |
কেমনে ছাড়িমু রঘুন।থের চরণ ॥ ৩৮ ॥
eta kahi’ ratri-kale karena cintana
kemane chadimu raghunathera carana
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; ratri-kale—at night; karena cintana—began to think;
kemane—how; chadimu—shall | give up; raghu-nathera carana—the lotus feet of
Lord Raghunatha.
TRANSLATION
‘After saying this, at night he began to think, ‘How shall | give up the lotus
feet of Lord Raghunatha?’
TEXT 39
সব রাত্রি ক্রন্দন করি” কৈল জাগরণ |
প্রাতঃকালে আমা-দু“হায় বকৈল নিবেদন ॥ ৩৯ ॥


--- Page 22 ---
Text 41] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 19
saba ratri krandana kari’ kaila jagarana
pratah-kale ama-dunhaya kaila nivedana
SYNONYMS
saba ratri—throughout the whole night; krandana—crying; kari’—doing; kaila
jagarana—remained awake; pratah-kale—in the morning; ama-dunhaya—to the
two of us; kaila—made; nivedana—submission.
TRANSLATION
‘He stayed up all night and cried. In the morning, he came to us and sub-
mitted the following plea.
TEXT 40
“রঘুনাথের गोक्तनेटश् বেচিয়াছে। Tita |
কাড়িতে না পারে” মাথা, न॑। বড় ব্যথা ॥ ৪০ ॥
‘raghunathera pada-padme ৮০০৮৭০0০0০1) matha
kadite na paron matha, pana bada vyatha
SYNONYMS
raghu-nathera—of Lord Ramacandra; pada-padme—at the lotus feet;
veciyachon matha—I have sold my head; kadite—to take away; na parori—I am
unable; matha—the head; pana—I get; bada vyatha—too much pain.
TRANSLATION
^“ “1 have sold my head at the lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra. | cannot take it
away. That would be too painful for me.
TEXT 41
কৃপা করি” মোরে আজ্ঞা দেহ” দুইজন ।
জন্মে-জন্মযে CIC রঘুন।থের চরণ ॥ ৪১ ॥
10003 kari’ more aja deha’ dui-jana
janme-janme sevor raghunathera carana
SYNONYMS
krpa kari’—being merciful; more —unto me; ajia deha’—give the order; dui-
jana—both of you; janme-janme—life after life; sevori—let me serve; raghu-
nathera carana—the lotus feet of Lord Raghunatha.


--- Page 23 ---
20 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
^ ‘Both of you please be merciful to me and order me in such a way so that
life after life | may serve the lotus feet of Lord Raghunatha.
TEXT 42
রঘুনাথের পাদপদ্ম ছাড়ান না যায়।
ছাড়িবার মন হৈলে व्योम ফার্টি' যায় ॥ ৪২ ॥
raghunathera pada-padma chadana na yaya
chadibara mana haile prana phati’ yaya’
SYNONYMS
raghu-nathera—of Lord Raghunatha; pada-padma—Ilotus feet; chadana na
ydya—it is impossible to give up; chadibara—of giving up; mana haile—when |
think; prana—my heart; phati’ yaya—breaks.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘It is impossible for me to give up the lotus feet of Lord Raghunatha.
When | even think of giving them up, my heart breaks.’
TEXT 43
তবে আমি-দু'হে তারে আলিঙ্গন tog ।
“সাধু: ছৃঢ়ভক্তি তোমার” কহি” emia ॥ ৪৩ ॥
tabe ami-dunhe tare alingana kailurn
‘sadhu, drdha-bhakti tomara’——kahi’ prasarnsilun
SYNONYMS
tabe —at that time; ami-dunhe—both of us; tare—him; alingana kailun—
embraced; sadhu—very good; drdha—very determined; bhakti—devotion;
tomara—your; kahi’—saying; prasarnsilun—we praised.
TRANSLATION
‘“Upon hearing this, both of us embraced him and encouraged him by say-
ing, ‘You are a great saintly devotee, for your determination in devotional ser-
vice is fixed.’ In this way we both praised him.


--- Page 24 ---
Text 46] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 21
TEXT 44
যে বংশের উপরে তোমার হয় FAC ।
সকল মঙ্গল তাহে খণ্ডে সব ক্লেশ ॥ 88 ॥
ye vamsera upare tomara haya krpa-lesa
sakala mangala tahe khande saba klesa’
SYNONYMS
ye varsera—which family; upare —upon; tomara—Your; haya—there is; krpa-
lesa—little mercy; sakala mangala—all auspiciousness; tahe—on that; khande —
are destroyed; saba—all; klesa—miserable conditions.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Lord, the family upon which You bestow even a little mercy is al-
ways fortunate, for such mercy makes all miseries disappear.”
TEXT 45
(भोजाय কহেন, --“এইমত মুত্রারি-ওপ্ত |
পূর্বে আমি পরীক্ষিল্যু"' তার এই রীত ॥ ৪৫ ॥
gosani kahena,— “ei-mata murari-gupta
parve ami pariksilun tara ei rita
SYNONYMS
gosani kahena—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; ei-mata—in this way;
murari-gupta—Murari Gupta; parve—formerly; ami—I; pariksilun—examined;
tara—of him; ei—this; rita—manner.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “There was a similar incident concerning
Murari Gupta. Formerly | examined him, and his determination was similar.
TEXT 46
সেই ভক্ত धक, যে না ছাড়ে প্রভুর চরণ |
সেই প্রভু ধন্য, যে না ছাড়ে নিজ-জন ॥ ৪৬ ॥
sei bhakta dhanya, ye na chade prabhura carana
sei prabhu dhanya, ye na chade nija-jana


--- Page 25 ---
22 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
sei bhakta—that devotee; dhanya—glorious; ye—who; na—not; chade—
gives up; prabhura carana—the lotus feet of the Lord; sei prabhu—that Per-
sonality of Godhead; dhanya—glorious; ye—who; na—not; chade—gives up;
nija-jana—His servant.
TRANSLATION
“Glorious is that devotee who does not give up the shelter of his Lord, and
glorious is that Lord who does not abandon His servant.
TEXT 47
তুদৈবে সেবক যদি যায় खच ITH |
সেই ঠাকুর धर তারে চুলে ধরি” আনে ॥ ৪৭ ॥
durdaive sevaka yadi yaya anya sthane
sei thakura dhanya tare cule dhari’ ane
SYNONYMS
durdaive —by chance; sevaka—the servant; yadi—if; yaya—goes; anya
sthane —to another place; sei thakura—that master; dhanya—glorified; tare—
him; cule—by the hair; dhari’—capturing; ane—brings back.
TRANSLATION
“If by chance a servant falls down and goes somewhere else, glorious is that
master who captures him and brings him back by the hair.
TEXT 48
ভাল হৈল, তোমার BF হৈল আগমনে |
এই ঘরে রহ ইই। হরিদাস-সনে ॥ 8४. ॥
bhala haila, tomara ihan haila agamane
ei ghare raha ihan haridasa-sane
SYNONYMS
bhala haila—it was very good; tomdara—your; ihan—here; haila—there was;
agamane—arrival; ei ghare—in this room; raha—remain; ihan—here; haridasa-
sane—with Haridasa Thakura.


--- Page 26 ---
Text 50] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 23
TRANSLATION
“It is very good that you have arrived here. Now stay in this room with
Haridasa Thakura.
TEXT 49
কৃষ্ণভক্তিরসে 7 टङ পরম প্রধান।
FRAA আস্বাদন কর, লহ কৃষ্ণনাম ॥” ৪৯ ॥
krsna-bhakti-rase dunhe parama pradhana
krsna-rasa asvadana kara, laha krspna-nama’’
SYNONYMS
krsna—of Lord Krsna; bhakti-rase—in the transcendental mellow of devotional
service; dunhe—both of you; parama pradhana—highly expert; krspa-rasa—the
transcendental taste of Krsna; asvadana—relishing; kara—do; laha krsna-nama—
chanting the holy name of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Both of you are expert in understanding the mellows of Lord Krsna’s devo-
tional service. Therefore you should both continue relishing the taste for such
activities and chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.”
TEXT 50
এত বলি” মহাপ্রভু छिद एनिन। |
গোবিম্দ-দ্বারায় दङ्‌ প্রসাদ পাঠাইলা ॥ ৫০ ॥
eta bali” mahaprabhu uthiya calila
govinda-dvaraya dunhe prasada pathaila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; uthiya calila—
got up and left; govinda-dvardaya—through Govinda; durihe—to both of them;
(2125508 pathaila—sent prasada.
TRANSLATION
Having said this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got up and left, and through
Govinda He sent prasada for them to eat.


--- Page 27 ---
24 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 51
এইমত সনাতন রহে প্রভু-স্থানে।
জগন্নাথের চক্র দেখি' করেন প্রণামে ॥ ৫১ ॥
ei-mata sanatana rahe prabhu-sthane
jagannathera cakra dekhi’ karena praname
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; sandtana—Sanatana Gosvami; rahe —remains; prabhu-
sthane—under the care of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jagannathera—of Lord
Jagannatha; cakra—the wheel on the top of the temple; dekhi’—seeing; karena
praname —offers respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sanitana Gosvami stayed under the care of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He would see the wheel on the pinnacle of the Jagannatha
temple and offer respectful obeisances.
TEXT 52
প্রভু আসি” প্রতিদিন মিলেন দুইজনে |
ইষ্টগোষ্ট, কৃষ্ণকথা কহে কতক্ষণে ॥ ৫২ ॥
prabhu asi’ prati-dina milena dui-jane
ista-gosthi, krsna-katha kahe kata-ksane
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asi’—coming; prati-dina—every day;
milena dui-jane—meets both of them; ista-gosthi—discussion; krsna-katha—
topics of Lord Krsna; kahe —speaks; kata-ksane—for some time.
TRANSLATION
Every day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would go there to meet these two stal-
wart devotees and discuss topics of Krsna with them for some time.
TEXT 53
দিব্য প্রসাদ পায় নিত; জগন্ন।থ-মন্দিরে ।
তাহ खानि" নিত্য অবশ্য দেন দেঁহাকারে ॥ ৫৩ ॥


--- Page 28 ---
Text 55] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 25
divya prasdda pdya nitya jagannatha-mandire
taha ani’ nitya avasya dena dornhakare
SYNONYMS
divya—first-class; prasada—prasiada; paya—gets; nitya—daily; jagannatha-
mandire —at the temple of Lord Jagannatha; taha ani’—bringing that; nitya—
daily; avasya—certainly; dena—delivers; dorhakare—to both of them.
TRANSLATION
The offerings of prasada in the temple of Lord Jagannatha were of the high-
est quality. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would bring this prasada and deliver it to
both devotees.
TEXT 54
একদ্বিন আসি' প্রভু टरं टोट মিলিলা।
ARTETA আচন্বিতে কহিতে न।ज्रिना। ॥ ৫৪ ॥
eka-dina asi’ prabhu dunhare milila
sanatane acambite kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; asi’—coming; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dunhare
milila—met both of them; sanatane —unto Sanatana Gosvami; dcambite —all of a
sudden; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
One day when the Lord came to meet them, He suddenly began speaking to
Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 55
“সনাতন, দেহত্যাগে কৃষ্ণ যদি পাইয়ে |
কোটি-দেহ ক্ষণেকে তবে ছাড়িতে পারিয়ে ॥ ৫৫ ॥
“sanatana, deha-tyage krsna yadi paiye
koti-deha ksaneke tabe chadite pariye
SYNONYMS
sanatana—My dear Sanatana; deha-tyage—by committing suicide; krsna—
Lord Krsna; yadi—if; paiye —I can get; koti-deha—miillions of bodies; ksaneke —
in a moment; tabe—then;chadite pariye —I can give up.


--- Page 29 ---
26 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
“My dear Sanatana,’” He said, “if ॥ could attain Krsna by committing
suicide, | would certainly give up millions of bodies without a moment's
hesitation.
TEXT 56
দেহত্যাগে कर না পাই, পাইয়ে ख्कटन |
কৃষ্ণপ্রাপ্ত্যের উপায় কোন নাহি “ভক্তি” বিনে ॥ ৫৬॥
deha-tyage krsna na pai, paiye bhajane
krsna-praptyera upaya kona nahi ‘bhakti’ vine
SYNONYMS
deha-tyage—by giving up the body; krsna—Lord Krsna; na pai—I do not get;
paiye—| get; bhajane—by devotional service; krsna-praptyera—to get the
shelter of Krsna; upaya—means; kona—any; nahi—there is not; bhakti vine —
without devotional service.
TRANSLATION
‘You should know that one cannot attain Krsna simply by giving up the
body. Krsna is attainable by devotional service. There is no other means to at-
tain Him.
TEXT 57
দেহত্যাগাদি যত, সব--তমো-ধর্ম ।
তমো-রজো-ধর্শে কৃষ্ণের না পাইয়ে মর্ম ॥ ৫৭ ॥
deha-tyagadi yata, saba—— tamo-dharma
tamo-rajo-dharme krsnera na paiye marma
SYNONYMS
deha-tyaga-adi—beginning with giving up the material body; yata—as many;
saba—all; tamah-dharma—performed under the mode of ignorance; tamah-rajah-
dharme—by remaining in the modes of ignorance and passion; krsnera—of Lord
Krsna; na paiye—I| cannot attain; marma—the truth.
TRANSLATION
“Acts such as suicide are influenced by the mode of ignorance, and in ig-
norance and passion one cannot understand who Krsna is.


--- Page 30 ---
Text 59] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 27
TEXT 58
“ভক্তি” विन। कट কভু নহে “প্রেমোদয়”।
প্রেম বিন৷ কৃষ্ণপ্রাপ্ি অন্য! হৈতে নয় ॥ ৫৮ ॥
‘bhakti’ vina krsne kabhu nahe ‘premodaya’
prema vina krsna-prapti anya haite naya
SYNONYMS
bhakti vina—without devotional service; krspe—unto Krsna; kabhu—at any
time; nahe—is not; prema-udaya—development of dormant love for Krsna;
prema vina—without love of Krsna; krspa-prapti—attaining Krsna; anya—any-
thing else; haite—from; naya—is not possible.
TRANSLATION
‘Unless one discharges devotional service, one cannot awaken one’s dor-
mant love for Krsna, and there is no means to attain Him other than awakening
that dormant love.
TEXT 59
न সাধয়তি মাং যোগো ন সাংখ্যং ধর্ম উদ্ধব।
न স্বাধ্যায়স্তপস্ত্যাগে৷ যথা ভক্তির্মমোজিতা ॥ ৫৯ ॥
na sadhayati marin yogo
na sankhyarih dharma uddhava
na svadhyayas tapas tyago
yatha bhaktir mamorjita
SYNONYMS
na—never; sadhayati —causes to remain satisfied; mam—Me; yogah—the pro-
cess of control; na—nor; sankhyam—the process of gaining philosophical knowl-
edge about the Absolute Truth; dharmah—such an occupation; uddhava—My
dear Uddhava; na—nor; svadhydyah—study of the Vedas; tapah—austerities;
tyagah —renunciation, acceptance of sannydsa, or charity; yatha—as much as;
bhaktih—devotional service; mama—unto Me; arjita—developed.
TRANSLATION
[The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, said:] * ‘My dear Uddhava,
neither through astanga-yoga [the mystic yoga system to control the senses],
nor through impersonal monism or an analytical study of the Absolute Truth,


--- Page 31 ---
28 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
nor through study of the Vedas, nor through austerities, charity or acceptance
of sannyasa can one satisfy Me as much as by developing unalloyed devotional
service unto Me.’
PURPORT
This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.14.20).
TEXT 60
দেহত্যাগাদ্ি তমো-ধর্ম-পাতক-কারণ।
সাধক না পায় তাতে ক্বষ্চের চরণ ॥ ৬০ ॥
deha-tyagadi tamo-dharma——pataka-karana
sadhaka na paya tate krsnera carana
SYNONYMS
deha-tyaga—giving up the material body by suicide; adi—beginning with;
tamah-dharma—on the platform of the mode of ignorance; pataka-karana—
cause of sinful activities; sadhaka—the devotee; na paya—does not get; tite —by
that; krsnera carana—the lotus feet of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘Measures like suicide are causes for sin. A devotee never achieves shelter
at Krsna's lotus feet by such actions.
TEXT 61
প্রেমী ভক্ত বিয়োগে চাহে দেহ ছাড়িতে।
প্রেমে কৃষ্ণ মিলে, সেহ না পারে মরিতে ॥ ৬১ ॥
premi bhakta viyoge ০৪05 deha chadite
preme krsna mile, seha na pare marite
SYNONYMS
premi bhakta—a devotee attached to Krsna by love; viyoge—in separation;
cahe —wants; deha chadite —to give up the body; preme —by such ecstatic love;
krsna mile —one meets Krsna; seha—such a devotee; na pare marite—cannot die.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Because of feelings of separation from Krsna, an exalted devotee some-
times wants to give up his life. By such ecstatic love, however, one attains the
audience of Krsna, and at that time he cannot give up his body.


--- Page 32 ---
Text 63] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 29
TEXT 62
গাড়ান্ুরাগের বিয়োগ না যায় जश्न |
তাতে TFA ATR SHAT মরণ ॥ ৬২ ॥
gadhanuragera viyoga na yaya sahana
tate anuragi vanche apana marana
SYNONYMS
gadha-anuragera—of one who has deep attachment; viyoga—separation; na—
not; ydya sahana—tolerated; tate —therefore; anuragi—a deeply attached devo-
tee; vafiche —desires; dpana marana—death of himself.
TRANSLATION
“One who is deeply in love with Krsna cannot tolerate separation from the
Lord. Therefore such a devotee always desires his own death.
TEXT 63
যন্যাজ্ঘিপক্কজরজঃস্নপনৎ মহাস্তো
বাঞ্ছদ্ধ্যমাপতিরিবাজ্মতমোধপহত্যৈ |
য্যগ্কুজাক্ষ ন AST SRA
জঙহ্যামন্থন্‌ ত্রতক্বশাঞ্চতজন্মভিঃ JI ॥ vo ॥
yasyanghri-parikaja-rajah-snapanarin mahanto
vanchanty uma-patir ivatma-tamo ‘pahatyai
yarhy ambujaksa na labheya bhavat-prasadari
jahyam asan vrata-krsan chata-janmabhih syat
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; anghri—of feet; panka-ja—lotus; rajah—in the dust;
snapanam—bathing; mahantah—great personalities; vanchanti—desire; uma-
patih—Lord Siva; iva—like; atma—personal; tamah—ignorance; apahatyai—to
drive away; yarhi—when; ambuja-aksa—O lotus-eyed one; na labheya—I do not
get; bhavat-prasadam—Your mercy; jahyam—I shall give up; asan—life; vrata-
krsan—reduced by observing vows; sata-janmabhih—by hundreds of births;
syat—if it is possible.
TRANSLATION
*^ (0 lotus-eyed one, great personalities like Lord Siva desire to bathe in the
dust of Your lotus feet to drive away ignorance. If | do not get the mercy of


--- Page 33 ---
30 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
Your Lordship, | shall observe vows to reduce the duration of my life, and thus
॥ shall give up bodies for hundreds of births if it is possible to get Your mercy
in that way.’
PURPORT
This verse was spoken by Rukminidevi in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.52.43). Ruk-
minidevi, the daughter of King Bhismaka, had heard about Krsna's transcendental
attributes, and thus she desired to get Krsna as her husband. Unfortunately, her
elder brother Rukmi was envious of Krsna and therefore wanted her to be offered
to Sisupala. When Rukmini became aware of this, she was greatly aggrieved. Thus
she wrote Krsna a confidential letter, which was presented and read to Him by a
brahmana messenger. This verse appeared in that letter.
TEXT 64
নিঞ্চাঙ্গ নস্বদধরাষৃতপৃরকেণ
হাসাবলোক-কলগীতজ-হৃচ্ছয়াগ্নিম্‌ ৷
নো চেদ্বয়ং বিরহজাগ্ন_পযুক্তদেহ।
ধ্যানেন যাম পদয়োঃ পদবীং ATA তে ॥ ৬৪ ॥
siAcanga nas tvad-adharamrta-ptrakena
hasavaloka-kala-gitaja-hrc-chayagnim
no ced vayarn virahajagny-upayukta-deha
dhyanena yama padayoh padavim sakhe te
SYNONYMS
siica—just sprinkle water; anga—O my dear Krsna; nah —our; tvat—Your;
adhara—of the lips; amrta—of nectar; parakepa—by the stream; hasa—smile;
avaloka—glancing; kala—melodious; gita—speaking; ja—produced by; hrt—in
the heart; saya—resting; agnim—upon the fire; no cet—if not; vayam—we;
viraha—from separation; ja—produced; agni—by the fire; upayukta—con-
sumed; dehah—whose bodies; dhyanena—by meditation; yama—shall go;
padayoh —of the lotus feet; padavim—to the site; sakhe —O my dear friend; te —
Your.
TRANSLATION
‘““‘O dear Krsna, by Your smiling glances and melodious talk, You have
awakened a fire of lusty desire in our hearts. Now You should extinguish that
fire with a stream of nectar from Your lips by kissing us. Kindly do this. Other-


--- Page 34 ---
Text 66] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 31
wise, dear friend, the fire within our hearts will burn our bodies to ashes be-
cause of separation from You. Thus by meditation we shall claim shelter at
Your lotus feet.” ^“
PURPORT
This verse (Bhag. 10.29.35) was spoken by the gopis when they were attracted
by the vibration of Krsna’s flute in the moonlight of autumn. All of them, being
maddened, came to Krsna, but to increase their ecstatic love, Krsna gave them
moral instructions to return home. The gopis did not care for these instructions.
They wanted to be kissed by Krsna, for they had come there with lusty desires to
dance with Him.
TEXT 65
কুবুদ্ধি ছাড়িয়৷ কর व्थवम- कोन |
Bate, পাবে তবে কৃষ্ণের চরণ ॥ ৬৫ ॥
kubuddhi chadiya kara sravana-kirtana
acirat pabe tabe krsnera carana
SYNONYMS
ku-buddhi—intelligence not favorable to discharging devotional service;
chadiya—giving up; kara—just do; S$ravana-kirtana—hearing and chanting;
acirat—very soon; pabe—you will get; tabe—then; krspera carana—the lotus
feet of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Sanatana Gosvami, “Give up all your nonsen-
sical desires, for they are unfavorable for getting shelter at the lotus feet of
Krsna. Engage yourself in chanting and hearing. Then you will soon achieve
the shelter of Krsna without a doubt.
TEXT 66
নীচ-জাতি নহে ক্বষ্ণতজনে অযোগ্য |
সংকুল-বিপ্র নহে खुकटनव्र যোগ্য ॥ ৬৬ ॥
nica-jati nahe krsna-bhajane ayogya
sat-kula-vipra nahe bhajanera yogya


--- Page 35 ---
32 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
nica-jati—a lowborn person; nahe—is not; krsna-bhajane—in discharging
devotional service; ayogya—unfit; sat-kula-vipra—a brahmana born in a very
respectable aristocratic family; nahe—is not; bhajanera yogya—fit for discharging
devotional service.
TRANSLATION
“A person born in a low family is not unfit for discharging devotional ser-
vice to Lord Krsna, nor is one fit for devotional service simply because he is
born in an aristocratic family of brahmanas.
TEXT 67
যেই ভজে সেই বড়, অন্তক্ত-_হীন, ছার।
কৃষ্ণতজনে নাহি জাতি-কুল।দি-বিচার ॥ ৬৭ ॥
yei bhaje sei 8903, abhakta——hina, chara
krsna-bhajane nahi jati-kuladi-vicara
SYNONYMS
yei bhaje—anyone who takes to devotional service; sei—he; bada—exalted;
abhakta—nondevotee; hina chara—most condemned and abominable; krsna-
bhajane—in discharging devotional service; nahi—there is not; jati—caste;
kula—family; adi—and so on; vicara—consideration of.
TRANSLATION
‘Anyone who takes to devotional service is exalted, whereas a nondevotee
is always condemned and abominable. Therefore in the discharge of devo-
tional service to the Lord, there is no consideration of the status of one's
family.
TEXT 68
দীনেরে অধিক wal করে ভগবালন্‌।
FTA, পণ্ডিত, ধনীর বড় অভিমান ॥ ৬৮ ॥
dinere adhika daya kare bhagavan
kulina, pandita, dhanira bada abhimana
SYNONYMS
dinere—to the humble; adhika—more; daya—mercy; kare—shows;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kulina—aristocratic; pandita—
learned scholar; dhanira—of rich man; bada abhimana—great pride.


--- Page 36 ---
Text 69] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 33
TRANSLATION
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is always favorable to the
humble and meek, but aristocrats, learned scholars and the wealthy are always
proud of their positions.
TEXT 69
विथ किख. গুণযুতাদরবিন্দনাভ-
পাদারবিন্দবিমুখাৎ শ্বপচং বরিষ্টম্‌ ।
मच्छ তদপিতমনোবচনেহিতার্থ-
প্রাণং পুনাতি म কুলং ন তু ভুরিমানঃ ॥ ৬৯ ॥
viprad dvisad-guna-yutad aravinda-nabha-
pdadaravinda-vimukhat svapacarh varistham
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacane ‘hitartha-
pranarh pundti sa kularh na tu bharimanah
SYNONYMS
viprat—than a brahmana; dvi-sat-guna-yutat—who has twelve brahminical
qualifications; aravinda-nabha—of Lord Visnu, who has a lotuslike navel; pada-
aravinda —unto the lotus feet; vimukhat—than a person bereft of devotion; sva-
pacam—a candala, or person accustomed to eating dogs; varistham—more
glorified; manye—I think; tat-arpita—dedicated unto Him; manah—mind;
vacane —words; ahita—activities; artha—wealth; pranam—life; punati —purifies;
sah—he; kulam—his family; na tu—but not; bhari-manah—a brahmana proud of
possessing such qualities.
TRANSLATION
’**One may be born in a brahmana family and have all twelve brahminical
qualities, but if in spite of being thus qualified he is not devoted to the lotus
feet of Lord Krsna, who has a navel shaped like a lotus, he is not as good as a
candala who has dedicated his mind, words, activities, wealth and life to the
service of the Lord. Simply to take birth in a brahmana family or to have
brahminical qualities is not sufficient. One must be a pure devotee of the
Lord. Thus if a §vapaca, or candala, is a devotee, he delivers not only himself
but his entire family as well, whereas a brahmana who is not a devotee but
simply has brahminical qualifications cannot even purify himself, what to
speak of his family.’
PURPORT
This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.9.9).


--- Page 37 ---
34 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 70
ভজমনের মধ্যে শ্রেষ্ঠ नवविध ভক্তি |
‘FRAT, ‘FR’ দিতে ধরে মহাশক্তি ॥ ৭০ ॥
bhajanera madhye srestha nava-vidha bhakti
‘krsna-prema’, ‘krsna’ dite dhare maha-sakti
SYNONYMS
bhajanera madhye —in executing devotional service; srestha—the best; nava-
vidha bhakti —the nine prescribed methods of devotional service; krsna-prema—
ecstatic love of Krsna; krspa—and Krsna; dite—to deliver; dhare —possess; maha-
Sakti —great potency.
TRANSLATION
“Among the ways of executing devotional service, the nine prescribed
methods are the best, for these processes have great potency to deliver Krsna
and ecstatic love for Him.
PURPORT
The nine kinds of devotional service are mentioned in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(7.5.23):
Sravaparm kirtanam vispoh
smaranarih pada-sevanam
arcanam vandanam dasyam
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
These nine are hearing, chanting, remembering Krsna, offering service to Krsna's
lotus feet, offering worship in the temple, offering prayers, working as a servant,
making friendship with Krsna and unreservedly surrendering to Krsna. These nine
processes of devotional service can grant one Krsna and ecstatic love for Him. In
the beginning one has to discharge devotional service according to regulative
principles, but gradually, as devotional service becomes one’s life and soul, one
achieves the most exalted position of ecstatic love for Krsna. Ultimately, Krsna is
the goal of life. One need not have taken birth in an aristocratic brahmana family
to attain the lotus feet of Krsna, nor is a person born in a low family unfit to
achieve Krsna's lotus feet. In Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7) Devahati says to
Kapiladeva:
aho bata $va-paco “(০ gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam


--- Page 38 ---
Text 71] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 35
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmanacur nama grnanti ye te
“O my Lord, even a person born in a low family of dog-eaters is glorious if he al-
ways chants the holy name of the Lord. Such a person has already performed all
types of austerities, penances and Vedic sacrifices, has already bathed in the
sacred rivers, and has also studied all the Vedic literature. Thus he has become an
exalted personality.” Similarly, Kuntidevi says to Lord Krsna:
janmaisvarya-sruta-sribhir
edhamana-madah puman
naivarhaty abhidhaturi vai
tvam akificana-gocaram
“A person who is proud of his birth, opulence, knowledge and beauty cannot
achieve Your lotus feet. You are available only to the humble and meek, not to the
proud.” (Bhag. 1.8.26.)
TEXT 71
তার মধ্যে ALCS नांय-ज्लोन |
নিরপরাধে নাম লৈলে পায় প্রেমধন ॥ ৭১ ॥
tara madhye sarva-srestha nama-sankirtana
niraparadhe nama laile paya prema-dhana
SYNONYMS
tara madhye —of the nine different types of devotional service; sarva-srestha—
the most important of all; nama-sankirtana—chanting of the holy name of the
Lord; niraparadhe—without offenses; nama laile—if one chants the holy name;
paya—he gets; prema-dhana—the most valuable ecstatic love of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
“Of the nine processes of devotional service, the most important is to al-
ways chant the holy name of the Lord. If one does so, avoiding the ten kinds of
offenses, one very easily obtains the most valuable love of Godhead.”
PURPORT
Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhu gives the following directions in his Bhakti-sandarbha
(270):
iyam ca kirtanakhya bhaktir bhagavato dravya-jati-guna-kriyabhir dina-janaika-
visayapara-karuna-mayiti Sruti-puranadi-visrutih. ataeva kalau svabhavata evatidinesu


--- Page 39 ---
36 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
lokesu avirbhdya tan anayasénaiva tat tad yuga-gata-maha-sadhananam sarvam eva
phalarh dadana sa krtarthayati. yata eva tayaiva kalau bhagavato visesatas ca santoso
bhavati.
“Chanting the holy name is the chief means of attaining love of Godhead. This
chanting or devotional service does not depend on any paraphernalia, nor on
one’s having taken birth in a good family. By humility and meekness one attracts
the attention of Krsna. That is the verdict of all the Vedas. Therefore if one be-
comes very humble and meek, he can easily attain the lotus feet of Krsna in this
age of Kali. That is the fulfillment of all great sacrifices, penances and austerities
because when one achieves ecstatic love of Godhead, he attains the complete
perfection of life. Therefore whatever one does in executing devotional service
must be accompanied with the chanting of the holy name of the Lord.” The
chanting of the holy name of Krsna—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare —has been praised by Srila
Rapa Gosvami in his Namastaka (verse 1):
nikhila-sruti-mauli-ratna-mala-
dyuti-nirajita-pada-parkajanta
ayi mukta-kulair upasyamanari
paritas tvarm hari-nama sarsrayami
“O Hari-nama! The tips of the toes of Your lotus feet are constantly being
worshiped by the glowing radiance emanating from the string of gems known as
the Upanisads, the crown jewels of all the Vedas. You are eternally adored by
liberated souls such as Narada and Sukadeva. O Hari-nama! | take complete
shelter of You.”
Similarly, Srila Sanatana Gosvami has praised the chanting of the holy name as
follows in his Brhad-bhagavatamrta (Chapter One, verse 9):
jayati jayati namananda-raparh murdarer
viramita-nija-dharma-dhyana-pajadi-yatnam
kathamapi sakrd-attarh muktidar praninam yat
paramam amrtam ekar jivanarn bhasanam me
“All glories, all glories to the all-blissful holy name of Sri Krsna, which causes the
devotee to give up all conventional religious duties, meditation and worship.
When somehow or other uttered even once by a living entity, the holy name
awards him liberation. The holy name of Krsna is the highest nectar. It is my very
life and my only treasure.”
In Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.11) Sukadeva Gosvami says:
etan nirvidyamananam
icchatam akuto-bhayam
yoginarh nrpa nirpitarn
harer namanukirtanam


--- Page 40 ---
Text 73] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 37
"O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord after the ways of the
great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for all, including
those who are free from all material desires, those who are desirous of all material
enjoyment, and those who are self-satisfied by dint of transcendental knowl-
edge.”
Similarly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said in His Siksastaka (3):
trnad api sunicena
taror api sahisnuna
amanina manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih
“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking
oneself lower than the straw in the street. One should be more tolerant than a
tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to offer all respect to others. In
such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.”
Regarding the ten offenses in chanting the holy name, one may refer to the Adi-
lila, Chapter Eight, verse 24.
TEXT 72
এত निः সনাতনের टेन চমৎকার |
প্রভুরে न। ভায় মোর মরণ-বিচার ॥ ৭২ ॥
eta suni’ sanatanera haila camatkara
prabhure na bhaya mora marana-vicara
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; sanatanera—of Sanatana Gosvami; haila camatkara—
there was astonishment; prabhure na bhaya—Sii Caitanya Mahaprabhu does not
approve; mora—my; marana-vicara—decision to commit suicide.
TRANSLATION
After hearing this, Sanatana Gosvami was exceedingly astonished. He could
understand, “My decision to commit suicide has not been greatly appreciated
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.”
TEXT 73
Ades মহাপ্রভু निटसथिन। মোরে ।
প্রভুর চরণ ধরি” কহেন কাহারে ॥ ৭৩ ॥
sarvajia mahaprabhu nisedhila more
prabhura carana dhari’ kahena tanhare


--- Page 41 ---
38 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
sarva-jiia—who knows everything; mahaprabhu —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
nisedhila—has forbidden; more—me; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
carana—the feet; dhari’—touching; kahena tanhare—began to speak to Him.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami concluded, “Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who knows
everything —past, present and future —has forbidden me to commit suicide.”
He then fell down, touching the lotus feet of the Lord, and spoke to Him as
follows.
TEXT 74
“সর্বজ্ঞ, FAG তুমি ঈশ্বর স্বতন্ত্র ৷
যৈছে নাচাও, তৈছে ना छि, যেন কাষ্টযন্ত্র ॥ ৭৪ ॥
“sarvajia, krpalu tumi isvara svatantra
yaiche nacao, taiche naci, —yena kastha-yantra
SYNONYMS
sarva-jia—all-knowing; krpalu—merciful; tumi—You; isvara—the Supreme
Lord; svatantra—independent; yaiche—as; nacao—You make to dance; taiche—
50; naci—I| dance; yena—as if; kastha-yantra—an instrument of wood.
TRANSLATION
‘My Lord, You are the omniscient, merciful, independent Supreme Lord.
Exactly like an instrument of wood, | dance as You make me do so.
TEXT 75
নীচ, অধম, गोमन्न Ife পামর-স্বভাব |
মোরে জিয়াইলে তোমার কিবা হবে लार ?” ৭৫ ॥
nica, adhama, pamara mui pamara-svabhava
more jiydile tomara kiba habe labha?”
SYNONYMS
nica—lowborn; adhama—lowest; pamara—condemned; muii—I; pamara-
svabhava—naturally sinful; more jiyaile—if You save me; tomara—Your; kiba—
what; habe —will be; labha—profit.


--- Page 42 ---
Text 771 Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 39
TRANSLATION
“I am lowborn. Indeed, | am the lowest. | am condemned, for | have all the
characteristics of a sinful man. If You keep me alive, what will be the profit?’’
TEXT 76
প্রভু কহে,-_ “তোমার দেহ মোর নিজ-ধন।
তুমি মোরে করিয়াছ আত্মসমর্পণ ॥ ৭৬ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “tomara deha mora nija-dhana
tumi more kariyacha atma-samarpana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says; tomara deha—your body;
mora—My; nija-dhana—personal property; tumi—you; more—to Me;
kariyacha—have done; atma-samarpana—complete surrender.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “Your body is My property. You have
already surrendered unto Me. Therefore you no longer have any claim to your
body.
TEXT 77
পরের लव তুমি কেনে চাহ বিনাশিতে ?
ধর্নাধর্ম বিচার কিবা না পার করিতে ? ৭৭ ॥
parera dravya tumi kene caha vinasite?
dharmadharma vicara kiba na para karite?
SYNONYMS
parera dravya—another's property; tumi—you; kene—why; caha—want;
vinasite—to destroy; dharma-adharma—what is pious and what is impious;
vicara—consideration; kiba—why; na—not; para—you can; karite—do.
TRANSLATION
“Why should you want to destroy another's property? Can't you consider
what is right and wrong?


--- Page 43 ---
40 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 78
তোমার শরীর-_মোর প্রধান ANH |
এ শরীরে ANY আমি वद्‌ প্রয়োজন av ॥
tomadra sarira——mora pradhana ‘sadhana’
€ sarire sadhimu ami bahu prayojana
SYNONYMS
tomara sarira—your body; mora—My; pradhana—chief; sadhana—instrument;
€ sarire—by this body; sadhimu—shall carry out; ami—I|; bahu—many; prayo-
jana—necessities.
TRANSLATION
“Your body is My principal instrument for executing many necessary func-
tions. By your body 1 shall carry out many tasks.
TEXT 79
ভক্ত-ভক্তি-কৃষ্ণণ্রেম-তস্ত্বের নিধার |
বৈষ্ণবের কৃত্য, আর বৈষ্ণব-আচার ॥ ৭৯ ॥
bhakta-bhakti-krsnaprema-tattvera nidhara
vaisnavera krtya, ara vaispava-acara
SYNONYMS
bhakta—devotee; bhakti—devotional service; krsna-prema—love of Krsna;
tattvera—of the truth of; nidhara—ascertainment; vaisnavera krtya—duties of a
Vaisnava; dra—and; vaispava-acara —characteristics of a Vaisnava.
TRANSLATION
‘“You shall have to ascertain the basic principles of a devotee, devotional
service, love of Godhead, Vaisnava duties, and Vaisnava characteristics.
TEXT 80
কৃষ্ণভক্তি, কৃষ্ণপ্রেমসেবা-প্রবর্তন |
লুপ্ততীর্থ-উদ্ধার, আর বৈরাগ্য-শিক্ষণ ॥ ৮০ ॥
krsna-bhakti, krsnaprema-seva-pravartana
lupta-tirtha-uddhara, ara vairagya-siksana


--- Page 44 ---
Text 81] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 41
SYNONYMS
krsna-bhakti—devotional service to Krsna; krsna-prema—Ilove of Krsna; 5০৮3 —
service; pravartana—establishment of; lupta-tirtha—the lost places of pilgrimage;
uddhara—excavating; dra—and; vairagya-siksana—instruction on the renounced
order of life.
TRANSLATION
“You will also have to explain Krsna’s devotional service, establish centers
for cultivation of love of Krsna, excavate lost places of pilgrimage and teach
people how to adopt the renounced order.
TEXT 81
নিজ-প্রিয়স্থান মোর - মথুরা-বৃন্দাবন |
তাহ এত ধর্ম চাহি করিতে ত্রচারণ ॥ ৮১ ॥
nija-priya-sthana mora—— mathura-vrndavana
tahan eta dharma cahi karite pracarana
SYNONYMS
nija—own; priya-sthana—very dear place; mora—My; mathura-vrndavana—
Mathura and Vindavana; tahan—there; eta—so many; dharma—activities;
cahi—I| want; karite—to do; pracarana—preaching.
TRANSLATION
‘“Mathura-Vrndavana is My own very dear abode. | want to do many things
there to preach Krsna consciousness.
PURPORT
Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to accomplish many purposes through the
exegetical endeavors of Srila Sanatana Gosvami. First Sanatana Gosvami compiled
the book called Brhad-bhagavatamrta to teach people how to become devotees,
execute devotional service and attain love of Krsna. Second, he compiled the
Hari-bhakti-vilasa, wherein he collected authoritative statements from scriptural
injunctions regarding how a Vaisnava should behave. Only by the endeavors of
Sri Sanatana Gosvami were all the lost places of pilgrimage in the Vindavana area
excavated. He established Madana-mohana, the first Deity in the Vrndavana area,
and by his personal behavior he taught how one should act in the renounced
order, completely devoted to the service of the Lord. By his personal example, he
taught people how to stay in Vindavana to execute devotional service. The prin-
cipal mission of $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu was to preach Krsna consciousness.


--- Page 45 ---
42 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
Mathura and Vindavana are the abodes of Lord Krsna. Therefore these two places
are very dear to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and He wanted to develop their glories
through Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 82
মাতার আজ্ঞায় আমি वजि নীলাচলে |
তাহা शर्म শিখাইতে নাহি নিজ-বলে ॥ ৮২ ॥
matara 3/83%3 ami vasi nilacale
tahan ‘dharma’ sikhaite nahi nija-bale
SYNONYMS
matara—of My mother; djiaya—by the order; ami—I; vasi—reside; nilacale—
at Jagannatha Puri; tahan—in Mathura and Vrndavana; dharma Sikhaite—to teach
religious principles; nahi—not; nija-bale—within My ability.
TRANSLATION
‘By the order of My mother | am sitting here in Jagannatha Puri; therefore, |
cannot go to Mathura-Vrndavana to teach people how to live there according
to religious principles.
TEXT 83
এত जव কর্ম আমি যে-দেহে করিমু।
তাহা ছাড়িতে চাহ তুমি, কেমনে সহিমু ?” ৮৩ ॥
eta saba karma ami ye-dehe karimu
taha chadite caha tumi, kemane sahimu?”’
SYNONYMS
eta saba—all this; karma—work; ami—I; ye-dehe —by which body; karimu—
will do; taha—that; chadite—to give up; caha tumi—you want; kemane —how;
sahimu —shall | tolerate.
TRANSLATION
1 have to do all this work through your body, but you want to give it up.
How can | tolerate this?’
TEXT 84
তবে সনাতন FLT, “তোমাকে নমস্কারে |
তোমার গম্ভীর হৃদয় কে বুঝিতে পারে ? ৮৪ ॥


--- Page 46 ---
Text 86] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 43
tabe sanatana kahe, — "tomake namaskare
tomara gambhira hrdaya ke bujhite pare?
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; sanatana kahe—Sanatana Gosvami said; tomake
namaskare—| offer my respectful obeisances unto You; tomdra—Your;
gambhira—deep; hrdaya—heart; ke —who; bujhite pare —can understand.
TRANSLATION
At that time Sanatana Gosvami said to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, “I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You. No one can understand the deep ideas You
plan within Your heart.
TEXT 85
কাণ্ঠের পুতলী যেন FCF AGIA |
আপনে না জানে, পুতলী কিৰ৷ নাচে গায় | ৮৫ ॥
kasthera putali yena kuhake nacaya
apane na jane, putali kiba nace gaya!
SYNONYMS
kasthera putali—a doll made of wood; yena—as; kuhake nacaya—magician
causes to dance; apane —personally; na jane —does not know; putali—the doll;
kiba—how; nace —dances; gaya—sings.
TRANSLATION
“A wooden doll chants and dances according to the direction of a magician
but does not know how he is dancing and singing.
TEXT 86
ষারে বৈছে নাচাও, সে তৈছে করে ASCH |
বৈছে নাচে, (FA নাচায়, CAT নাহি জানে ॥” ৮৬ ॥
ydre yaiche 73030, se taiche kare nartane
kaiche nace, keba nacaya, seha nahi jane”
SYNONYMS
ydre—whomever; yaiche—as; nacao—You cause to dance; se—that person;
taiche—so; kare nartane—dances; kaiche —how; niace—he dances; keba
nacaya—who causes to dance; seha—he; nahi jane—does not know.


--- Page 47 ---
44 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
‘“My dear Lord, as You cause one to dance, he dances accordingly, but how
he dances and who is causing him to dance he does not know.”
TEXT 87
হরিদাসে কহে প্রভু, “न, হরিদাস ।
পরের खवः ই'হো চাহেন করিতে বিনাশ ॥ va ॥
haridase kahe prabhu, — 80773, haridasa
parera dravya inho cahena karite vinasa
SYNONYMS
haridase—Haridasa Thakura; kahe prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ad-
dressed; Suna haridasa—My dear Haridasa, please hear; parera dravya—another’s
property; inho—this Sanatana Gosvami; cahena—wants; Kkarite vinasa—to
destroy.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu then said to Haridasa Thakura, “My dear
Haridasa, please hear Me. This gentleman wants to destroy another's prop-
erty.
TEXT 88
পরের স্থাপ্য खंव) কেহ না খায়, বিলায়।
নিষেধিহ ই“হারে,- যেন न। করে TDI ॥” ৮৮ ॥
parera sthapya dravya keha na khaya, vilaya
nisedhiha inhare, —yena na kare anyaya”
SYNONYMS
parera—by another; sthapya—to be kept; dravya—property; keha na khaya—
no one uses; vilaya—distributes; nisedhiha—forbid; inhare—him; yena—so; na
kare—he does not do; anyaya—something unlawful.
TRANSLATION
“One who is entrusted with another's property does not distribute it or use
it for his own purposes. Therefore, tell him not to do such an unlawful thing.”


--- Page 48 ---
Text 91] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 45
TEXT 89
হরিদাস Fee, — “मिथ অভিমান fF)
তোমার গম্ভীর হৃদয় বুঝিতে না পারি ॥ ৮৯ ॥
haridasa kahe, — “mithya abhimana kari
tomara gambhira hrdaya bujhite na pari
SYNONYMS
haridasa kahe —Haridasa Thakura replied; mithya —falsely; abhimana kari—are
proud; tomara—Your; gambhira—deep; hrdaya—intention; bujhite na pari—we
cannot understand.
TRANSLATION
Haridasa Thakura replied, “We are falsely proud of our capabilities. Ac-
tually we cannot understand Your deep intentions.
TEXT 90
কোন্‌ FR কার্য তুমি কর (कान्‌ দ্বারে ।
তুমি না ছানাইলে কেহ জানিতে না পারে ॥ ৯০ ॥
kon kon karya tumi kara kon dvare
tumi na janaile keha janite na pare
SYNONYMS
kon kon karya—what work; tumi—You; kara—perform; kon dvare—through
which; tumi na janaile—unless You make to understand; keha janite na pare —no
one can understand.
TRANSLATION
“Unless You inform us, we cannot understand what Your purpose is nor
what You want to do through whom.
TEXT 91
এতাদৃশ তুমি ই"হারে করিয়াছ অঙ্গীকার ।
এত (मोरोगए ইহ না হয় কাহার ॥” >> ॥
etadrsa tumi inhare kariyacha angikara
eta saubhagya ihan na haya kahara”


--- Page 49 ---
46 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
etadrsa—such; tumi—You; inhare—him; kariyacha angikara—have accepted;
eta saubhagya—so much fortune; iharn—upon him; na haya—is not possible;
kahara—by anyone else.
TRANSLATION
“My dear sir, since You, a great personality, have accepted Sanatana
Gosvami, he is greatly fortunate; no one can be as fortunate as he.”
TEXT 92
তবে মহাপ্রভু করি' তু'হারে আলিঙ্গন ।
भ्मधच्छ' করিতে উঠি' করিল গমন ॥ ৯২ ॥
tabe mahaprabhu kari’ dunhare alingana
‘madhyahna’ karite uthi’ karila gamana
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kari’ dunihare alingana—
embracing both of them; madhya-ahna karite—to perform His noon duties;
uthi’—getting up; karila gamana—left.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced both Haridasa Thikura and
Sanatana Gosvami and then got up and left to perform His noon duties.
TEXT 93
সনাতনে কহে হরিদাস করি” আলিঙ্গন |
“তোমার ভাগ্যের সীমা না যায় कथन्‌ ॥ >< ॥
sanatane kahe haridasa kari’ alingana
“tomdara bhagyera sima na yaya kathana
SYNONYMS
sanatane—unto Sanatana Cosvami; kahe —said; haridasa—Haridasa Thakura;
kari’ alingana—embracing; tomara—your; bhagyera—of fortune; sima—limita-
tion; na yaya kathana—cannot be described.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Sanatana,”” Haridasa Thakura said, embracing him, ‘no one can
find the limits of your good fortune.


--- Page 50 ---
Text 96] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 47
TEXT 94
তোমার দেহ কহেন প্রভু ‘cata निज -धनः |
তোমা-সম ভাগ্যবান্‌ নাহি কোন জন ॥ ৯৪ ॥
tomara deha kahena prabhu ‘mora nija-dhana’
toma-sama bhagyavan nahi kona jana
SYNONYMS
toméra deha—your body; kahena prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says;
mora—My; nija-dhana—personal property; toma-sama—like you; bhagyavan—
fortunate person; nahi—there is not; kona jana—anyone.
TRANSLATION
“$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has accepted your body as His own property.
Therefore no one can equal you in good fortune.
TEXT 95
নিজ-দেহে যে কার্য না পারেন করিতে |
সে কার্য করাইবে তোমা, সেহ মথুরাতে ॥ ৯৫ ॥
nija-dehe ye karya na parena karite
se karya karaibe toma, seha mathurate
SYNONYMS
nija-dehe —with His personal body; ye karya—whatever business; na parena
karite—He cannot do; se karya—those things; karaibe —He will cause to do;
toma—you; seha—that; mathurate —in Mathura.
TRANSLATION
“What Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu cannot do with His personal body He
wants to do through you, and He wants to do it in Mathura.
TEXT 96
যে করাইতে চাহে ঈশ্বর, সেই সিদ্ধ হয়।
তোমার সৌভাগ্য এই কহিল! নিশ্চয় ॥ ৯৬ ॥
ye karaite ০306 isvara, sei siddha haya
tomara saubhagya ei kahilun niscaya


--- Page 51 ---
48 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
ye—whatever; karaite—to cause to do; cahe—wants; iSvara—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sei—that; siddha—successful; haya—is; tomara
saubhagya—your great fortune; ei—this; kahilun—I have spoken; niscaya—my
considered opinion.
TRANSLATION
“Whatever the Supreme Personality of Godhead wants us to do will suc-
cessfully be accomplished. This is your great fortune. That is my mature opin-
ion.
TEXT 97
ভক্তিসিদ্ধান্ত, ग छ-साएोज्-निरनञच |
তোমা-দ্বারে করাইবেন, JAG আশয় ॥ ৯৭ ॥
bhakti-siddhanta, sastra-acara-nirnaya
toma-dvare karaibena, bujhilun asaya
SYNONYMS
bhakti-siddhanta—conclusive decision in devotional service; sastra—according
to the scriptural injunctions; acara-nirpaya—ascertainment of behavior; toma-
dvare—by you; karaibena—will cause to be done; bujhilun—I can understand;
asaya—His desire.
TRANSLATION
“I can understand from the words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that He
wants you to write books about the conclusive decision of devotional service
and about the regulative principles ascertained from the revealed scriptures.
TEXT 98
আমার এই দেহ প্রভুর কার্যে ন৷ লাগিল।
ভারত-ভুমিতে wf এই দেহ ব্যর্থ হৈল ॥ ৯৮ ॥
amara ei deha prabhura karye na lagila
bharata-bhamite janmi’ ei deha vyartha haila
SYNONYMS
amafa—my; ei—this; deha—body; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
karye—in the service; na lagila—could not be used; bharata-bhamite—in the
land of India; janmi’—taking birth; ei deha—this body; vyartha haila—has be-
come useless.


--- Page 52 ---
Text 99] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 49
TRANSLATION
“My body could not be used in the service of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Therefore although it took birth in the land of India, this body has been use-
less.”
PURPORT
For a further explanation of the importance of Bharata-bhaimi, one may refer to
the Adi-lila (9.41) and also Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.19.19-27). The special feature
of a birth in India is that a person born in India becomes automatically God con-
scious. In every part of India, and especially in the holy places of pilgrimage, even
an ordinary uneducated man is inclined toward Krsna consciousness, and as soon
as he sees a Krsna conscious person, he offers obeisances. India has many sacred
rivers like the Ganges, Yamuna, Narmada, Kaveri and Krsna, and simply by bathing
in these rivers people are liberated and become Krsna conscious. 6 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu therefore says:
bharata-bhamite haila manusya-janma yara
janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
One who has taken birth in the land of Bharata-bhami, India, should take full ad-
vantage of his birth. He should become completely well versed in the knowledge
of the Vedas and spiritual culture and should distribute the experience of Krsna
consciousness all over the world. People all over the world are madly engaging in
sense gratification and in this way spoiling their human lives, with the risk that in
the next life they may become animals or less. Human society should be saved
from such a risky civilization and the danger of animalism by awakening to God
consciousness, Krsna consciousness. The Krsna consciousness movement has
been started for this purpose. Therefore unbiased men of the highest echelon
should study the principles of the Krsna consciousness movement and fully
cooperate with this movement to save human society.
TEXT 99
সনাতন কহে,-__“তোমা-সম (FA আছে আন |
মহাপ্রভুর গণে তুমি-_মহাতভাগ্যবান্‌ ! >> ॥
sandtana kahe, — “toma-sama keba ache ana
mahaprabhura gane tumi——maha-bhagyavan!
SYNONYMS
sanatana kahe—Sanatana Gosvami said; toma-sama—like you; keba—who;
ache—is there; dna—another; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;


--- Page 53 ---
50 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
gane—among the personal associates; tumi—you; maha-bhagyavan—the most
fortunate.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami replied, “0 Haridasa Thakura, who is equal to you? You
are one of the associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore you are the
most fortunate.
TEXT 100
অবতার-কার্থ প্রভুর--নাম-প্রচারে।
সেই নিজ-কার্থ প্রভু করেন তোমার দ্বারে ॥ ১০০ ॥
avatara-karya prabhura—— nama-pracare
sei nija-karya prabhu karena tomara dvare
SYNONYMS
avatara-kirya—mission of the incarnation; prabhura—of = ऽत = Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nama-pracare —spreading the importance of the holy name of the
Lord; sei—that; nija-karya—mission of His life; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena—performs; tomara dvare—through you.
TRANSLATION
“The mission of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for which He has descended as
an incarnation, is to spread the importance of chanting the holy name of the
Lord. Now instead of personally doing so, He is spreading it through you.
TEXT 101
প্রত্যহ কর তিনলক্ষ নাম-সন্ধীর্তন।
সবার আগে কর নামের মহিমা কথন ॥ ১০১ ॥
pratyaha kara tina-laksa nama-sankirtana
sabara age kara namera mahima kathana
SYNONYMS
prati-aha—daily; kara—you do; tina-laksa—300,000; nama-sarnkirtana—
chanting of the holy name; sabara age—before everyone; kara—you do;
namera—of the holy name; mahima kathana—discussion of the glories.


--- Page 54 ---
Text 103] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 51
TRANSLATION
“‘My dear sir, you are chanting the holy name 300,000 times daily and in-
forming everyone of the importance of such chanting.
TEXT 102
আপনে আচরে কেহ, না করে প্রচার |
BIA করেন কেহ, না করেন আচার ॥ So ॥
apane acare keha, na kare pracara
pracara karena keha, na karena acara
SYNONYMS
apane—personally; acare—behaves; keha—someone; na kare pracara—does
not do preaching work; pracara karena—does preaching work; keha—someone;
na karena dcara—does not behave strictly according to the principles.
TRANSLATION
“Some behave very well but do not preach the cult of Krsna consciousness,
whereas others preach but do not behave properly.
TEXT 103
“আচার”, ‘ABI, नोटमन्न করহ “তুই” कार्य |
ভুমি- সর্ব-গুরু, তুমি জগতের আর্য 1” ১০৩ ॥
‘acara’, ‘pracara’, ——namera karaha ‘dui’ karya
tumi——sarva-guru, tumi jagatera arya
SYNONYMS
acara pracara—behaving well and preaching; namera—of the holy name;
karaha—you do; dui—two; karya—works; tumi—you; sarva-guru—everyone's
spiritual master; tumi—you; jagatera arya—the most advanced devotee within
this world.
TRANSLATION
“You simultaneously perform both duties in relation to the holy name by
your personal behavior and by your preaching. Therefore you are the spiritual
master of the entire world, for you are the most advanced devotee in the
world.”


--- Page 55 ---
52 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
PURPORT
Sanatana Gosvami clearly defines herein the bona fide spiritual master of the
world. The qualifications expressed in this connection are that one must act ac-
cording to the scriptural injunctions and at the same time preach. One who does
50 is a bona fide spiritual master. Haridasa Thakura was the ideal spiritual master
because he regularly chanted on his beads a prescribed number of times. Indeed,
he was chanting the holy name of the Lord 300,000 times a day. Similarly, the
members of the Krsna consciousness movement chant a minimum of sixteen
rounds a day, which can be done without difficulty, and at the same time they
must preach the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu according to the gospel of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is. One who does so is quite fit to become a spiritual master
for the entire world.
TEXT 104
এইমত দুইজন নানা-কথা-রঙ্গে 1
কৃষ্ণকথা আস্বাদয় রহি” একসঙ্গে ॥ ১০৪ ॥
ei-mata dui-jana nana-katha-range
krspa-katha asvadaya rahi’ eka-sange
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; dui-jana—two persons; nana-katha-range—in the happi-
ness of discussing various subject matters; krspa-katha—the subject matter of
Krsna; asvadaya—they taste; rahi’ eka-sarige—keeping together.
TRANSLATION
In this way the two of them passed their time discussing subjects concern-
ing Krsna. Thus they enjoyed life together.
TEXT 105
साला काटन खान] जव গোৌড়ের ভক্তগণ।
পুর্ববৎ टेकल। ACA FATIH] দরশন ॥ ১০৫ ॥
yatra-kale aila saba gaudera bhakta-gana
parvavat kaila sabe ratha-yatra darasana
SYNONYMS
yatra-kale—during the time of the car festival; aila—came; saba—all; gaudera
bhakta-gana—devotees from Bengal; pirvavat—like previously; kaila—did;
sabe —all; ratha-yatra darasana—uvisiting the car festival of Lord Jagannatha.


--- Page 56 ---
Text 107] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 53
TRANSLATION
During the time of Ratha-yatra, all the devotees arrived from Bengal to visit
the cart festival as they had done previously.
TEXT 106
রথ-অগ্রে প্রভু তৈছে করিলা AEA |
দেখি চমৎকার হৈল সনাতনের মন ॥ ১০৬ ॥
ratha-agre prabhu taiche karila nartana
dekhi camatkara haila sanatanera mana
SYNONYMS
ratha-agre—in front of the car; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; taiche —
similarly; karila nartana—performed dancing; dekhi—seeing; camatkara haila—
was astonished; sanatanera mana—the mind of Sanatana.
TRANSLATION
During the Ratha-yatra festival, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again danced
before the cart of Jagannatha. When Sanatana Gosvami saw this, his mind was
astonished.
TEXT 107
বর্ষার চারি-মাস Afzal जव নিজ ভক্তগণে ।
সবা-সঙ্গে প্রভু মিলাইল৷ সনাতনে ॥ ১০৭ ॥
varsara cari-madsa rahila saba nija bhakta-gane
saba-sanige prabhu milaila sanatane
SYNONYMS
varsara cari-masa—the four months of the rainy season; rahild—remained;
saba—all; nija bhakta-gane—the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; saba-
sange—with all of them; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; milaila—in-
troduced; sanatane —Sanatana.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's devotees from Bengal stayed at Jagannatha Puri during the four
months of the rainy season, and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced
Sanatana Gosvami to them all.


--- Page 57 ---
54 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXTS 108-110
অদ্বৈত, নিত্যানন্দ, প্রীবাস, বক্রেশ্বর।
বাসুদেব, মুর।রি, রাঘব, দামোদর ॥ ১০৮ ॥
পুব্রী, ভারতী, স্বরূপ, পণ্ডিত-গদ।ধর |
সার্বভৌম, রাম।নন্দ, FATIH, শঙ্কর ॥ ১০৯ ॥
কাশীশ্বর, গো বিম্দাদি যত ভক্তগণ |
সবা-সনে সনাতনের TABS] মিলন ॥ ১১০ ॥
advaita, nityananda, srivasa, vakresvara
vasudeva, murari, raghava, damodara
puri, bharati, svarapa, pandita-gadadhara
sarvabhauma, ramananda, jagadananda, sarikara
kasisvara, govindadi yata bhakta-gana
saba-sane sanatanera karaila milana
SYNONYMS
advaita—Advaita; nityananda—Nityananda; srivasa—Srivasa; vakresvara—
Vakresvara; vasudeva—Vasudeva; murari—Murari; raghava—Raghava;
damodara—Damodara; puri—Puri; bharati—Bharati; svargpa—Svaripa; pandita-
gadadhara—Gadadhara Pandita; sarvabhauma —Sarvabhauma; ramananda—
Ramananda; jagadananda—)agadananda; sankara—Sankara; kasisvara—
Kasisvara; govinda—Govinda; adi—and others; yata bhakta-gana—all the devo-
tees; saba-sane—with all of them; sanatanera—of Sanatana Gosvami; karaila
milana—made introduction.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced Sanatana Gosvami to these and other
selected devotees: Advaita, Nityananda, Srivasa, Vakre$vara, Vasudeva,
Murari, Raghava, Damodara, Paramananda Puri, Brahmananda Bharati,
५५०१०0०० Damodara, Gadadhara Pandita, Sarvabhauma, Ramananda, Jagada-
nanda, Sankara, Kasisvara and Govinda.
TEXT 111
যথাযোগ্য করাইল সবার চরণ aa |
ভারে করাইল। সবার রূপার ভাজন ॥ ১১১ ॥


--- Page 58 ---
Text 113] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 55
yatha-yogya karaila sabara carana vandana
tanre karaila sabara krpara bhajana
SYNONYMS
yatha-yogya—as it is fit; kardila—caused to perform; sabara—of all; carana
vandana—worshiping the lotus feet; tanre —him; karaila —made; sabara—of all of
them; krpara bhajana—object of mercy.
TRANSLATION
The Lord asked Sanatana Gosvami to offer obeisances to all the devotees in
a way that befitted each one. Thus He introduced Sanatana Gosvami to them
all, just to make him an object of their mercy.
TEXT 112
जत्‌ ट, পাণ্ডিত্যে, সবার প্রিয়-_-সন৷তন।
যথাযোগ্য কৃপা-মৈত্রী-গৌরব-ভাজন ॥ ১১২ ॥
sad-gune, panditye, sabara priya—sanatana
yatha-yogya krpa-maitri-gaurava-bhajana
SYNONYMS
sat-gupne—in good qualities; panditye—in learning; sabara priya—dear to
everyone; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; yatha-yogya—as it is suitable; krpa—
mercy; maitri—friendship; gaurava—honor; bhajana—worthy of being offered.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami was dear to everyone because of his exalted qualities in
learning. Suitably, therefore, they bestowed upon him mercy, friendship
and honor.
TEXT 113
जकन বৈষ্ণব যবে গৌড়দেশে (नेन) ।
সনাতন মহাপ্রভুর চরণে AFF ॥ ১১৩ ॥
sakala vaispava yabe gauda-dese gela
sanatana mahaprabhura carane rahila
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; vaispava—devotees; yabe —when; gauda-dese—to Bengal; gela—
returned; sandtana—Sanatana Gosvami; mahdprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; carane rahila—stayed at the lotus feet.


--- Page 59 ---
56 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
When all the other devotees returned to Bengal after the Ratha-yatra
festival, Sanatana Gosvami stayed under the care of the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 114
দেোলযাত্রা-আদি প্রভুর সঙ্গেতে (यिन |
দিনে-দিমনে প্রভু-সঙ্গে আনন্দ বাড়িল ॥ ১১৪ ॥
dola-yatra-adi prabhura sangete dekhila
dine-dine prabhu-sarige ananda badila
SYNONYMS
dola-yatra—the festival of Dola-yatra; adi—and others; prabhura sangete—
with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhila—he saw; dine-dine—day after day;
prabhu-sange—in the association of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ananda badila—
his pleasure increased.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami observed the Dola-yatra ceremony with Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this way, his pleasure increased in the company of
the Lord.
TEXT 115
পূর্বে বৈশাখ-মাসে সনাতন যবে আইলা ।
জ্যৈষ্ঠমাসে প্রভু ভারে পরীক্ষ। করিল। ॥ ১১৫ ॥
parve vaisakha-mase sanatana yabe aila
jyaistha-mase prabhu tarre pariksa karila
SYNONYMS
parve—formerly; vaisakha-mase—during the month of April-May; sanatana—
Sanatana Gosvami; yabe—when; aila—came; jyaistha-mase—in the month of
May-June; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarire—him; pariksa karilda—
tested.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami had come to see $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha
Puri during the month of April-May, and during the month of May-June Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu tested him.


--- Page 60 ---
Text 118] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 57
TEXT 116
জ্যৈষ্ঠমাসে প্রভু যমেশ্বর-টোটা আইলা ।
ভক্ত-অনুরোধে S11 ভিক্ষা! যে করিলা ॥ ১১৬ ॥
1১:৭/5[003-77356 prabhu yamesvara-tota aila
bhakta-anurodhe tahan bhiksa ye karila
SYNONYMS
jyaistha-mase—during the month of May-June; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; yamesvara-toti—to the garden of Lord Siva, Yamesvara; ild—
came; bhak ta-anurodhe —on the request of the devotees; tahar—there; bhiksa
ye karila—accepted prasada.
TRANSLATION
In that month of May-June, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to the garden of
Yamesvara [Lord Sival and accepted prasada there at the request of the devo-
tees.
TEXT 117
মধ্যাহ্-ভিক্ষাকালে সনাতনে বোলাইল |
প্রভু বোলাইল, ভার আনন্দ বাড়িল ॥ ১১৭ ॥
madhyahna-bhiksa-kale sanatane bolaila
prabhu bolaila, tanra ananda badila
SYNONYMS
madhya-ahna—at noon; bhiksa-kale—at the time for lunch; sanatane—for
Sanatana Gosvami; bolaila—He called; prabhu bolaili—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu called; tanra—his; ananda—happiness; badila—increased.
TRANSLATION
At noon, when it was time for lunch, the Lord called for Sanatana Gosvami,
whose happiness increased because of the call.
TEXT 118
মধ্যাহ্ছে সমুদ্র-বাল্দু হঞাছে অগ্ি-সম।
সেইপথে সনাতন করিলা গমন ॥ ১১৮ ॥
madhyahne samudra-valu haiache agni-sama
sei-pathe sanatana karila gamana


--- Page 61 ---
58 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
madhya-ahne—at noon; samudra-valu—the sand by the sea; hafiache—was;
agni-sama—as hot as fire; sei-pathe—by that path; sanatana—Sanatana
Cosvami; karila gamana—came.
TRANSLATION
At noon the sand on the beach was as hot as fire, but Sanatana Gosvami
came by that path.
TEXT 119
প্রভু বোলাঞাছে”, -এই আনন্দিত बटन |
তপ্ত-বাল্দুকাতে 2H পোড়ে, তাহা নাহি জানে sven
‘prabhu bolariache’, — ei anandita mane
tapta-valukate pa pode, taha nahi jane
SYNONYMS
prabhu bolanache —the Lord has called; ei—this; anandita—happy; mane —
within the mind; tapta-valukate—on the hot sand; pa—feet; pode —were burn-
ing; taha—that; nahi jane —could not understand.
TRANSLATION
Overwhelmed by joy at being called by the Lord, Sanatana Gosvami did not
feel that his feet were burning in the hot sand.
TEXT 120
দুই পায়ে (फा ख] হৈল, তবু গেলা প্রভুস্থানে |
ভিক্ষা করি” মহাপ্রভু করিয়াছেন বিশ্রামে ॥ ১২০ ॥
dui paye phoska haila, tabu gela prabhu-sthane
bhiksa kari’ mahaprabhu kariyachena visrame
SYNONYMS
dui pdye—on the two soles; phoska haila—there were blisters; tabu —still;
gela—came; prabhu-sthane—to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhiksa kari’—after
finishing lunch; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kariyachena visrame—
was taking rest.


--- Page 62 ---
Text 122] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 59
TRANSLATION
Although the soles of both his feet were blistered because of the heat, he
nevertheless went to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There he found that the Lord,
having taken His lunch, was resting.
TEXT 121
ভিজ্কা-অবশেষ-পাত্র গোবিন্দ তারে wal ।
প্রসাদ नाग] সনাতন প্রভুপাশে আইলা ॥ ১২১ ॥
bhiksa-avasesa-patra govinda tare dila
prasada pana sanatana prabhu-pase aila
SYNONYMS
bhiksa-avasesa—of remnants of the food; patra—plate; govinda—Govinda;
tare dili—delivered to him; prasida pana—after taking the remnants of food;
sandtana—Sanatana Gosvami; prabhu-pase—to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
aila—came.
TRANSLATION
Govinda gave Sanatana Gosvami the plate with the remnants of Lord
Caitanya’s food. After taking the prasada, Sanatana Gosvami approached Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 122
প্রভু কহে,- “কোন্‌ পথে আইলা, সনাতন ?”
(ङ কহে, _“সমুদ্র-পথে, FRG আগমন ॥” ১২২ ॥
prabhu kahe, — ‘kon pathe aila, sanatana?’
tenha kahe, — ‘samudra-pathe, karilur agamana’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord inquired; kon pathe—through which path; aila
sanatana—you have come, Sanatana; tenha kahe —he replied; samudra-pathe —
on the path by the sea; karilun agamana—| have come.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord inquired, “By which path have you come?” Sanatana
Gosvami replied, “1 have come on the path along the beach.”


--- Page 63 ---
60 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 123
প্রভু কহে, - “তপ্ত-বাল্ুকাতে ক্মেনে আইলা ?
সিংহদ্বারের পথ-_শীতল, কেনে न। আইলা ?১২৩ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “tapta-valukate kemane aila?
simha-dvarera patha—S$itala, kene na aila?
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; tapta-valukiate—on hot sand;
kemane aila—how did you come; simha-dvarera patha—the path of the Sirhha-
dvara gate; Sitala—very cool; kene—why; na aila—did you not come.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “How did you come through the beach
where the sand is so hot? Why didn’t you come by the path in front of the
Sirmha-dvara gate? It is very cool.
PURPORT
Sirmha-dvara refers to the main gate on the eastern side of the Jagannatha
temple.
TEXT 124
তপ্ত-বাল্দুকায় তোমার পায় হৈল लन्‌ ।
চলিতে না পার, কেমনে Fae जङन ?”১২৪ ॥
tapta-valukaya tomara pdya haila 303
calite na para, kemane karila sahana?”
SYNONYMS
tapta-valukdya—by the hot sand; tomara—your; padya—on the soles; haila—
there were; vrana—blisters; calite na para—you cannot walk; kemane—how;
karila sahana—did you tolerate.
TRANSLATION
“The hot sand must have blistered your soles. Now you cannot walk. How
did you tolerate it?’’


--- Page 64 ---
Text 127] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 61
TEXT 125
সনাতন কহে,-- “দুখ वृर না नादेन ৷
পায়ে लन হঞাছে তাহা না जानिन्त ॥ ১২৫ ॥
sanatana kahe, — “dukha bahuta na pailun
paye vrana hanache taha na janilun
SYNONYMS
sanatana kahe—Sanatana Gosvami replied; dukha—pain; bahuta—much; na
pailun—I did not feel; paye—on the soles; vrana hafache —there were blisters;
taha—that; na janilun—I did not know.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami replied, “I did not feel much pain, nor did | know that
there are blisters because of the heat.
TEXT 126
সিংহদ্বারে যাইতে মোর নাহি অধিকার ।
বিশেষে--ঠাকুরের তাই সেবকের ययै) ॥ ১২৬ ॥
simha-dvare yaite mora nahi adhikara
visese —thakurera tahan sevakera pracara
SYNONYMS
sirhha-dvare —in front of the main gate, known as Sirhha-dvara; yaite—to go;
mora—my; nahi adhikara—there is no right; visese—specifically; thakurera—of
Lord Jagannatha; tahan—there; sevakera pracara—traffic of the servants.
TRANSLATION
‘‘I have no right to pass by the Sirnha-dvara, for the servants of Jagannatha
are always coming and going there.
TEXT 127
সেবক গতাগতি করে, নাহি, অবসর ।
তার স্পর্শ হৈলে, সর্বনাশ হবে মোর ॥” ১২৭ ॥
sevaka gatagati kare, nahi avasara
tara sparsa haile, sarva-nasa habe mora”


--- Page 65 ---
62 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
sevaka—servants; gatagati kare —come and go; nahi avasara—there is no inter-
val; tara sparsa haile—if | touch them; sarva-nasa habe mora—1 shall be ruined.
TRANSLATION
“The servants are always coming and going without interval. If I touch
them, | shall be ruined.”
PURPORT
Herein it is very clearly indicated that priests performing Deity worship should
be careful to keep themselves completely pure and not be touched by outsiders.
Sanatana Gosvami and Haridasa Thakura, thinking themselves mlecchas and
yavanas because of their past association with Mohammedans, did not enter the
temple nor even travel on the path in front of the temple gate. It is customary for
the priests of temples in India not even to touch outsiders nor enter the Deity
room after having been touched. This is a very important item in temple worship.
TEXT 128
नि, মহাপ্রভু মনে ATE পাইলা।
তুষ্ট হঞা ভারে কিছু কহিতে লাগিলা ॥ ১২৮. ॥
Suni” mahaprabhu mane santosa paila
tusta hana tanre kichu kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mane—in the mind;
santosa paila—became very happy; tusta hana—being pleased; tarire—unto him;
kichu—something; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Having heard all these details, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, greatly pleased,
spoke as follows.
TEXTS 129-130
“যত্যপিও তুমি হও জগৎপাবন |
তোমা-স্পর্শে পবিত্র হয় দেব-মুনিগণ ॥ ১২৯ ॥
তথাপি ভক্ত-স্বভাব- মর্যাদা-রক্ষণ |
মর্যাদা-পালন হয় সাধুর ভুষণ ॥ ১৩০ ॥


--- Page 66 ---
Text 132] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 63
“yadyapio tumi hao jagat-pavana
toma-sparse pavitra haya deva-muni-gana
tathapi bhakta-svabhava — maryada-rak sana
maryada-palana haya sadhura bhasana
SYNONYMS
yadyapio—although; tumi—you; hao—are; jagat-pavana—the deliverer of the
entire universe; toma—you; sparse —by touching; pavitra—purified; haya—be-
comes; deva-muni-gana—the demigods and great saintly persons; tathapi—still;
bhakta-svabhava—the nature of a devotee; maryada—etiquette; raksana—to
protect or observe; maryada palana—to maintain etiquette; haya—is; sadhura
bhasana—ornament of devotees.
TRANSLATION
‘“My dear Sanatana, although you are the deliverer of the entire universe
and although even the demigods and great saints are purified by touching
you, it is the characteristic of a devotee to observe and protect the Vaisnava
etiquette. Maintenance of the Vaisnava etiquette is the ornament of a devotee.
TEXT 131
মর্থাদা-লঙড্ঘনে লোক করে উপহাস |
ইহলোব, পরলোক- দুই হয় নাশ ॥ ১৩১ ॥
maryada-langhane loka kare upahasa
iha-loka, para-loka——dui haya nasa
SYNONYMS
maryada-langhane—by surpassing the customs of etiquette; loka—people;
kare upahasa—joke; iha-loka—this world; para-loka—the next world; dui—two;
haya nasa—become vanquished.
TRANSLATION
‘If one transgresses the laws of etiquette, people make fun of him, and thus
he is vanquished in both this world and the next.
TEXT 132
মর্যাদা রাখিলে, তুষ্ট কৈলে মোর जन |
তুমি जट्ट না করিলে করে কোন্‌ জন ?” ১৩২ ॥


--- Page 67 ---
64 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
maryada rakhile, tusta kaile mora mana
tumi aiche na karile kare kon jana?”
SYNONYMS
maryada rakhile—since you have observed the etiquette; tusta kaile—you
have satisfied; mora mana—My mind; tumi—you; aiche—like that; na karile—
without doing; kare —would do; kon jana—who.
TRANSLATION
‘By observing the etiquette, you have satisfied My mind. Who else but you
will show this example?”
TEXT 133
এত वनि' প্রভু তারে আলিঙ্গন देकल |
তার FYI প্রভুর জ্রীঅজে লাগিল ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
eta bali’ prabhu tanre alingana kaila
tanra kandu-rasa prabhura $ri-ange lagila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarnre —him; alingana
kaila—embraced; tanra—his; kandu-rasa—moisture oozing from the itches;
prabhura—of ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $ri-ange lagila—smeared the body.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced Sanatana Gosvami,
and the moisture oozing from the itching sores on Sanatana’s body smeared
the body of the Lord.
TEXT 134
বার বার নিষেধেন, তবু করে আলিঙ্গন |
অঙ্গে রসা লাগে, দুঃখ পায় সনাতন ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
bara bara nisedhena, tabu kare alingana
ange rasa lage, duhkha paya sanatana
SYNONYMS
bara bara—again and again; nisedhena—forbids; tabu —still; kare alingana—He
embraces; ange—on the body; rasa lage—oozing moisture touches; duhkha—
unhappiness; pdya—gets; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami.


--- Page 68 ---
Text 136] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 65
TRANSLATION
Although Sanatana Gosvami forbade Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to embrace
him, the Lord did so. Thus His body was smeared with the moisture from
Sanatana’s body, and Sanatana became greatly distressed.
TEXT 135
এইমতে সেবক-প্রভু দু'হে খর গেলা |
আর किन জগদানন্দ সনাতনেরে মিলিলা॥ ১৩৫ ॥
ei-mate sevaka-prabhu dunhe ghara gela
ara dina jagadananda sanatanere milila
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; sevaka-prabhu—the servant and the master; durihe—
both of them; ghara gela—returned to their respective places; ara dina—the next
day; jagadananda—)agadananda; sanatanere milila—met Sanatana Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Thus both servant and master departed for their respective homes. The next
day, Jagadananda Pandita went to meet Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 136
তুইজন বসি” কৃষ্ণকথা-গোষ্টী কৈলা |
পণ্ডিতেরে সনাতন দুঃখ নিবেদিল। ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
dui-jana vasi’ krsna-katha-gosthi kaila
panditere sanatana duhkha nivedila
SYNONYMS
dui-jana vasi’—both of them sitting; krsna-katha—topics of Lord Krsna;
gosthi—discussion; kaila—did; panditere—unto  Jagadananda  Pandita;
sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; duhkha nivedila—submitted his unhappiness.
TRANSLATION
When Jagadananda Pandita and Sanatana Gosvami sat together and began
to discuss topics about Krsna, Sanatana Gosvami submitted to Jagadananda
Pandita the cause of his distress.


--- Page 69 ---
66 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 137
“ইহা আইলাঙ ATLA দেখি” BY খণ্ডাইতে |
(बव মনে, তাহা প্রভু न। দিলা করিতে ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
“ihan ailan prabhure dekhi’ duhkha khandaite
yeba mane, taha prabhu na dila karite
SYNONYMS
ihan—here (to Jagannatha Purl); ailann—| have come; prabhure—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhi’—by seeing; duhkha khandaite—to diminish my
unhappiness; yeba mane—what was in my mind; taha—that; prabhu—Lord ऽन
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na dila karite—did not allow me to do.
TRANSLATION
“1 came here to diminish my unhappiness by seeing Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, but the Lord did not allow me to execute what was in my mind.
TEXT 138
নিষেধিতে প্রভু আলিঙ্গন করেন মোরে ।
মোর FIA লাগে প্রভুর শরীরে ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
nisedhite prabhu alingana karena more
mora kandu-rasa lage prabhura sarire
SYNONYMS
nisedhite —although | forbid; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; alingana—
embracing; karena—does; more—unto me; mora kandu-rasa—my wet sores;
lage—touches; prabhura—of 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sarire—on the body.
TRANSLATION
“Although 1 forbid Him to do so, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu nevertheless
embraces me, and therefore His body becomes smeared with the discharges
from my itching sores.
TEXT 139
অপরাধ হয় মোর, নাহিক নিস্তার ।
জগন্নাথেহ না দেখিয়ে,--এ দুঃখ অপার ॥ ১৩৯ ॥


--- Page 70 ---
Text 141] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 67
aparadha haya mora, nahika nistara
jagannatheha na dekhiye, —e duhkha apara
SYNONYMS
aparadha—offense; haya—is; mora—mine; nahika nistara—there is no
deliverance; jagannatheha—also Lord Jagannatha; na dekhiye —I cannot see; e—
this; duhkha apara—great unhappiness.
TRANSLATION
‘In this way | am committing offenses at His lotus feet, for whick I shall cer-
tainly not be delivered. At the same time, | cannot see Lord Jagannitha. This is
my great unhappiness.
TEXT 140
হিত-নিমিত্ত আইলাঙ আমি, হৈল বিপরীতে |
কি করিলে হিত হয় নারি নির্ধারিতে ॥” ১৪০ ॥
hita-nimitta ailana ami, haila viparite
ki karile hita haya nari nirdharite”
SYNONYMS
hita-nimitta—for benefit; ailana—came; ami—I; haila viparite —-it has become
just the opposite; ki karile—how; hits haya—there will be benefit; nari
nirdharite—| cannot ascertain.
TRANSLATION
‘I came here for my benefit, but now 1 see that | am getting just the op-
posite. | do not know, nor can | ascertain, how there will be benefit for me.”
TEXT 141
পণ্ডিত কহে,__“তোমার বাসযোগ্য ‘GIR’ |
রখথযাত্র| দেখি” St TAZ গমন ॥ ১৪১ ॥
pandita kahe, — “tomara vasa-yogya ‘vrndavana’
ratha-yatra dekhi’ tahan karaha gamana
SYNONYMS
pandita kahe —Jagadananda Pandita said; tomara—your; vasa-yogya—a suita-
ble place for residence; vrndavana—Vindavana; ratha-yatra dekhi’--after seeing
the Ratha-yatra festival; tahan—there; karaha gamana—go.


--- Page 71 ---
68 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Jagadananda Pandita said, “The most suitable place for you to reside is
Vrndavana. After seeing the Ratha-yatra festival, you can return there.
TEXT 142
প্রভুর WIS TRICE তোমা” দুই ভায়ে।
बन्न वटन বৈস, छो ALTA পাইয়ে ॥ ১৪২ ॥
prabhura 5175 hanache toma’ dui bhaye
vrndavane vaisa, tahan sarva-sukha paiye
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; &jAa—order; hafache —has been;
toma’—you; dui bhdye—to the two brothers; vrndavane vaisa—sit down at
Vindavana; tahan—there; sarva-sukha—all happiness; paiye —you will get.
TRANSLATION
“The Lord has already ordered both of you brothers to situate yourselves in
Vrndavana. There you will achieve all happiness.
TEXT 143
যে-কার্ধে আইলা, প্রভুর দেখিল। एत्र ।
রথে জগন্নাথ দেখি” করহ গমন 1” ১৪৩ ॥
ye-karye aila, prabhura dekhila carana
rathe jagannatha dekhi’ karaha gamana’
SYNONYMS
ye-karye—for which business; aili—you have come; prabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhila—you have seen; carana—the feet; rathe —on the
car; jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; dekhi’—after seeing; karaha gamana—go.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Your purpose in coming has been fulfilled, for you have seen the lotus feet
of the Lord. Therefore, after seeing Lord Jagannatha on the Ratha-yatra car,
you can leave.”


--- Page 72 ---
Text 145] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 69
TEXT 144
সনাতন কহে, “ভাল टेकन। উপদেশ |
তাহ যাব, সেই মোর “প্রভুদত্ত দেশ” 1” ১৪৪ ॥
sanatana kahe, — “bhala kaila upadesa
tahan yaba, sei mora ‘prabhu-datta 0९5०“ ^“
SYNONYMS
sanatana kahe —Sanatana Gosvami replied; bhala kaila upadesa—you have
given good advice; tahan yaba—I shall go there; sei—that; mora—my; prabhu-
datta—given by the Lord; desa—residential country.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami replied, “You have given me very good advice. | shall
certainly go there, for that is the place the Lord has given me for my resi-
dence.”
PURPORT
The words prabhu-datta desa are very significant. ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
devotional cult teaches one not to sit down in one place but to spread the devo-
tional cult all over the world. The Lord dispatched Sanatana Gosvami and Rapa
Gosvami to Vrndavana to excavate and renovate the holy places and from there
establish the cult of bhakti. Therefore Vindavana was given to Sanatana Gosvamt
and Rapa Gosvami as their place of residence. Similarly, everyone in the line of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s devotional cult should accept the words of the spiritual
master and thus spread the Krsna consciousness movement. They should go
everywhere, to all parts of the world, accepting those places as prabhu-datta desa,
the places of residence given by the spiritual master or Lord Krsna. The spiritual
master is the representative of Lord Krsna; therefore one who has carried out the
orders of the spiritual master is understood to have carried out the orders of Krsna
or ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to spread the
bhakti cult all over the world (prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama). Therefore
devotees in the line of Krsna consciousness must go to different parts of the world
and preach, as ordered by the spiritual master. That will satisfy Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 145
এত বলি” रं टङ निज-कटर्थं উঠি' গেলা |
আর দিন মহাপ্রভু মিলিবারে আইলা ॥ ১৪৫ ॥


--- Page 73 ---
70 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
eta bali’ dunhe nija-karye uthi’ gela
ara dina mahaprabhu milibare aila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—talking like this; dunhe —both Jagadananda Pandita and Sanatana
Gosvami; nija-karye—to their respective duties; uthi’—getting up; gela—went;
ara dina—the next day; mahaprabhu—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; milibare aila—
came to meet.
TRANSLATION
After talking in this way, Sanatana Gosvami and Jagadananda Pandita
returned to their respective duties. The next day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
went to see Haridasa and Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 146
হরিদাস বকৈলা প্রভুর চরণ a |
হরিদাসে বকৈলা প্রভু প্রেম-আলিঙ্গন ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
haridasa kaila prabhura carapa vandana
haridase kaila prabhu prema-alingana
SYNONYMS
haridasa—Haridasa Thakura; kaila—did; prabhura—of Lord ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; carana vandana—worshiping the lotus feet; haridase—unto
Haridasa; kaila—did; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-alingana—
embracing in ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Haridasa Thakura offered obeisances to the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and the Lord embraced him in ecstatic love.
TEXT 147
দূর হৈতে দণ্ড-পরণাম করে जनांङन्‌ |
প্রভু বোলায় বার বার করিতে আলিঙ্গন ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
dara haite danda-paranama kare sanatana
prabhu bolaya bara bara karite alingana


--- Page 74 ---
Text 149] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 71
SYNONYMS
0013 haite—from a distant place; danda-paranama—offering obeisances and
dandavats; kare—did; sanatana—Sanitana Gosvami; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bolaya—calls; bara bara—again and again; karite alingana—to
embrace.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami offered his obeisances and dandavats from a distant
place, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called him again and again to embrace
him.
TEXT 148
অপরাধ-ভয়ে (ST মিলিতে ন। আইল ।
মহাপ্রভু মিলিবারে সেই Sifae গেল ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
aparadha-bhaye tenha milite na aila
mahaprabhu milibare sei thani gela
SYNONYMS
aparadha-bhaye—out of fear of offenses; tenha—Sanatana Gosvamr; milite—
to meet; na aila—did not come forward; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; milibare—to meet; sei thani—to Sanatana Gosvami; gela—went.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of committing offenses, Sanatana Gosvami did not come for-
ward to meet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord, however, went forward to
meet him.
TEXT 149
সনাতন राजिः পাছে করেন গমন |
বলাৎকারে ধরি, প্রভু टेकन। আলিঙ্গন ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
sanatana bhagi’ pache karena gamana
balatkare dhari, prabhu kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
sandtana—Sanatana Gosvami; bhagi’—running away; pache—back; karena
gamana—goes; balatkare—by force; dhari—capturing; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kaila alingana—embraced.


--- Page 75 ---
72 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami backed away, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu caught him
by force and embraced him.
TEXT 150
তুই जन লঞ প্রভু বলিল! Profs |
নিশ্বিগ্ন সনাতন ল।গ্গিল। কহিতে ॥ ১৫০ ॥
dui jana lana prabhu vasila pindate
nirvinna sanatana lagila kahite
SYNONYMS
dui jana lafida—taking the two of them; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
vasila—sat down; pindate—on the altar; nirvinna—advanced in renunciation;
sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; lagila kahite—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
The Lord took them both with Him and sat down in a sacred place. Then
Sanatana Gosvami, who was advanced in renunciation, began to speak.
TEXT 151
“হিত লাগি” আইনু few, হৈল বিপরীত ।
সেবাযোগ্য নহি, অপরাধ করে”। নিতি নিতি ॥ ১৫১॥
“hita lagi’ ainu muni, haila viparita
seva-yogya nahi, aparadha karon niti niti
SYNONYMS
hita lagi’—for benefit; 3170 muni—I came; haila viparita—it has become just
the opposite; seva-yogya nahi—I am not fit to render service; aparadha karon—I|
commit offenses; niti niti—day after day.
TRANSLATION
^^ came here for my benefit,” he said, “01001 see that | am getting just the
opposite. | am unfit to render service. | simply commit offenses day after day.
TEXT 152
সহজে নীচ-জাতি गूयि9, দুষ্ট, পাপাশয়” |
মোরে তুমি षटं देदन মোর অপরাধ ङ्न ॥ ১৫২ ॥


--- Page 76 ---
Text 154] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 73
sahaje nica-jati mudi, dusta, ‘papasaya’
more tumi chunile mora aparadha haya
SYNONYMS
sahaje —by nature; nica-jati—lowborn; 1706161 --1; dusta—sinful; papa-asaya—
reservoir of sinful activities; more —me; tumi chunile—if You touch; mora—my;
aparadha haya—there is offense.
TRANSLATION
‘By nature | am lowborn. | am a contaminated reservoir of sinful activities.
If You touch me, sir, that will be a great offense on my part.
TEXT 153
তাহাতে আমার অঙ্গে কঙু-রসা-রক্ত চলে ।
তোমার অঙ্গে লাগে, তবু স্পূর্ণহু ভুমি বলে ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
tahate amara ange kandu-rasa-rakta cale
tomadra ange lage, tabu sparsaha tumi bale
SYNONYMS
tahate—over and above this; amara—my; arige—on the body; kandu-rasa—
from wet, itching sores; rakta—blood; cale—runs; tomara ange lage —touches
Your body; tabu—still; sparsaha—touch; tumi—You; bale —by force.
TRANSLATION
‘“Moreover, blood is running from infected itching sores on my body,
smearing Your body with moisture, but still You touch me by force.
TEXT 154
বীভৎস স্পশিতে না কর স্বণা-লেশে |
এই অপরাধে মোর হবে সর্বনাশে ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
bibhatsa sparsite na kara ghrna-lese
ei aparadhe mora habe sarva-nase
SYNONYMS
bibhatsa—horrible; sparsite —to touch; na kara—You do not do; ghrpa-lese —
even a small bit of aversion; ei aparadhe —because of this offense; mora—my;
habe —there will be; sarva-nase —loss of everything auspicious.


--- Page 77 ---
74 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
‘My dear sir, You do not have even a pinch of aversion to touching my
body, which is in a horrible condition. Because of this offense, everything
auspicious will be vanquished for me.
TEXT 155
তাতে ইহ রহিলে মোর না হয় "कलग" |
আজ্ঞা দেহ-_রথ দেখি” যাঙ বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
tate ihan rahile mora na haya ‘kalyana’
2/7 deha’—ratha dekhi’ yana vrndavana
SYNONYMS
tate—because of this; ihan—here; rahile—if । remain; mora—my; na—not;
haya—there is; kalyana—auspiciousness; ajfia deha’—kindly give the order; ratha
dekhi’—after witnessing the Ratha-yatra festival; yana vrndavana—| may return
to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
“Therefore | see that | will get nothing auspicious by staying here. Kindly
give me orders allowing me to return to Vrndavana after the Ratha-yatra
festival.
TEXT 156
জগদানম্দ-পঞ্ডিতে আমি যুক্তি পুছিল।
বৃন্দাবন যাইতে (ङ्‌ উপদেশ দিল ॥” ১৫৬ ॥
jagadananda-pandite ami yukti puchila
vrndavana yaite tenha upadesa dila”
SYNONYMS
jagadananda-pandite—from Jagadananda Pandita; ami—I; yukti—advice;
puchila—inquired; vrndavana yaite —to go to Vrindavana; tenha—he; upadesa
dila—has given instruction.
TRANSLATION
‘‘I have consulted Jagadananda Pandita for his opinion, and he has also ad-
vised me to return to Vrndavana.””


--- Page 78 ---
Text 159] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 75
TEXT 157
এত শুনি' মহাপ্রভু সরে ষ-অশ্তরে।
জগদানন্দে ठर क 3} করে তিরকস্কারে ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
eta suni’ mahaprabhu sarosa-antare
jagadanande kruddha (1275 kare tiraskare
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; mahaprabhu —Sr1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sa-rosa-an-
tare—in an angry mood; jagadanande —at Jagadananda Pandita; kruddha hana —
becoming very angry; kare tirah-kare—chastises.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in an angry mood, began to chastise
Jagadananda Pandita.
TEXT 158
«कोलिकाच्र aml ait এঁছে গবী হৈল ।
তোমা-সবারেহ উপদেশ করিতে লাগিল ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
“kalikara batuya jaga aiche garvi haila
toma-sabareha upadesa karite lagila
SYNONYMS
kalikara—new; batuya—boy; jaga—)agadananda Pandita; aiche—so; garvi
haila—has become proud; toma-sabareha—persons like you; upadesa karite —to
advise; lagila—has begun.
TRANSLATION
‘Jaga [Jagadananda Pandital is only a new boy, but he has become so proud
that he thinks himself competent to advise a person like you.
TEXT 159
ব্যবহারে-পরমার্থে তুমি তার छक्र-ङ्न) |
তোমারে উপদেশে, না জানে আপন-মুল্য ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
vyavahare-paramarthe tumi——tara guru-tulya
tomare upadese, na jane apana-malya


--- Page 79 ---
76 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
vyavahdre—in ordinary dealings; parama-arthe—in spiritual matters; tumi—
you; tara—of him; guru-tulya—like a spiritual master; tomare —you; upadese —
he advises; na jane—does not know; apana-mdlya—his value.
TRANSLATION
‘In affairs of spiritual advancement and even in ordinary dealings, you are
on the level of his spiritual master. Yet not knowing his own value, he dares to
advise you.
TEXT 160
আমার উপদেষ্টা তুমি প্রামাণিক चार्य ।
তোমারেহ উপদেশে- বালকা করে এঁছে কার্য ১৬০॥
amdra upadesta tumi——pramanika arya
tomareha upadese——balaka kare aiche karya
SYNONYMS
amara—My; upadesta—adviser; tumi—you; pramanika arya—authorized per-
son; tomdreha—even you; upadese—he advises; balakai—boy; kare—does;
aiche —such; karya—business.
TRANSLATION
“My dear 59311303113, you are on the level of My adviser, for you are an
authorized person. But Jaga wants to advise you. This is but the impudence of
a naughty boy.”
TEXT 161
শুনি” সনাতন পায়ে धत्नि' ঞ্ুভুরে কহিল ।
“জগদানম্দ্ের সৌভাগ্য আজি সে জামিল ॥ ১৬১ ॥
Suni’ sanatana paye dhari’ prabhure kahila
“jagadanandera saubhagya 3// se janila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; paye dhari’—capturing the feet;
prabhure kahila—began to say to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jagadanandera—of
Jagadananda Pandita; saubhagya—fortune; aji—now; se—that; janila—I under-
stand.


--- Page 80 ---
Text 163] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 77
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was thus chastising Jagadananda Pandita,
Sanatana Gosvami fell at the Lord’s feet and said, “| can now understand the
fortunate position of Jagadananda.
TEXT 162
আপনার “অসৌভ্যাগ্য' আজি হৈল জ্ঞান ৷
জগতে নাহি জগদানন্দ-সম ভাগ্যবান্‌ ॥ ১৬২ ॥
apanara ‘asaubhagya’ aji haila jiana
Jjagate nahi jagadananda-sama bhagyavan
SYNONYMS
apanara—my personal; asaubhagya—misfortune; aji—today; haila jAana—I|
can understand; jagate —within this world; nahi—there is not; jagadananda-
sama—Tlike Jagadananda Pandita; bhagyavan —fortunate person.
TRANSLATION
‘I can also understand my misfortune. No one in this world is as fortunate
as Jagadananda.
TEXT 163
জগদানম্দে পিয়াও আত্মীয়তা-স্ুধ।রস |
মোরে পিয়াও গৌরবস্তুতি-নিদ্ব-নিশিল্দা-রস ॥১৬৩॥
jagadanande piyao atmiyata-sudha-rasa
more (21/30 gaurava-stuti-nimba-nisinda-rasa
SYNONYMS
jagadanande—unto Jagadananda Pandita; piydo—You cause to drink;
atmiyata-sudha-rasa—the nectar of affectionate relations; more—me; piydo—
You cause to drink; gaurava-stuti—honorable prayers; nimba-nisinda-rasa—the
juice of nimba fruit and nisinda.
TRANSLATION
“Sir, You are making Jagadananda drink the nectar of affectionate relation-
ships, whereas by offering me honorable prayers, You are making me drink the
bitter juice of nimba and ni$inda.


--- Page 81 ---
78 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 164
আজিহ নহিল মোরে खाज त्रङ।-छ्ठान |
মোর অভাগ্য, তুমি--স্বতন্ন ভগবান্‌ |” ১৬৪ ॥
ajiha nahila more atmiyata-jrana!
mora abhagya, tumi——svatantra bhagavan!”
SYNONYMS
ajiha—even until now; nahila—there has not been; more —unto me; atmiyata-
jiana—feeling as one of Your relations; mora abhagya—my misfortune; tumi—
You; svatantra bhagavan—the independent Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
“It is my misfortune that You have not accepted me as one of Your intimate
relations. But You are the completely independent Supreme Personality of
Godhead.”
TEXT 165
শুনি মহাপ্রভু কিছু লঙ্জিত হৈল। মনে |
তারে সপ্তোষিতে কিছু বলেন বচনে ॥ ১৬৫ ॥
Suni’ mahaprabhu kichu lajjita (2115 mane
tanre santosite kichu balena vacane
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kichu—somewhat;
lajjita—ashamed; haila—became; mane—within the mind; tanre—him; san-
tosite—to satisfy; kichu—some; balena—said; vacane —words.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was somewhat ashamed. Just to
satisfy Sanatana Gnsvami, He spoke the following words.
TEXT 166
“জগদ। নন্দ প্রিয় আমার নহে তোমা হৈতে।
মর্থাদা-লঙঘন ত্যামি না পারে সহিতে ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
“jagadananda priya amara nahe toma haite
maryada-langhana ami na paron sahite


--- Page 82 ---
Text 168] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 79
SYNONYMS
Jjagadananda—)agadananda Pandita; priya—more dear; amara—to Me; nahe —
is not; toma haite—than you; maryada-langhana—transgressing the etiquette;
ami—I; na—not; paron—can; sahite —tolerate.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Sanatana, please do not think that Jagadananda is more dear to
Me than you. However, | cannot tolerate transgressions of the standard eti-
quette.
TEXT 167
কা তুমি - প্রামাণিক, শাস্ত্রে প্রবীণ !
कोड] জগা- কালিকার aga নবীন ! ১৬৭ ॥
kahan tumi——pramanika, sastre pravipa!
kahan jaga—kalikara batuya navina!
SYNONYMS
kahan—where; tumi—you; pramanika—authority; sastre pravina—ex-
perienced in the learning of the sastras; kahan—where; jaga—Jaga; kalikara—
recent; batuya—youth; navina—new.
TRANSLATION
‘You are an experienced authority in the $astras, whereas Jaga is just a
young boy.
TEXT 168
আমাকেহ বুঝাইতে তুমি ধর শক্তি |
কত ঠাঞ্ি বুঝাঞাছ ঝ্যবহার-ভক্তি ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
amakeha bujhaite tumi dhara Sakti
kata thai bujhanacha vyavahara-bhakti
SYNONYMS
amakeha—even Me; bujhdite —to convince; tumi—you; dhara—have; sakti—
power; kata thari—in how many places; bujhafidgcha—you have convinced;
vyavahara-bhakti —ordinary behavior as well as devotional service.
TRANSLATION
“You have the power to convince even Me. In many places you have already
convinced Me about ordinary behavior and devotional service.


--- Page 83 ---
80 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 169
তোমারে উপদেশ করে, না যায় जङ्न |
অতএব তারে আমি করিয়ে ভৎপন ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
tomare upadesa kare, na yaya sahana
ataeva tare ami kariye bhartsana
SYNONYMS
tomare —you; upadesa kare—advises; na yaya sahana—I cannot tolerate;
ataeva—therefore; tare—unto him; ami—I; kariye—do; bhartsana—chastise-
ment.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Jaga’s advising you is intolerable for Me. Therefore | am chastising him.
TEXT 170
বহিরঙ্গ-ভ্ঞানে তোমারে না করি वन |
তোমার গুণে खडि করায় যৈছে তোমার গুণ ॥১৭০॥
bahiranga-jiane tomare na kari stavana
tomara gune stuti karaya yaiche tomara guna
SYNONYMS
bahirariga-jiane —thinking outside My intimate relationship; tomare—unto
you; na kari—| do not; stavana—offer praise; tomara—your; gune —by qualifica-
tions; stuti karaya—one is induced to offer prayers; yaiche —as; tomara—your;
guna—attributes.
TRANSLATION
‘I offer you praise not because I think of you as being outside an intimate
relationship with Me but because you are actually so qualified that one is
forced to praise your qualities.
TEXT 171
যদ্যপি কাহার “মমতা” বহুজনে ङ्च |
প্রীতি-স্বভাবে কাহাতে কোন ভাবোদয় ॥ ১৭১ ॥
yadyapi kahara ‘mamata’ bahu-jane haya
priti-svabhave kahate kona bhavodaya


--- Page 84 ---
Text 173] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 81
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; kahara—of someone; mamata—affection; bahu-jane —
unto many persons; haya—there is; priti-svabhave —according to one’s affection;
kahate—in someone; kona—some; bhava-udaya—awakening of ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
“Although one has affection for many persons, different types of ecstatic
love awaken according to the nature of one’s personal relationships.
TEXT 172
তোমার দেহ তুমি কর বীভৎস-জ্ঞান |
তোমার দেহ আমারে লাগে অম্ৃত-সমা[ন ॥ ১৭২ ॥
tomara deha tumi kara bibhatsa-jiana
tomara deha amare lage amrta-samana
SYNONYMS
tomdra deha—your body; tumi—you; kara bibhatsa-jidna— consider horrible;
tomdara deha—your body; amare —unto Me; lage —appears; amrta-samana—as if
made of nectar.
TRANSLATION
“You consider your body dangerous and awful, but I think that your body is
like nectar.
TEXT 173
অপ্রাকৃত-দেহ তোমার “প্রাকৃত” কভু नग्न |
তথাপি তোমার তাতে প্রা কৃত-বুদ্ধি হয় ॥ ১৭৩ ॥
aprakrta-deha tomara ‘prakrta’ kabhu naya
tathapi tomara tate prakrta-buddhi haya
SYNONYMS
aprakrta—transcendental; deha—body; tomara—your; prakrta—material;
kabhu naya—is never; tathapi—still; tomara—your; tate—in that; prakrta-bud-
dhi—conception as material; haya—is.
TRANSLATION
“Actually your body is transcendental, never material. You are thinking of
it, however, in terms of a material conception.


--- Page 85 ---
82 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives his opinion about how a person
completely engaged in the service of the Lord transforms his body from material
to transcendental. He says: “A pure devotee engaged in the service of Lord Krsna
has no desire for his personal sense gratification, and thus he never accepts any-
thing for that purpose. He desires only the happiness of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Krsna, and because of his ecstatic love for Krsna, he acts in various
ways. Karmis think that the material body is an instrument for material enjoyment,
and that is why they work extremely hard. A devotee, however, has no such
desires. A devotee always engages wholeheartedly in the service of the Lord,
forgetting about bodily conceptions and bodily activities. The body of a karmi is
called material because the karmi, being too absorbed in material activities, is al-
ways eager to enjoy material facilities, but the body of a devotee who tries his
best to work very hard for the satisfaction of Krsna by fully engaging in the Lord's
service must be accepted as transcendental. Whereas karmis are interested only
in the personal satisfaction of their senses, devotees work for the satisfaction of
the Supreme Lord. Therefore one who cannot distinguish between devotion and
ordinary karma may mistakenly consider the body of a pure devotee material.
One who knows does not commit such a mistake. Nondevotees who consider
devotional activities and ordinary material activities to be on the same level are
offenders to the chanting of the transcendental holy name of the Lord. A pure
devotee knows that a devotee’s body, being always transcendental, is just suit-
able for rendering service to the Lord.

A devotee on the topmost platform of devotional service always humbly thinks
that he is not rendering any devotional service. He thinks that he is poor in devo-
tional service and that his body is material. On the other hand, those known as
the sahajiyas foolishly think that their material bodies are transcendental. Because
of this, they are always bereft of the association of pure devotees, and thus they
cannot behave like Vaisnavas. Observing the defects of the sahajiyas, Srila Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura has sung as follows in his book Kalyana-kalpa-taru:

ami ta’ vaispava, e-buddhi ha-ile,
amani na haba ami
pratisthasa asi’, hrdaya dasibe,
ha-iba niraya-gami
nije srestha jani’, ucchistadi-dane,
habe abhimana bhara
tai sisya tava, thakiya sarvada,
na la-iba paja kara
“If | think | am a Vaisnava, | shall look forward to receiving respect from others.
And if the desire for fame and reputation pollute my heart, certainly 1 shall go to
hell. By giving others the remnants of my food, | shall consider myself superior and


--- Page 86 ---
Text 175] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 83
shall be burdened with the weight of false pride. Therefore, always remaining
your surrendered disciple, | shall not accept worship from anyone else.” Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdgja Gosvami has written (Antya-lila 20.28):
premera svabhava— yahan premera sambandha
sei mane, — ‘krsne mora nahi prema-gandha’
“Wherever there is a relationship of love of Godhead, the natural symptoms are
that the devotee does not think himself a devotee, but always thinks that he has
not even a drop of love for Krsna.”
TEXT 174
“প্রাকৃত” হৈলেহ তোম।র বপু নারি উপেক্ষিতে |
ভদ্রোভদ্র-বস্তচ্চান নাহিক “প্রাকৃতে” ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
‘prakrta’ haile ha tomara vapu nari upeksite
bhadrabhadra-vastu-jAana nahika ‘prakrte’
SYNONYMS
prakrta—material; haile ha—even if it were; tomara—your; vapu—body;
nari—| cannot; upeksite—neglect; bhadra-abhadra—good and bad; vastu-
jAana—appreciation of things; nahika—there is not; prakrte—in the material
world.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Even if your body were material, | still could not neglect it, for the material
body should be considered neither good nor bad.
PURPORT
ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Sanatana Gosvami, “51706 you are a Vaisnava,
your body is spiritual, not material. Therefore you should not consider this body
to be subjected to superior or inferior qualities. Moreover, | am a sannyasi.
Therefore even if your body were material, a sannyasi should see no distinction
between a good body and a bad body.
TEXT 175
কিং ভদ্রং किमञ्य९ বা দ্বৈতস্যাবস্তনঃ কিরৎ ।
বাচোদিতং তদন্ৃতৎ মনস। ধ্যাতমেব চ ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
100 0090/3/7 kim abhadrarh va
dvaitasyavastunah kiyat


--- Page 87 ---
84 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
vacoditari tad anrtar
manasa dhyatam eva ca
SYNONYMS
kim —what; bhadram—good; = kim—what;  abhadram—bad; va—or;
dvaitasya—of this material world; avastunah—that which has temporary exis-
tence; kiyat—how much; vaca—by words; uditam—vibrated; tat—that;
anrtam —without permanent existence; manasa—by the mind; dhyatam—con-
ceived; eva—certainly; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
‘Anything not conceived in relationship to Krsna should be understood to
be illusion [mayal. None of the illusions uttered by words or conceived in the
mind are factual. Because illusion is not factual, there is no distinction be-
tween what we think is good and what we think is bad. When we speak of the
Absolute Truth, such speculations do not apply.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from $rimad-Bhagavatam (11.28.4).
TEXT 176
LAS ভদ্রোভদ্্র-ক্ঞান, जव — ACA |
“এই ভাল, এই AW, — এই जव ‘@ ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
‘dvaite’ 800030130/030/3-/83/773, saba— ‘manodharma’
‘ei bhala, ei manda’, —ei saba ‘bhrama’
SYNONYMS
dvaite—in the material world; bhadra-abhadra-jiiana—understanding of good
and bad; saba—all; manah-dharma—speculative mental creations; ei bhala—this
is good; ei manda—this is bad; ei—this; saba—all; bhrama—mistake.
TRANSLATION
‘In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental specula-
tions. Therefore, saying, ‘This is good, and this is bad,’ is all a mistake.
PURPORT
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the Absolute Truth, ever existing
with different varieties of energies. When one is absorbed in the illusory energy of
Krsna and cannot understand Krsna, one cannot ascertain what is good and bad


--- Page 88 ---
Text 178] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 85
for him. Conceptions of good and bad are all imaginations or mental speculations.
When one forgets that he is an eternal servant of Krsna, he wants to enjoy the
material world through different plans. At that time he distinguishes between ma-
terial plans that are good and those that are bad. Actually, however, they are all
false.
TEXT 177
বিদ্যাবিনয়সম্পন্পে arse भवि হস্তিনি।
শুনি চৈব শ্বপাকে ए পণ্ডিতাঃ সমদশিনঃ ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini
Suni caiva Svapake ca
panditah sama-darsinah
SYNONYMS
vidya—knowledge; vinaya—gentleness; sampanne —endowed ৭077
brahmane—unto a brahmana; gavi—unto a cow; hastini—unto an elephant;
Suni—unto a dog; ca—and; eva—also; $va-pake—unto a dog-eater; ca—also;
panditah —those who are actually learned in spiritual understanding; sama-dar-
Sinah—equipoised.
TRANSLATION
‘The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (5.18).
TEXT 178
]नविखांनर्‌छांख। কূটস্কে। বিজিতেন্দ্রিয়ঃ ৷
যুক্ত ইতু্যুচ্যতে যোগী সমলোষ্টাশ্মকাঞ্চনঃ ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
jhana-vijhidna-trptatma
katastho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama-lostrasma-kancanah
SYNONYMS
jAana—by acquired knowledge; vijidna—realized knowledge; trpta—satisfied;
atma—living entity; kdata-sthah—fixed in his constitutional position; vijita—con-


--- Page 89 ---
86 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
trolled; indriyah—whose senses; yuktah—in touch with the Supreme; iti—thus;
ucyate—is said; yogi—a yogi; sama—equal; lostra—pebbles; asma—stone;
kancanah —gold.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘One who is fully satisfied in knowledge obtained and practically applied
in life, who is always determined and fixed in his spiritual position, who com-
pletely controls his senses, and who sees pebbles, stone and gold on the same
level, is understood to be a perfect yogi.’
PURPORT
This is also a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (6.8).
TEXT 179
আমি ऊ সন্ন্যাসী, আমার AIR ধর্ম।
চন্দন-পনজ্কেতে আমার জ্ঞান হয় “সম” ॥ ১৭৯ ॥
ami ta’——sannyasi, amara ‘sama-drsti’ dharma
candana-parikete amara 02/22 haya ‘sama’
SYNONYMS
ami—l; ta’—certainly; sannyasi—in the renounced order of life; amara—My;
sama-drsti—seeing everything on the same platform; dharma—duty; candana-
parikete —between sandalwood pulp and mud; amara—My; jAiana—knowledge;
haya—is; sama—same.
TRANSLATION
“Since | am in the renounced order, My duty is to make no distinctions but
instead be equipoised. My knowledge must be equally disposed toward san-
dalwood pulp and dirty mud.
PURPORT
It is the duty of a sannyasi, a person in the renounced order, to be always
equipoised, and that is also the duty of a learned man and a Vaisnava. A Vaisnava,
a sannyasi or a learned person has no conception of the material world; in other
words, he has no conception of anything materially important. He has no desire to
use sandalwood pulp for sense gratification, nor does sense gratification make
him hate mud. Acceptance or rejection of material things is not the concern of a
sannyasi, a Vaisnava or a learned person. An advanced devotee has no desire to
enjoy or reject anything. His only duty is to accept whatever is favorable for the


--- Page 90 ---
Text 182] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 87
advancement of Krsna consciousness. A Vaisnava should be indifferent to ma-
terial enjoyment and renunciation and should always hanker for the spiritual life of
rendering service to the Lord.
TEXT 180
এই লাগি” তোমা ত্যাগ করিতে না gam ।
ঘৃণা-বুদ্ধি করি যদি, নিজ-ধর্ম যায় ॥” ১৮০ ॥
ei lagi’ toma tyaga karite na yuydya
ghrna-buddhi kari yadi, nija-dharma yaya”
SYNONYMS
ei lagi’—for this reason; toma —you; tyaga karite—to reject; na yuydya—is not
befitting; ghrna-buddhi kari—I regard with hatred; yadi—if; nija-dharma yaya—I
deviate from My duty.
TRANSLATION
‘For this reason, 1 cannot reject you. If | hated you, | would deviate from My
occupational duty.”
TEXT 181
হরিহাস কহে,--“প্রভু, যে কহিলা তুমি ।
এই "वाक প্রতারণা' নাহি মানি আমি ॥ ১৮১ ॥
haridasa kahe, — “prabhu, ye kahila tumi
ei ‘bahya pratarana’ nahi mani ami
SYNONYMS
haridasa kahe—Haridasa said; prabhu—my Lord; ye—what; kahila—have
spoken; tumi—You; ei—this; bahya pratarana—external formality; nahi mani
ami—I do not accept.
TRANSLATION
Haridasa said, “My dear Lord, what You have spoken deals with external
formalities. | do not accept it.
TEXT 182
আমা-সব অধমে যে করিয়াছ অঙ্গীকার |
দীনদয়াল্ুংগুণ তোমার তাহাতে প্রচার ॥” ১৮২ ॥


--- Page 91 ---
88 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
ama-saba adhame ye kariyacha angikara
dina-dayalu-guna tomara tahate pracara”
SYNONYMS
ama-saba—all of us; adhame—most fallen; ye—that; kariyacha—You have
done; angikara—acceptance; dina-dayalu—merciful unto the fallen souls;
guna —attribute; tomara—of You; tahate—in that; pracara—proclaiming.
TRANSLATION
““My Lord, we are all fallen, but You have accepted us due to Your attribute
of being merciful to the fallen. This is well known all over the world.”
TEXT 183
প্রভু হাসি” কহে,-_“শুন, হরিদাস, সনাতন |
STS: কহি তোমা-বিষয়ে যৈছে মোর মন ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
prabhu hasi’ kahe, — “Suna, haridasa, sanatana
tattvatah kahi toma-visaye yaiche mora mana
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hasi’—smiling; kahe —says; suna—hear;
haridasa—My dear Haridasa; sanatana—My dear Sanatana; tattvatah—truly;
kahi—1 am speaking; toma-visaye—about you; yaiche—as; mora mana—My
mind.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya smiled and said, “Listen, Haridasa and Sanatana. Now | am
speaking the truth about how My mind is attached to you.
TEXT 184
তোমারে "नांल, আপনাকে 'লালক'” অভিমান |
লালকের ATE নহে দোষ-পরিজ্ঞান ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
tomadre ‘lalya’, apanake ‘lalaka’ abhimana
lalakera lalye nahe dosa-parijiana


--- Page 92 ---
Text 186] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 89
SYNONYMS
tomare—unto you; lalya—maintained; apanake —unto Me; lalaka—the main-
tainer; abhimana—conception; lalakera—of the maintainer; lalye—unto the
maintained; nahe—not; dosa—fault; parijiana—understanding.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Haridasa and Sanatana, | think of you as My little boys, to be
maintained by Me. The maintainer never takes seriously any faults of the
maintained.
PURPORT
When a father maintains a child and the child is maintained by the father, the
father never takes seriously the faults of the child. Even if they actually are faults,
the father does not mind them.
TEXT 185
আপনারে ङ्स মোর অমান্য-সমান।
তোমা-সবারে করে” यूय বালক-অভিমান ॥১৮৫ ॥
apanare haya mora amanya-samana
toma-sabare karon muni balaka-abhimana
SYNONYMS
apanare—unto Myself; haya—there is; mora—My; amanya—not deserving
respect; samana—like; toma-sabare—unto all of you; karon—do; muni—I;
balaka-abhimana—considering My sons.
TRANSLATION
“1 always think of Myself as deserving no respect, but because of affection |
always consider you to be like My little children.
TEXT 186
মাতার LACE বালকের “অমেধ্য' লাগে भोर |
geil নাহি জন্থে, আর মহাস্থখ পায় ॥ ১৮৬ ॥
matara yaiche balakera ‘amedhya’ lage gaya
ghrna nahi janme, ara maha-sukha paya


--- Page 93 ---
90 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
matara—of the mother; yaiche—as; balakera—of the child; amedhya—stool
and urine; lage gadya—touches the body; ghrna—hatred; nahi janme —does not
arise; ara—more; maha-sukha—great pleasure; paya—gets.
TRANSLATION
“When a child passes stool and urine that touch the body of the mother, the
mother never hates the child. On the contrary, she takes much pleasure in
cleansing him.
TEXT 187
“লাল্যামেধ্য' লালকের एम्नन-जम SIH |
সনাতনের ক্লেছে আমার ঘৃণা ना উপজায় ॥” ১৮৭ ॥
‘lalyamedhya’ lalakera candana-sama bhaya
sanatanera klede amara ghrna na upajaya”
SYNONYMS
lalya—of the maintained child; amedhya—stool and urine; lalakera—of the
maintainer; candana-sama—like sandalwood pulp; bhaya—appears;
sanatanera—of Sanatana Gosvami; klede—unto the moisture of the sores;
amara—My; ghrna—hatred; na—not; upajaya—arises.
TRANSLATION
“The stool and urine of the maintained child appear like sandalwood pulp
to the mother. Similarly, when the foul moisture oozing from the itches of
Sanatana touches My body, | have no hatred for him.’’
TEXT 188
হরিদাস কহে,- “তুমি ঈশ্বর দয়।ময়।
তোমার গম্ভীর হৃদয় বুঝন না যায় ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
haridasa kahe, — “tumi i$vara daya-maya
tomara gambhira hrdaya bujhana na yaya
SYNONYMS
haridasa kahe—Haridasa Thakura said; tumi—You; isvara—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; daya-maya—merciful; tomara—Your; gambhira—deep;
hrdaya—heart; bujhana na yaya—cannot be understood.


--- Page 94 ---
Text 190] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 91
TRANSLATION
Haridasa Thakura said, “My dear sir, You are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and are most merciful toward us. No one can understand what is
within Your deeply affectionate heart.
TEXT 189
বাসুদেব भलर कृशो, তাতে অঙ্গ FIST |
তারে আলিঙ্গন কৈল৷ ङ| সদয় ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
vasudeva—galat-kusthi, tate anga—kida-maya
tare alingana kaila hana sadaya
SYNONYMS
vasudeva—Vasudeva; galat-kusthi—suffering from leprosy; tate—over and
above that; anga—the body; kida-maya—full of worms; tare —him; alingana—
embracing; kaila—You did; 0275 sa-daya—being merciful.
TRANSLATION
“You embraced the leper Vasudeva, whose body was fully infected by
worms. You are so kind that in spite of his condition You embraced him.
TEXT 190
আলিঙ্গিয়৷ কৈল। তার কম্দর্প-পম অঙ্গ |
বুঝিতে না পারি তোমার कृश त তরঙ্গ ॥” ১৯০ ॥
alingiya kaila tara kandarpa-sama anga
bujhite na pari tomara krpara taranga”
SYNONYMS
alingiya—by embracing; kaila—You made; tara—his; kandarpa-sama—as
beautiful as Cupid; arnga—body; bujhite na pari—we cannot understand;
tomara—Your; krpara taranga—waves of mercy.
TRANSLATION
‘By embracing him You made his body as beautiful as that of Cupid. We
cannot understand the waves of Your mercy.”


--- Page 95 ---
92 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 191
প্রভু কহে, --“বৈষ্ণব-দেহ “প্রাকৃত” কভু নয় |
“অপ্রাকৃত” দেহ ভক্তের “চিদানন্দময়” ॥ >>> ॥
prabhu kahe, — “vaisnava-deha ‘prakrta’ kabhu naya
‘aprakrta’ deha bhaktera ‘cid-ananda-maya’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; vaispava deha—the body of a
Vaisnava; prakrta—material; kabhu naya—is never; aprakrta—transcendental;
deha—body; bhaktera—of a devotee; cit-ananda-maya—full of transcendental
bliss.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “The body of a devotee is never material. It
is considered to be transcendental, full of spiritual bliss.
PURPORT
7 Caitanya Mahaprabhu is trying to convince Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana
Gosvami that a devotee whose life is dedicated to the service of the Lord is never
in the material conception. Because he always engages in the service of the Lord,
his body is transcendental and full of spiritual bliss. His body should never be con-
sidered material, just as the body of the Deity worshiped in the temple is never
considered to be made of stone or wood. Factually, the Deity is directly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, without a doubt. The injunctions of the Padma
Purana therefore state: arcye vispau siladhir gurusu nara-matir vaisnave jati-bud-
010. . .yasya va naraki sah. The Deity worshiped in the temple is never stone or
wood. Similarly, the body of a Vaisnava fully dedicated to the service of the Lord
is never considered to belong to the material modes of nature.
TEXT 192
দীক্ষাকালে ভক্ত করে আত্মসমর্পণ |
সেইকালে কৃষ্ণ তারে করে আত্মসম ॥ ১৯২ ॥
diksa-kale bhakta kare atma-samarpana
sei-kale krsna tare kare atma-sama
SYNONYMS
diksa-kale —at the time of initiation; bhakta—the devotee; kare—does;
atma—of himself; samarpana—full dedication; sei-kale—at that time; krspa—
Lord Krsna; tare —him; kare—makes; atma-sama—as spiritual as Himself.


--- Page 96 ---
Text 194] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 93
TRANSLATION
‘At the time of initiation, when a devotee fully surrenders unto the service
of the Lord, Krsna accepts him to be as good as Himself.
TEXT 193
সেই দেহ করে তার চিদানন্দময় |
অপ্রাকৃত-দেহে তার চরণ ভজয় ॥ ১৯৩ ॥
sei deha kare tara cid-ananda-maya
aprakrta-dehe tanra carana bhajaya
SYNONYMS
sei deha—that body; kare—makes; tara—his; cit-ananda-maya—full of tran-
scendental bliss; aprakrta-dehe—in that transcendental body; tarnra—His;
carana—feet; bhajaya—worships.
TRANSLATION
“When the devotee’s body is thus transformed into spiritual existence, the
devotee, in that transcendental body, renders service to the lotus feet of the
Lord.
५ TEXT 194
মর্ত্যে। যদ। ত্যও'সমস্তকর্ম।
নিবেছিতাজ্ম। বিচিকীষিতে। মে ।
তদামৃতত্বং প্রতিপদ্যমানো
ময়াত্মভূয়ায় চ FACS CAN ১৯৪ ॥
martyo yada tyakta-samasta-karma
niveditatma vicikirsito me
tadamrtatvarn pratipadyamano
mayatma-bhayaya ca kalpate vai
SYNONYMS
martyah —the living entity subjected to birth and death; yada—as soon as;
tyakta—giving up; samasta—all; karmah—fruitive activities; nivedita-atma—a
fully surrendered soul; vicikirsitah—desired to act; me—by Me; tadd—at that
time; amrtatvam—immortality; pratipadyamanah —attaining; maya —with Me;
atma-bhayaya—for becoming of a similar nature; ca—also; kalpate—is eligible;
vai—certainly.


--- Page 97 ---
94 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION

“ ‘The living entity who is subjected to birth and death, when he gives up
all material activities dedicating his life to Me for executing My order, and
thus acts according to My direction, at that time he reaches the platform of
immortality, and becomes fit to enjoy the spiritual bliss of exchange of loving
mellows with Me.”

PURPORT

This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.29.34). At the time of initiation,
a devotee gives up all his material conceptions. Therefore, being in touch with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is situated on the transcendental platform.
Thus having attained knowledge and the spiritual platform, he always engages in
the service of the spiritual body of Krsna. When one is freed from material con-
nections in this way, his body immediately becomes spiritual, and Krsna accepts
His service. However, Krsna does not accept anything from a person with a ma-
terial conception of life. When a devotee no longer has any desire for material
sense gratification, in his spiritual identity he engages in the service of the Lord, for
his dormant spiritual consciousness awakens. This awakening of spiritual con-
sciousness makes his body spiritual, and thus he becomes fit to render service to
the Lord. Karmis may consider the body of a devotee material, but factually it is
not, for a devotee has no conception of material enjoyment. If one thinks that the
body of a pure devotee is material, he is an offender, for that is a vaispava-
aparadha. In this connection one shouid consult Srila Sanatana Gosvamr's Brhad-
bhagavatamrta (1.3.45 and 2.3.139).

TEXT 195
সনাতনের দেহে কৃষ্ণ TY छनख9। |
আমা পরীক্ষিতে BE দিলা পাঠাঞ। ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
sanatanera dehe krsna kandu upajana
ama pariksite ihan dila pathana
SYNONYMS

sandtanera—of Sanatana Gosvami; dehe—in the body; krsna—Lord Krsna;
kandu—itches; upajana—manifesting; ama—Me; pariksite —to test; ihan—here;
dila pathana—has sent.

TRANSLATION

‘Krsna somehow or other manifested these itching sores on the body of

Sanatana Gosvami and sent him here to test Me.


--- Page 98 ---
Text 197] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 95
TEXT 196
gol করি” আলিঙ্গন नां করিতাম aga
কষ্ণঠাঞি অপরাধ-দণ্ড পাইতাম তবে ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
ghrna kari’ alingana na karitama yabe
krsna-thani aparadha-danda paitama tabe
SYNONYMS
ghrna kari’—hating; alingana—embracing; na karitama—| would not do;
yabe—when; krsna-thani—unto Lord Krsna; aparadha-danda—punishment for
offenses; paitama—! would have gotten; tabe —then.
TRANSLATION
. “If 1 had hated Sanatana Gosvami and had not embraced him, | would cer-
tainly have been chastised for offenses to Krsna.
TEXT 197
পারিষদ-দেহ এই, না হয় gol |
প্রথম দিবসে AB চতুঃলম-গন্ধ ॥ ১৯৭ ॥
parisada-deha ei, na haya durgandha
prathama divase pailun catuhsama-gandha”
SYNONYMS
parisada-deha—the body of Krsna’s associate; ei—this; na haya—is not;
durgandha—having a bad smell; prathama divase—on the first day; pailun—I
got; catuhsama-gandha—the smell of catuhsama, a mixture of sandalwood pulp,
camphor, aguru and musk.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Sanatana Gosvami is one of the associates of Krsna. There could not be any
bad odor from his body. On the first day | embraced him, | smelled the aroma
of catuhsama [a mixture of sandalwood pulp, camphor, aguru and muskl.”
PURPORT
An associate of the Lord is one whose body is fully engaged in the service of
the Lord. A materialist might see Sanatana Gosvami’s body as being full of itching
sores that exuded foul moisture and a bad smell. ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
however, said that actually the aroma of his body was the excellent scent of a


--- Page 99 ---
96 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
mixture of sandalwood pulp, camphor, musk and aguru. In the Garuda Purana this
mixture, which is called catuhsama, is described as follows:
kastarikaya dvau bhagau
catvaras candanasya tu
kunkumasya trayas caikah
sasinah syat catuhsamam
“Two parts of musk, four parts of sandalwood, three parts of aguru or saffron and
one part of camphor, when mixed together, form catuhsama.” The aroma of
catuhsama is very pleasing. It is also mentioned in the Hari-bhakti-vilasa (6.115).
TEXT 198
বস্তুতঃ প্রভু যবে কৈলা আলিঙ্গন!
ভার স্পর্শে গদ্ধ হৈল চন্দনের সম ॥ ১৯৮' ॥
vastutah prabhu yabe kaila alingana
tanra sparse gandha haila candanera sama
SYNONYMS
vastutah—in fact; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yabe—when; kaila—
did; alingana—embracing; {३0/72 sparse —by His touch; gandha haila—there was a
fragrance; candanera sama—exactly like that of sandalwood pulp.
TRANSLATION
In fact, however, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced the body of
Sanatana Gosvami, by the Lord’s touch alone there was manifest a fragrance
exactly like that of sandalwood pulp.
TEXT 199
প্রভু कट्ङ्‌,+- जनांङन, না मो निङ्‌ षऽ |
তোমার আলিঙ্গনে আমি পাই বড় সুখ ॥ ১৯৯ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “sanatana, na maniha duhkha
tomadra alingane ami pai bada sukha
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued to speak; sanatana—My
dear Sanadtana; na maniha duhkha—do not be unhappy; tomara alingane—by
embracing you; 1711-1; pai—get; bada sukha—great happiness.


--- Page 100 ---
Text 202] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 97
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, “My dear Sanatana, do not be ag-
grieved, for when | embrace you I actually get great pleasure.
TEXT 200
-व<जन्न তুমি दें] রহ ख।म]-जटन |
বঙসর রহি” তোমারে আমি পাঠাইমু FMT ॥२००॥
e-vatsara tumi ihan raha ama-sane
vatsara rahi’ tomare ami pathaimu vrndavane
SYNONYMS
e-vatsara—this year; tumi—you; ihan—here; raha—remain; ama-sane—with
Me; vatsara—year; rahi’—remaining; tomare—you; = 2011-1; pathaimu
vrndavane —shall send to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
‘Stay with Me at Jagannatha Puri for one year, and after that I shall send you
to Vrndavana.”
TEXT 201
এত afer श्रमः ভারে टेकन। আলিজন ।
FY গেল, सन टन স্বর্ণের সম ॥ ২০১ ॥
eta bali’ punah tanre kaila alingana
kandu gela, anga haila suvarpera sama
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; punah—again; tanre—him; kaila—did; alingana—
embracing; kandu gela—the itching sores disappeared; anga—the body; haila—
became; suvarpera sama—like gold.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again embraced Sanatana
Gosvami. Thus immediately Sanatana’s itches disappeared, and his entire
body resembled the color of gold.
TEXT 202
দেখি” হরিদাস মনে टेन চমৎকার |
প্রভুরে কহেন, -“এই ভঙ্গী যে তোমার ॥ ২০২ ॥


--- Page 101 ---
98 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
dekhi’ haridasa mane haila camatkara
prabhure kahena, — “ei bhangi ye tomara
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; haridasa—Haridasa Thakura; mane—in the mind; haila
camatkara—became astonished; prabhure kahena—spoke to the Lord; ei—this;
bhangi—transcendental activity; ye—which; tomara—Your.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the change, Haridasa Thakura, greatly astonished, told the Lord,
“This is Your pastime.
TEXT 203
সেই ঝারিখণ্ডের नानो তুমি খাওয়াইল। |
সেই পালনী-লক্ষ্যে ই“হার Tg উপজাইলা ॥ ২০৩ ॥
sei jharikhandera pani tumi khaoyaila
sei pani-laksye inhara kandu upajaila
SYNONYMS
sei—that;  jharikhandera—of  Jharikhanda;  pani—water; tumi —You;
khaoyaila—made to drink; sei pani-laksye—on account of this water; inhara—of
Sanatana Cosvami; kandu upajaili—You generated the itching.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Lord, You made Sanatana Gosvami drink the water of Jharikhanda,
and You actually generated the consequent itching sores on his body.
TEXT 204
Tg করি” পরীক্ষা করিলে ANISH |
এই লীলা-ভঙ্গী তোমার (FZ নাহি জানে” 12-81
kandu kari’ pariksa karile sanatane
ei lila-bhangi tomara keha nahi jane”
SYNONYMS
kandu kari’—generating the itching sores; pariksa—examination; karile—You
did; sanatane—unto Sanatana Cosvami; ei—this; [ila—of pastimes; bhangi—
trick; tomdra—Your; keha nahi jane—no one knows.


--- Page 102 ---
Text 206] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 99
TRANSLATION
“After thus causing these itching sores, You examined Sanatana Gosvami.
No one can understand Your transcendental pastimes.’
TEXT 205
g tz আলিঙ্গিয়! প্রভু cafe নিজালয় |
প্রভুর গুণ কহে দুহে হঞ। প্রেমময় ॥ २०९ ॥
dunhe alingiya prabhu gela nijalaya
prabhura guna kahe dunhe hana prema-maya
SYNONYMS
durhe—both 60 them; alingiya—embracing; prabhu—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; geld—departed; nija-alaya—for His place; prabhura guna—at-
tributes of Sri Caitanya Mahadprabhu; kahe —discussed; durthe —both of them;
hana—being; prema-maya—overwhelmed by ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
After embracing both Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu returned to His residence. Then both Haridasa Thakura and
Sanatana Gosvami, in great ecstatic love, began to describe the Lord's tran-
scendental attributes.
TEXT 206
এইমত সনাতন রহে প্রভু-স্থানে |
কৃষ্ণচৈতন্য-গুণ-কথা হরিদ।স-সনে ॥ ২০৬ ॥
ei-mata 53/7303/73 rahe prabhu-sthane
krspa-caitanya-guna-katha haridasa-sane
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; rahe —remained; prabhu-
sthane —at the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krspa-caitanya—of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; guna—of the attributes; katha—discussion; haridasa-
sane —with Haridasa Thakura.
TRANSLATION
In this way Sanatana Gosvami stayed under the care of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and discussed the transcendental qualities of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu with Haridasa Thakura.


--- Page 103 ---
100 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 207
দ্োলযাত্র৷ দেখি” প্রভু তারে বিদায় fue ।
বৃন্দাবনে (य করিবেন, সব শিখাইল। ॥ ২০৭ ॥
dola-yatra dekhi’ prabhu tanre vidaya dila
vrndavane ye karibena, saba sikhaila
SYNONYMS
dola-yatra—the festival of Dola-yatra; dekhi’—seeing; prabhu—Si Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tanre—unto him; viddya dila—bid farewell; vrndavane—at
Vindavana; ye karibena—whatever he would do; saba—all; sikhaila—instructed.
TRANSLATION
After they saw the Dola-yatra festival, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed
Sanatana Gosvami fully about what to do in Vrndavana and bade him farewell.
TEXT 208
যে-কালে বিদায় হৈলা প্রভুর চরণে |
দুইজনার বিচ্ছেদ-দশা না যায় বর্ণনে ॥ ২০৮ ॥
ye-kale vidaya haila prabhura carane
dui-janara viccheda-dasa na yaya varpane
SYNONYMS
ye-kale—when; vidaya—farewell; haila—there was; prabhura carane—at the
lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dui-janara—both of them; viccheda-
dasa—condition of separation; na yaya varpane—cannot be described.
TRANSLATION
The scene of separation that took place when Saniatana Gosvami and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu took leave of one another is so piteous that it cannot be
described herein.
TEXT 209
যেই বন-পথে প্রভু গেলা বৃন্দাবন |
সেইপথে যাইতে মন टेकल। সনাতন ॥ ২০৯ ॥
yei vana-pathe prabhu gela vrndavana
sei-pathe yadite mana kaila sanatana


--- Page 104 ---
Text 211] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 101
SYNONYMS
yei—which; vana-pathe—on the path in the forest; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; gela vrndavana—went to Vrndavana; sei-pathe—on the very path;
yaite—to go; mana—mind; kaili—made; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami decided to go to Vrndavana by the very forest path Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu had traversed.
TEXT 210
যে-পথে, যে-গ্রাম-নদী-শৈল, যাহ্‌। যেই नौला |
বলভদ্রেভট্ট-স্থানে সব লিখি” নিল ॥ ২১০ ॥
ye-pathe, ye-grama-nadi-saila, yahan yei lila
balabhadra-bhatta-sthane saba likhi’ nila
SYNONYMS
ye-pathe—on which path; ye—which; grama—uvillages; nadi—rivers; saila—
hills; yahan—where; yei—which; lild—pastimes; balabhadra-bhatta-sthane —
from Balabhadra Bhatta; saba—everything; likhi’—writing; nila—he took.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami noted from Balabhadra Bhattacarya all the villages, rivers
and hills where Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had performed His pastimes.
TEXT 211
মহাপ্রভুর ভক্তগণে সবারে মিলিয়া!
CARAT চলি' যায় সে-স্থান দ্বেখিয়। ॥ ২১১ ॥
mahaprabhura bhakta-gane sabare miliya
sei-pathe cali’ yaya se-sthana dekhiya
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-gane—the devotees;
sabare—all; miliya—meeting; sei-pathe—on the path; cali’ yaya—passed
through; se —those; sthana—places; dekhiya—uvisiting.


--- Page 105 ---
102 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-hla, Ch. 4,
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami met all the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
then, traveling by that same path, visited the places through which Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu had passed.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura writes in a song (Saranagati 31.3):
gaura amara, ye saba sthane,
karala bhramana range
se-saba sthana, heriba ami,
pranayi-bhakata-sange.
“May | visit all the holy places associated with the lilas of Lord Caitanya and His
devotees.” A devotee should make a point of visiting all the places where Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His pastimes. Indeed, pure devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu even want to see the places He simply visited for only
hours or minutes.
TEXT 212
যে-যে-লীলা প্রভু পথে टेकन। যে-যে-স্থানে |
তাহা দেখি” প্রেমাবেশ হয় সনাতনে ॥ ২১২ ॥
ye-ye-lila prabhu pathe kaila ye-ye-sthane
taha dekhi’ premavesa haya sanatane
SYNONYMS
ye-ye—whatever; lila—pastimes; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pathe —
on the way; kaila—performed; ye-ye-sthane—in whatever places; taha—those
places; dekhi’—by seeing; prema-avesa—ecstatic love; haya—there 15;
sanatane—in Sanatana Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Sanatana Gosvami visited a place where Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had performed His pastimes on the way, he was immediately
filled with ecstatic love.
TEXT 213
এইমতে সনাতন বৃন্দাবনে আইলা |
পাছে আসি” क्रभे-८श गाय তাহারে মিলিলা ॥২১৩॥


--- Page 106 ---
Text 215] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 103
ei-mate sandtana vrndavane aila
pache asi’ rapa-gosani tanhare milila
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; vrndavane dila—came to
Vimndavana; pache &si’—coming after; rdpa-gosani—Srila Rapa Gosvami;
tanhare—him; milila—met.
TRANSLATION
In this way Sanatana Gosvami reached Vrndavana. Later Rapa Gosvami
came and met him.
TEXT 214
একবৎসর রূপ-গোসাঞ্ডির গৌড়ে विश्न टेन ।
কুটুদ্বের “স্বিতি'-অর্থ বিভাগ করি” निन ॥ ২১৪ ॥
eka-vatsara rapa-gosanira gaude vilamba haila
kutumbera ‘sthiti’-artha vibhaga kari’ dila
SYNONYMS
eka-vatsara—for one year; rupa-gosanira—of Srila Rapa Gosvami; gaude—in
Bengal; vilamba—delay; haila—there was; kutumbera—of the relatives; sthiti-
artha—wealth for maintenance; vibhaga—shares; kari’—making; dila—gave.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami was delayed in Bengal for a year because he was divid-
ing his money among his relatives to situate them in their proper positions.
PURPORT
Although Srila Rapa Gosvami renounced his family life, he nevertheless was not
unjust to his family members. Even after renunciation, he returned to Bengal,
where he properly divided whatever money he had and gave it to his relatives so
that they would not be inconvenienced.
TEXT 215
গোৌড়ে যে অর্থ ছিল, তাহ। আনাইলা |
কুটুদ্ব-ত্রাহ্মণ-দেবালয়ে বটি” arin ২১৫ ॥
gaude ye artha chila, (303 anaila
kutumba-brahmana-devalaye banti’ dila


--- Page 107 ---
104 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4,
SYNONYMS
gaude—in Bengal; ye—whatever; artha—money; chila—there was; taha—
that; anaila—collected; kutumba—to relatives; brahmana—brahmanas;
devalaye —temples; banti’ dila—divided and distributed.
TRANSLATION
He collected whatever money he had accumulated in Bengal and divided it
among his relatives, the brahmanas and the temples.
TEXT 216
जव মনঃকথা গোসাঞ্ঞি করি” নির্বাহণ ।
নিশ্চিন্ত ₹<9] Ng আইলা বৃন্দাবন ॥ ২১৬ ॥
saba manah-katha gosanii kari’ nirvahana
niscinta hana sighra aila vrndavana
SYNONYMS
saba—all; manah-katha—decisions; gosani—Rapa Gosvami; kari’ nirvahana—
executing properly; niscinta haiia—being freed from all anxiety; sighra aila—very
soon returned; vrndavana—to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
Thus after finishing all the tasks he had on his mind, he returned to
Vrndavana fully satisfied.
TEXT 217
তুই ভাই निनि, বৃন্দাবনে বাস टेकन।।
প্রভুর যে আজ্ঞা, দু'হে সব নির্বাহিল। ॥ ২১৭ ॥
dui bhai mili’ vindavane vasa kaila
prabhura ye ajna, dunhe saba nirvahila
SYNONYMS
dui bhai—both brothers; mili’—meeting; vindavane—in Vrndavana; vasa
kaila—resided; prabhura ye ajida—whatever was ordered by ऽप Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dunhe—both of them; saba—all; nirvahila—executed.


--- Page 108 ---
Text 218] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 105
TRANSLATION
The brothers met at Vrndavana, where they stayed to execute the will of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
sri-caitanya-mano-‘bhistarn
sthapitarn yena bha-tale
svayarn rapah kada mahyam
dadati sva-padantikam
“When will $rila Rapa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established within the ma-
terial world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under
his lotus feet?” Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami were previously
ministers directly in charge of the government of Nawab Hussain Shah, and they
were also householders, but later they became gosvamis. A gosvami, therefore, is
one who executes the will of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The title “gosvami” is not
an inherited designation; it is meant for a person who has controlled his sense
gratification and dedicated his life to executing the order of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Therefore Srila Sanatana Gosvami and Srila Rapa Gosvami became
genuine gosvamis after dedicating their lives to the service of the Lord.
TEXT 218
নানাশান্ত্র আমি' লুপ্ত-তীর্থ উদ্ধারিল। |
বৃন্দাবনে কৃষ্ণসেবা প্রকাশ করিল ॥ ২১৮ ॥
nana-sastra ani’ lupta-tirtha uddharila
vrnddvane krspa-seva prakasa karila
SYNONYMS
nana-sastra—different types of revealed scripture; ani’ —bringing together; lup-
ta-tirtha—the lost sites of the holy places; uddharila—excavated; vrndavane —at
Vindavana; krsna-seva—Lord Krsna's direct service; prakasa karila—manifested.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami collected many revealed scrip-
tures, and from the evidence in those scriptures they excavated all the lost
sites of pilgrimage. Thus they established temples for the worship of Lord
Krsna.


--- Page 109 ---
106 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4,
TEXT 219
সনাতন ष्ट टेकलो। “ভাগবতাযৃতে”।
ভক্ত-ভক্তি-কবষ্ণ-তত্ত্ব জানি যাহা হৈতে ॥ ২১৯ ॥
sanatana grantha kaila ‘bhagavatamrte’
bhakta-bhakti-krspa-tattva jani yaha haite
SYNONYMS
sanatana—Sanatana Gosvami; grantha—books; kaila—compiled; bhagavata-
amrte—in the Bhagavatamrta; bhakta—devotee; bhakti—devotional service;
krsna-tattva—Krsna, the Absolute Truth; jani—we know; yaha haite—from
which.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sanatana Gosvami compiled the Bhagavatamrta. From this book one
can understand who is a devotee, what is the process of devotional service,
and who is Krsna, the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 220
সিদ্ধান্তসার গ্রন্থ কৈল। “দশম-টিপ্পনী”।
কুষ্ণলীল।রস-প্রেম যাহ। হৈতে জানি ॥ ২২০ ॥
siddhanta-sara grantha kaila ‘dasama-tippani’
krspa-lila-rasa-prema yaha haite jani
SYNONYMS
siddhanta-sara—mature understanding; grantha—book; kaila—compiled;
dasama-tippani—commentary on the Tenth Canto; krsna-lila—of pastimes of
Lord Krsna; rasa—of the transcendental mellow; prema—ecstatic love; yaha
haite—from which; jani—we can understand.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sanatana Gosvami wrote a commentary on the Tenth Canto known as
Dasama-tippani, from which we can understand the transcendental pastimes
and ecstatic love of Lord Krsna.
TEXT 221
হরিভক্তিবিলাস'-গ্রন্থ কৈল৷ বৈষ্ণব-আচার।
বৈষ্ণবের কর্তব্য যাহ পাইয়ে পার ॥ ২২১ ॥


--- Page 110 ---
Text 222] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 107
‘hari-bhakti-vilasa’-grantha kaila vaispava-acara
vaisnavera kartavya yahan paiye para
SYNONYMS
hari-bhakti-vilasa—of the name Hari-bhakti-vilasa; grantha—book; kaila—
compiled; vaispava-acara—the standard behavior of a Vaisnava; vaisnavera—of a
devotee; kartavya—duty; yahan—in which; paiye para—one can understand up
to the extreme limit.
TRANSLATION
He also compiled the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, from which we can understand the
standard behavior of a devotee and the full extent of a Vaisnava’s duty.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes: “The Hari-bhakti-vilisa was
originally compiled by Srila Sanatana Gosvami. Later, Gopala Bhatta Gosvami pro-
duced a shortened version of it and added the Dig-darsini-tika. In the Hari-bhak ti-
vilasa there are so many quotations from the satvata scriptures that sometimes it is
inquired how the atheistic smartas can refuse to accept them and instead imagine
some other opinions. What is recorded in the Hari-bhakti-vilasa strictly follows
the Vedic scriptures and is certainly pure, but the attitude of the karmis is always
one of giving up the conclusion of pure Vaisnava understanding. Because the
karmis are very much attached to the world and material activities, they always
try to establish atheistic principles that oppose the understanding of the
Vaisnavas.
TEXT 222
আর যত গ্রন্থ কৈল Sil কে করে तनन्‌ |
“মদনগোপাল-গোবিল্দের সেবা'-প্রকাশন ॥ ২২২॥
ara yata grantha kaila, taha ke kare ganana
‘madana-gopala-govindera seva’-prakasana
SYNONYMS
ara yata—all other; grantha—books; kaila—compiled; taha—that; ke kare
ganana—who can enumerate; madana-gopdla—the Deity named Madana-
mohana; govindera—of the Deity named Sri Govinda; seva—service; pra-
kasana—exhibition.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sanatana Gosvami also compiled many other books. Who can enumer-
ate them? The basic principle of all these books is to show us how to love
Madana-mohana and Govindaji.


--- Page 111 ---
108 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4,
PURPORT
The Bhakti-ratnakara refers to the following books by Srila Sanatana Gosvami:
(1) Brhad-bhagavatamrta, (2) Hari-bhakti-vilasa and his commentary known as
Dig-darsini, (3) Lila-stava and (4) the commentary on the Tenth Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam known as Vaispava-tosani. Sanatana Gosvami compiled many, many
books, all with the aim of describing how to serve the principal Deities of
Vrndavana—Govinda and Madana-gopala. Later, other Deities were gradually
established, and the importance of Vindavana increased.
TEXT 223
রূপ-গোসাঞ্চি কৈল। ‘antgsimg সার |
কৃষ্ণভক্তি-রসের বাই পাইয়ে বিস্তার ॥ ২২৩ ॥
rapa-gosani kaila ‘rasamrta-sindhu’ sara
krsna-bhakti-rasera yahan paiye vistara
SYNONYMS
rapa-gosani —Srila Rapa Gosvami; kaila—compiled; rasamrta-sindhu—the
book known as Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu; sara—the essence of knowledge in devo-
tional service; krspa-bhakti-rasera—of the transcendental mellow in devotional
service; yahan—wherein; paiye—we can get; vistara—elaboration.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami also wrote many books, the most famous of which is
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. From that book one can understand the essence of
devotional service to Krsna and the transcendental mellow one can derive
from such service.
TEXT 224
“জ্জ্বলনীলমণি'”-নাম গ্রন্থ কৈল আর |
রাধাীকৃষ্ণ-লীলারস SE পাইয়ে পায় ॥ ২২৪ ॥
‘ujjvala-nilamani’-nama grantha kaila ara
radha-krsna-lila-rasa tahan paiye para
SYNONYMS
ujjvala-nila-mani—Ujjvala-nilamani; nama —named; grantha—scripture;
kaila—compiled; ara—also; radha-krsna-lila-rasa—the transcendental mellow of
the pastimes of Radha and Krsna; tahan—there; paiye—we get; para—the ex-
treme limit.


--- Page 112 ---
Text 226] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 109
TRANSLATION
Srila Riipa Gosvami also compiled the book named Ujjvala-nilamani, from
which one can understand, to the fullest limits, the loving affairs of Sri Sri
Radha and Krsna.
TEXT 225
“বিদষ্চমাধব”, 'ললিতমাধব- নাটকযুগল |
কৃষ্ণলীলা-রস তাহ পাইয়ে সকল ॥ ২২৫ ॥
‘vidagdha-madhava’, ‘lalita-madhava’, —nataka-yugala
krspa-lila-rasa tahan paiye sakala
SYNONYMS
vidagdha-madhava— Vidagdha-madhava; lalita-madhava—Lalita-madhava;
nataka-yugala—two dramas; krsna-lila-rasa—the mellow derived from the
pastimes of Lord Krsna; tahan—there; paiye sakala—we can understand all.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami also compiled two important dramas named Vidagdha-
madhava and Lalita-madhava, from which one can understand all the mellows
derived from the pastimes of Lord Krsna.
TEXT 226
“বানকেলিক্ৌমনুদী” আদি লক্ষগ্রন্থ কল |
সেই সব গ্রন্থে ত্রজের রস বিচারিল ॥ ২২৬ ॥
‘dana-keli-kaumudi’ adi laksa-grantha kaila
sei saba granthe vrajera rasa vicarila
SYNONYMS
dana-keli-kaumudi—the book named Dana-keli-kaumudi; adi—beginning
with; laksa—100,000; grantha—verses; kaila—compiled; sei—those; saba—all;
granthe—in scriptures; vrajera—of Vindavana; rasa vicarila—elaborately ex-
plained the transcendental mellows.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami compiled 100,000 verses, beginning with the book
Dana-keli-kaumudi. In all these scriptures he elaborately explained the tran-
scendental mellows of the activities of Vrndavana.


--- Page 113 ---
110 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4,
PURPORT
Referring to the words laksa-grantha (“100,000 verses”), Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura says that the total number of verses written by Srila Rapa
Cosvami is 100,000 (eka-laksa or laksa-grantha). The copyists count both the
verses and the prose sections of the Sanskrit works. One should not mistakenly
think that Srila Rupa Gosvami compiled 100,000 books. He actually wrote sixteen
books, as mentioned in the First Wave of the Bhakti-ratnakara (sri-rapa-gosvami
grantha sodasa karila).
TEXT 227
ভার gE te -- वनै वन्नख-खङू्‌नैम |
তার পুত্র মহাপসণ্ডিত - कौ वटनोजो य নাম ॥ २२१ ॥
tanra laghu-bhrata —sri-vallabha-anupama
tanra putra maha-pandita—jiva-gosani nama
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; laghu-bhrata—younger brother; $ri-vallabha-anupama—named Sri
Vallabha or Anupama; tanra putra—his son; maha-pandita--very learned scholar;
jiva-gosani—Srila Jiva Gosvami; ndma—named.
TRANSLATION
The son of Sri Vallabha, or Anupama, Srila Ripa Gosvami’s younger
brother, was the great learned scholar named Srila Jiva Gosvami.
TEXT 228
সর্ব ত্যজি” তেঁহে। পাছে আইলা বৃন্দাবন |
তেহ Siem ag टेकन। প্রচারণ ॥ २२४ ॥
sarva tyaji’ tenho pache aila vindavana
tenha bhakti-sastra bahu kaila pracarana
SYNONYMS
sarva tyaji’—renouncing everything; tertho—he (Srila Jiva 0০5৬3); pache—
later; 3//3 vrndavana—came to Vindavana; tennha—he; bhakti-sastra—books on
devotionai service; bahu—many; kaila—did; pracarana—spreading.
TRANSLATION
After renouncing everything, Srila Jiva Gosvami went to Vrndavana. Later
he also wrote many books on devotional service and expanded the work of
preaching.


--- Page 114 ---
Text 231] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 111
TEXT 229
“ভাগবত-সম্দর্ভ'-নাম কৈল গ্রন্থ-সার |
ভাগবত-সিদ্ধান্তের তাই পাইয়ে পার ॥ ২২৯ ॥
‘bhagavata-sandarbha’-nama kaila grantha-sara
bhagavata-siddhantera tahan paiye para
SYNONYMS
bhagavata-sandarbha—the Bhagavata-sandarbha, which is also known as Sat-
sandarbha; nama—named; kaila—made; grantha-sara—the essence of all scrip-
tures; bhagavata-siddhantera—of conclusive information about the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and His service; tahan—there; paiye—we get; para—the
limit.
TRANSLATION
In particular, Srila Jiva Gosvami compiled the book named Bhagavata-san-
darbha, or Sat-sandarbha, which is the essence of all scriptures. From this
book one can obtain a conclusive understanding of devotional service and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 230
“(नोनोन-छन्श्युः নাম গ্রন্থ সার CTA |
ত্রজ-প্রেম-লীলা-রস-সার দেখাইল ॥ ২৩০ ॥
180/031/3-03/77000/ nama grantha sara kaila
vraja-prema-lila-rasa-sara dekhaila
SYNONYMS
gopala-campi —Copala-campt; nama—named; grantha sara—the essence of
all Vedic literature; kaila—made; vraja—of Vindavana; prema—of love; lila—of
pastimes; rasa—of mellows; sara—essence; dekhaila—exhibited.
TRANSLATION
He also compiled the book named Gopala-campa, which is the essence of
all Vedic literature. In this book he has exhibited the ecstatic loving transac-
tions and pastimes of Radha and Krsna in Vrndavana.
TEXT 231
"वह AME’ FRCAT-SF প্রকাশিল |
চারিলক্ষ গ্রন্থ তেঁহে। বিস্তার করিল ॥ ২৩১ ॥


--- Page 115 ---
112 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4,
‘sat sandarbhe’ krsna-prema-tattva prakasila
cari-laksa grantha tenho vistara karila
SYNONYMS
sat sandarbhe—in the Sat-sandarbha; krspa-prema-tattva—the truth about
transcendental love of Krsna; prakasila—he exhibited; cari-laksa grantha—
400,000 verses; tenho—he; vistara karila—expanded.
TRANSLATION
In the Sat-sandarbha Srila Jiva Gosvami set forth the truths about the tran-
scendental love of Krsna. In this way he expanded 400,000 verses in all his
books.
TEXT 232
Fra-cattatfes গৌড় হৈতে মথুর। एलिन। |
निङगोनन्नेङ््‌- 3 আজ্ঞা! মাগিল। ॥ ২৩২ ॥
jiva-gosani gauda haite mathura calila
nityananda-prabhu-thani 2/0 magila
SYNONYMS
jiva-gosani —Sripada Jiva Gosvami; gauda haite —from Bengal; mathura calila—
started for Mathura; nityananda-prabhu-thani—from Srila Nityananda Prabhu;
aja magila—he asked permission.
TRANSLATION
When Jiva Gosvami wanted to go to Mathura from Bengal, he requested
permission from Srila Nityananda Prabhu.
TEXT 233
প্রভু প্রীত্যে তার মাথে ধরিলা চরণ |
রূপ-সনাতন-সম্বদ্ধে কৈল! আলিঙ্গন ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
prabhu pritye (3/)/3 mathe dharila carana
rapa-sanatana-sambandhe kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
prabhu pritye—because of the mercy of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanra—his;
mathe —on the head; dharila carana—rested His lotus feet; rapa-sandtana-sam-


--- Page 116 ---
Text 235] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 113
bandhe —because of his relationship with Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami;
kaila alingana—embraced.
TRANSLATION
Because of Jiva Gosvami’s relationship with Riipa Gosvami and Sanatana
Gosvami, who were greatly favored by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Nitya-
nanda Prabhu placed His feet on the head of Srila Jiva Gosvami and embraced
him.
TEXT 234
আজ্ঞা fer, —«Ma তুমি যাহ বৃন্দাবনে।
তোমার বংশে প্রভু দিয়াছেন সেইস্থানে ॥ ২৩৪ ॥
ajna 013, — “sighra tumi yaha vrndavane
tomara vamse prabhu diyachena sei-sthane
SYNONYMS
ana dilai—He gave orders; sighra—very soon; tumi—you; yaha—go;
vrndavane—to Vrndavana; tomara—your; varhse —to the family; prabhu—Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; diyachena—has given; sei-sthane—that place.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda Prabhu ordered, ‘Yes, go soon to Vrndavana. That place
has been awarded to your family, to your father and uncles, by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and therefore you must go there immediately.”
TEXT 235
ভার আঙ্ঞায় আইলা, खांङ।-फन পাইল! |
শাস্ত্র করি” কতকাল “ভক্তি” প্রচারিলা ॥ ২৩৫ ॥
tanra ajnaya aila, ajna-phala paila
sastra kari’ kata-kala ‘bhakti’ pracarila
SYNONYMS
tanra ajndya—by His order; aila—came; ajna-phala—the result of His order;
paila—got; sastra kari’—compiling various scriptures; kata-kala—for a long time;
bhakti pracarila—preached devotional service.


--- Page 117 ---
114 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 4,
TRANSLATION
By the order of Nityananda Prabhu, he went and actually achieved the result
of His order, for he compiled many books for a long time and preached the
cult of bhakti from Vrndavana.
TEXT 236
এই छिन्त, আর রঘুন।থদাস |
ই"হা-সবার চরণ বন্দে”, যর मयि “দাস” ॥২৩৬॥
ei tina-guru, ara raghunatha-dasa
inha-sabara carana vandon, yanra mui ‘dasa’
SYNONYMS
ei—these; tina-guru—three spiritual masters; dra—also; raghunatha-dasa—
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; inha-sabara—of all of them; carana—the lotus feet;
vandon—I| worship; yanra—of whom; muni—I; dasa—the servant.
TRANSLATION
These three —Rapa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami and Jiva Gosvami—are my
spiritual masters, and so also is Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. | therefore offer
prayers at their lotus feet, for | am their servant.
TEXT 237
এই © Teg পুনঃ সন।তন-সঙ্গমে |
প্রভুর আশয় कानि যাহার শ্রবণে ॥ ২৩৭ ॥
ei ta’ kahilun punah sanatana-sangame
prabhura asaya jani yahara sravane
SYNONYMS
ei ta’ kahilun—thus | have described; punah —again; sanatana-sargame —the
meeting with Sanatana Gosvami; prabhura &asaya—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's desire; jani—I can understand; yahara sravane—by hearing of
which.
TRANSLATION
Thus | have described the Lord’s meeting again with Sanatana Gosvami. By
hearing this | can understand the Lord's desire.


--- Page 118 ---
Text 239] Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord 115
TEXT 238
চৈতন্যচরিত্র এই-_ইঞ্ষু্দণ-সম |
চর্বণ করিতে হয় রস-আস্বাদন ॥ ২৩৮ ॥
caitanya-caritra ei— iksu-danda-sama
carvana karite haya rasa-asvadana
SYNONYMS
caitanya-caritra—the characteristics of Lord Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei—this;
iksu-danda-sama—exactly like sugar cane; carvana karite —chewing; haya—there
is; rasa-asvadana—a taste of juice.
TRANSLATION
These characteristics of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are like sugar cane that
one can chew to relish transcendental juice.
TEXT 239
জীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদ্বে যার আশ |
চৈতন্যচরিতামৃত কহে কৃষ্ণৰাস ॥ ২৩৯ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
s$ri-rapa—>Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami,
pade—at the lotus feet of, yara—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-
caritamrta—the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe —describes; krsna-dasa—
Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-Iila,
Fourth Chapter, describing Sanatana Gosvami’s stay with the Lord at Jagannatha
Puri.


--- Page 119 ---
CHAPTER 5

How Pradyumna Misra
Received Instructions from Ramananda Raya
The following summary of the Fifth Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Pradyumna Misra, a resident of Srihatta, came to see
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear from Him about Lord Krsna and His pastimes.
The Lord, however, sent him to Srila Ramananda Raya. Srila Ramananda Raya was
training the deva-dasi dancing girls in the temple, and when Pradyumna Misra
heard about this, he returned to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord, however,
elaborately described the character of Srila Ramananda Raya. Then Pradyumna
Misra went to see Ramananda Raya again to hear about the transcendental truth
from him.

A brahmana from Bengal composed a drama about the activities of $rf Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and went to Jagannatha Puri to show it to the associates of the Lord.
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's secretary, Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, heard
the drama, he discerned a tinge of Mayavada philosophy and pointed it out to the
author. Although Svarapa Damodara condemned the entire drama, by reference
to secondary meanings of the introductory verse he nevertheless satisfied the
brahmana. That brahmanpa poet thus became greatly obliged to Svartpa
Damodara Gosvami, renounced his family connections and stayed at Jagannatha
Purl with the associates of जें Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

TEXT 1
বৈগুণ্যকীটকলিতঃ टेनेङकछ-लननोङिङः |
WDC নিমগ্নোহহং চৈতন্য-বৈত্তমাশ্রয়ে ॥ > ॥
vaigunya-kita-kalitah
paisunya-vrana-piditah
dainyarpave nimagno ‘ham
caitanya-vaidyam asraye
SYNONYMS

vaigunya—of material activities; kita—by the germs; kalitah—bitten;

paisunya—of envy; vrana—from boils; piditah—suffering; dainya-arnave —in the
117


--- Page 120 ---
118 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
ocean of humility; nimagnah —merged; aham—I; caitanya-vaidyam—to the
physician known as Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asraye—I surrender.
TRANSLATION
1 am infected by germs of material activity and suffering from boils due to
envy. Therefore, falling in an ocean of humility, | take shelter of the great
physician Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় गौ खर AFP06S |
জয় জয় FAINT निगो नन्त ध ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya saci-suta sri-krsna-caitanya
jaya jaya krpa-maya nityananda dhanya
SYNONYMS
_ jaya jaya—all glories; saci-suta—to the son of mother Sac; $ri-krspa-caitanya—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya jaya—all glories; krpa-maya—to the most mer-
ciful; nityananda dhanya—the glorious Srila Nityananda Prabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of mother Saci! All glories
to Sri Nityananda Prabhu! Indeed, He is the most glorious and merciful.
TEXT 3
खश्नादेषङ কবপাসিদ্ধু জয় भेन |
জয় BH, গদাধর, রূপ, সনাতন ॥ © ॥
jayadvaita krpa-sindhu jaya bhakta-gana
jaya svarapa, gadadhara, rapa, sanatana
SYNONYMS
jaya advaita—all glories to Advaita Prabhu; krpa-sindhu—the ocean of mercy;
jaya bhakta-gana—all glories to the devotees; jaya svaripa—all glories to Svarapa
Damodara; gadidhara—Gadadhara Pandita; rdpa—Srila Rapa; sanatana—
Sanatana Gosvami.


--- Page 121 ---
Text 5] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 119
TRANSLATION
1 offer my respectful obeisances unto Advaita Prabhu, the ocean of mercy,
and to all the devotees, such as Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, Gadadhara Pan-
dita, Sri Ripa Gosvami and Sri Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 4
একদিন প্রদ্্যুস্ন-মিশ্র दूत চরণে |
wee করি” কিছু করে নিবেদনে ॥ ৪ ॥
eka-dina pradyumna-misra prabhura carane
dandavat kari’ kichu kare nivedane
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; pradyumna-misra—the devotee named Pradyumna Misra;
prabhura carane —at the lotus feet of Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dandavat kari’—
offering his respects; kichu—something; kare nivedane —submits as a petition.
TRANSLATION
One day Pradyumna Misra came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, offering
his respects and inquiring from Him with great submission.
TEXT 5
“শুন, প্রভু, मूर्यं দীন গৃহস্থ অধম !
কোন ভাগ্যে পাঞাছে। তোমার দুর্লভ চরণ ॥ ৫ ॥
“suna, prabhu, muni dina grhastha adhama!
kona bhagye panachon tomara durlabha carana
SYNONYMS
suna—please hear; prabhu—my Lord; muni—I; dina—very fallen; grhastha—
householder; adhama—the lowest of men; kona bhagye—by some good for-
tune; panachon—! have gotten; tomara—Your; durlabha—rarely achieved;
carapna—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
“My Lord,” he said, “’kindly hear me. | am a cripple-minded householder,
the most fallen of men, but somehow, by my good fortune, | have received the
shelter of Your lotus feet, which are rarely to be seen.


--- Page 122 ---
120 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 6
কৃষ্ণকথা শুনিবারে মোর ইচ্ছা হয়।
কৃষ্ণকথা কহ মোরে TB সদয় ॥ ৬ ॥
1005$03-/3003 sunibare mora iccha haya
krsna-katha kaha more hana sadaya”
SYNONYMS
krsna-katha —discussions on the subject of Lord Krsna; sunibare—to hear;
mora—my; iccha—desire; haya—is; krsna-katha—talks about Lord Sri Krsna;
kaha—kindly speak; more—unto me; hana—being; sa-daya—kind.
TRANSLATION
‘I wish to hear topics concerning Lord Krsna constantly. Be merciful unto
me and kindly tell me something about Krsna.”
TEXT 7
প্রভু কহেন» “FRA আমি নাহি छनि ।
সবে রামানন্দ জানে, তার মুখে শুনি ॥ ৭ ॥
prabhu kahena,— “krsna-katha ami nahi jani
sabe ramananda jane, tanra mukhe suni
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—the Lord replied; krsna-katha—talks about Lord Krsna; ami—I;
nahi jani—do not know; sabe—only; ramananda jane—Ramananda Raya knows;
tanra mukhe—from his mouth; suni—I hear.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, /1 do not know about topics concerning
Lord Krsna. | think that only Ramananda Raya knows, for | hear these topics
from him.
TEXT 8
ভাগেযে তোমার FETA শুনিতে হয় मन |
রামানন্দ-পাশ যাই” করহ অবণ ॥ ৮ ॥
bhagye tomara krsna-katha sunite haya mana
ramananda-pasa yai’ karaha sravana


--- Page 123 ---
Text 10] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 121
SYNONYMS
bhagye—by fortune; tomara—your; krspa-katha—topics about Lord Krsna;
Sunite—to hear; haya mana—there is an inclination; ramananda-pasa—to Rama-
nanda Raya; yai’—going; karaha sravana—hear.
TRANSLATION
“It is your good fortune that you are inclined to hear topics regarding
Krsna. The best course for you would be to go to Raimananda Raya and hear
these topics from him.
TEXT 9
কৃষ্ণকথায় রুচি তোমার- বড় ভাগ্যবান্‌।
যার কৃষ্ণকথায় রুচি, সেই ভাগ্যবান্‌ ॥ > ॥
krsna-kathaya ruci tomara— 8393 bhagyavan
yara krsna-kathaya ruci, sei bhagyavan
SYNONYMS
krsna-kathaya—in talking of Krsna; ruci—taste; tomara—your; bada
bhagyavan—very fortunate; yara—of whom; krsna-kathdaya—in hearing about
Krsna; ruci—taste; sei bhagyavan—he is very fortunate.
TRANSLATION
11 see that you have acquired a taste for hearing talks regarding Krsna.
Therefore you are extremely fortunate. Not only you but anyone who has
awakened such a taste is considered most fortunate.
TEXT 10
ধর্মঃ ge: পুংসাং दिषकृप्ननकथां ख्‌ वः ।
নোংপাদয়েদ্যদি রতিং শ্রম এব হি (कवनम्‌ ॥ ১০ ॥
dharmah svanusthitah purhsarm
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratim
$rama eva hi kevalam
SYNONYMS
dharmah —execution of the system of varpa and asrama; su-anusthitah—prop-
erly executed; (24158771 —of men; visvaksena-kathasu—in talks about Visvaksena,


--- Page 124 ---
122 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
or Krsna; yah—which; na—not; utpadayet—awakens; yadi—if; ratim—taste;
Srama—Iabor; eva—without doubt; hi—certainly; kevalam—only.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘A person who properly performs his regulative duties according to varna
and asrama but does not develop his dormant attachment for Krsna or awaken
his taste to hear and chant about Krsna is certainly laboring fruitlessly.” ^
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.8).
TEXT 11
তবে প্রদ্যস্ম-মিশ্র গেলা রামানন্দের टन |
রায়ের সেবক তারে বসাইল আসনে ॥ ১১ ॥
tabe pradyumna-misra gela ramanandera sthane
rayera sevaka tanre vasdila asane
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; pradyumna-misra—of the name Pradyumna Misra; gela—
went; ramanandera sthane —to the place of Rimananda Raya; rayera sevaka—the
servant of Ramananda Raya; tanre —unto him; vasaila asane —gave a sitting place.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra, being thus advised by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, went to
the home of Ramananda Raya. There the servant of Ramananda Raya gave him
a proper place to sit down.
TEXT 12
দর্শন না পাঞ। মিশ্র সেবকে পুছিল।
রায়ের বৃত্তান্ত সেবক কহিতে লাগিল ॥ ১২ ॥
darsana na pana misra sevake puchila
rayera vrttanta sevaka kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
darsana—audience; na—not; pana—getting; misra—Pradyumna Misra;
sevake—unto the servant; puchila—inquired; rayera—of Ramananda Raya; vrt-
tanta—description; sevaka—the servant; kahite lagila—began to speak.


--- Page 125 ---
Text 14] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 123
TRANSLATION
Unable to see Ramananda Raya immediately, Pradyumna Misra inquired
from the servant, who then gave a description of Sri Ramananda Raya.
TEXT 13
“তুই ८नव-कचछ। হয় পরম-সুন্দরী |
নৃত্য-গীতে স্থনিপুণা, বয়সে কিশোরী ॥ >< ॥
“dui deva-kanya haya parama-sundari
nrtya-gite sunipund, vayase kisorl
SYNONYMS
dui—two; deva-kanya—dancing girls; haya—are; parama-sundari—very, very
beautiful; nrtya-gite—in singing and dancing; su-nipuna—very expert; vayase—
in age; kisori—very young.
TRANSLATION
“There are two dancing girls who are extremely beautiful. They are very
youthful, and they are expert in dancing and singing.
TEXT 14
সেই QTR Apel রায় নিভূত উদ্যানে |
নিজ-নাটক-গীতের শিখায় नटन ॥ ১৪ ॥
sei dunhe 1275 raya nibhrta udyane
nija-nataka-gitera sikhaya nartane
SYNONYMS
sei dunhe—those two; lana—taking; raya—Ramananda Raya; nibhrta
udyane—in a solitary place in the garden; nija-nataka—of the drama composed
by him; gitera—of the songs; sikhaya—gives direction; nartane—in dancing.
TRANSLATION
“Srila Ramananda Raya has taken these two girls to a solitary place in his
garden, where he is teaching and directing them to dance according to the
songs he has composed for his drama.


--- Page 126 ---
124 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
PURPORT
The drama being rehearsed by Ramananda Raya and the two young girls was
the well-known Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka. The songs and dances were meant
for the pleasure of Lord Jagannatha; therefore Ramananda Raya was personally
giving instructions on how to sing and dance for the drama.
TEXT 15
তুমি ইহ বসি” রহ, ক্ষণেকে ख जिटवन ।
তবে যেই আজ্ঞা দেহ, সেই করিবেন ॥” ১৫ ॥
tumi ihan vasi’ raha, ksaneke asibena
tabe yei ajia deha, sei karibena”
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; ihan—here; vasi'—sitting; raha—just wait; ksaneke asibena—he
will come within a moment; tabe—then; yei—whatever; 3jida—order; deha—
you give; sei—he; karibena—will do.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Please sit here and wait for a few moments. As soon as he comes, he will
execute whatever order you give him.”
TEXT 16
তবে প্রদ্যুক্স-মিশ্র si&l রহিল afami ।
রামানন্দ নিভৃতে (AZ দুই-জন লঞ। ॥ ১৬ ॥
tabe pradyumna-misra tahan rahila vasiya
ramananda nibhrte sei dui-jana lana
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; pradyumna-misra—of the name Pradyumna Misra; tahan—there;
rahila vasiya—remained seated; ramananda—Ramananda Raya; nibhrte—in a
solitary place; sei—those; dui-jana—two girls; lana—taking.
TRANSLATION
While Pradyumna Misra remained seated there, Rimananda Raya took the
two girls to a solitary place.


--- Page 127 ---
Text 19] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 125
TEXT 17
স্বহস্তে করেন তার অভ্যঙ্গ-মর্দন |
স্বহস্তে করান স্নান, গাত্র সংমার্জন ॥ ১৭ ॥
sva-haste karena tara abhyariga-mardana
sva-haste karana snana, gatra sammarjana
SYNONYMS
sva-haste—with his own hand; karena—does; tara—of those two girls;
abhyanga-mardana—massaging the body with oil; sva-haste —with his own
hand; karana snana—bathes them; gatra sammarjana—cleansing the whole body.
TRANSLATION
With his own hand, $ri Rimananda Raya massaged their bodies with oil and
bathed them with water. Indeed, Rimananda Raya cleansed their entire
bodies with his own hand.
TEXT 18
স্বহস্তে পরান व्च, সর্বাঙ্গ जखन |
তবু নির্বিকার রায়-রামাননম্দের মন ॥ ১৮ ॥
sva-haste parana vastra, 53/৮3/7839 mandana
tabu nirvikara raya-ramanandera mana
SYNONYMS
sva-haste—with his own hand; parana vastra—dresses them; sarvarga man-
dana—decorating the whole body; tabu —still; nirvikara—without transforma-
tion; rdya-ramanandera—of Ramananda Raya; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Although he dressed the two young girls and decorated their bodies with
his own hand, he remained unchanged. Such is the mind of Srila Ramananda
Raya.
TEXT 19
কান্ঠ-পাবাণ-স্পর্শে হয় যৈছে रोव |
তরুণী-স্পর্শে রামানম্দের তৈছে “স্বভাব” ॥ ১৯ ॥


--- Page 128 ---
126 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
kastha-pasana-sparse haya yaiche bhava
taruni-sparse ramanandera taiche ‘svabhava’
SYNONYMS
kastha—wood; pasana—stone; sparse —by touching; haya—there is; yaiche—
as; bhava—mental position; taruni-sparse—by touching the young girls; rama-
nandera—of Ramananda Raya; taiche—like that; svabhava—nature.
TRANSLATION
While touching the young girls, he was like a person touching wood or
stone, for his body and mind were unaffected.
TEXT 20
সেব্য-বুক্ধি আরো HT করেন (जवन |
স্বাভাবিক দালপীভাব করেন আরোপণ ॥ ২০ ॥
sevya-bujhi aropiya karena sevana
svabhavika dasi-bhava karena aropana
SYNONYMS
sevya-bujhi aropiya—considering worshipable; karena sevana—engages in ser-
vice; svabhavika—by his natural position; dasi-bhava—as a maidservant; karena
aropana—considers.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ramananda Raya used to act in that way because he thought of himself
in his original position as a maidservant of the gopis. Thus although externally
he appeared to be a man, internally, in his original spiritual position, he con-
sidered himself a maidservant and considered the two girls gopis.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura writes in his Amyta-pravaha-bhasya: “Srila Ramanan-
da Raya composed a drama named Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka, and he engaged
two young girls who were professional dancers and singers to demonstrate the
ideology of the drama. Such girls, who are called deva-dasis, are still employed in
the temple of Jagannatha, where they are called maharis. ऽ Ramananda Raya
engaged two such girls, and because they were meant to play the parts of gopis,
he taught them how to awaken thoughts like those of the gopis. Because the
gopis are worshipable personalities, Ramananda Raya, who considered the two


--- Page 129 ---
Text 22] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 127
girls gopis and himself their maidservant, engaged in their service by massaging
their bodies with oil to cleanse them completely. Because Ramananda Raya al-
ways placed himself in the position of a maidservant of the gopis, his rehearsal
with the girls was actually on the spiritual platform.”

Because there was no question of personal sense gratification when Sri Rama-
nanda Raya was serving the girls, his mind was steady and his body
untransformed. This is not to be imitated, nor is such a mentality possible for any-
one but $r1 Ramananda Raya, as ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu will explain. The exam-
ple of Sri Ramananda Raya is certainly unique. The author of Sri Caitanya-
caritamrta has given this description because in perfect devotional service one can
attain such a position. Nevertheless, one must understand this subject very
seriously and never attempt to imitate such activities.

TEXT 21
মহাপ্রভুর ভক্তগণেরু দুর্গম মহিমা ।
তাহে রামানন্দের ভাবভক্তি-প্রেম-সীম| ॥ ২১ ॥
mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera durgama mahima
tahe ramanandera bhava-bhakti-prema-sima
SYNONYMS

mahaprabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-ganera—of the
devotees; durgama—difficult to understand; mahima—greatness; tahe—in that
connection; ramanandera—of Sri Ramananda Raya; bhava-bhakti—of ecstatic
devotion; prema-sima—the limit of love of Krsna.

TRANSLATION

The greatness of the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is exceedingly
difficult to understand. Sri Ramananda Raya is unique among them all, for he
showed how one can extend his ecstatic love to the extreme limit.

TEXT 22
তবে সেই তুইজনে নৃত্য শিখাইল) ৷
গীতের Pp অর্থ অভিনয় कन्रादेन। ॥ ২২ ॥
tabe sei dui-jane nrtya sik haila
gitera gadha artha abhinaya karaila


--- Page 130 ---
128 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereupon; sei—those; dui-jane—two young girls; nrtya Sikhaila—
directed how to dance; gitera—of the songs; gtdha artha—the deep meaning;
abhinaya karaila—taught how to express by dramatic performances.
TRANSLATION
Ramananda Raya directed the two girls how to dance and express the deep
meaning of his songs through dramatic performances.
TEXT 23
সঞ্চারী, সাস্তিক, স্থায়ি-ভাবের লক্ষণ |
মুখে নেত্রে অভিনয় করে প্রকটন ॥ ২৩ ॥
sancari, sattvika, sthayi-bhavera laksana
mukhe netre abhinaya kare prakatana
SYNONYMS
saficari—passing; sattvika—natural; sthayi—continuously existing; bhavera—
of ecstasies; laksana—symptoms; mukhe—in the facial expressions; netre—in
the movement of the eyes; abhinaya—the dramatic performance; kare pra-
katana—he demonstrates.
TRANSLATION
He taught them how to express the symptoms of continuous, natural and
transitional ecstasies with the movements of their faces, their eyes and the
other parts of their bodies.
TEXT 24
ভাবগ্রকটন-লাস্ত রায় যে শিখায় ।
জগন্নাথের আগে टं दङ्‌ প্রকট দেখায় ॥ ২৪ ॥
bhava-prakatana-lasya raya ye Sikhaya
jagannathera age dunhe prakata dekhaya
SYNONYMS
bhava—ecstasy; prakatana—manifesting; /asya—feminine poses and dancing;
rdya—Ramananda Raya; ye—which; sikhaya—was teaching; jagannathera age —
in front of Lod Jagannatha; dunhe—both of them; prakata dekhaya—dem-
onstrated.


--- Page 131 ---
Text 26] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 129
TRANSLATION
Through the feminine poses and dances they were taught by Ramananda
Raya, the two girls precisely exhibited all these expressions of ecstasy before
Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 25
তবে সেই দুইজনে প্রসাদ খাওয়াইলা |
निर्दर পু'হারে নিজ-ঘরে পাঠাইলা ॥ ২৫ ॥
tabe sei dui-jane prasada khaoyaila
nibhrte dunhare nija-ghare pathaila
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; sei—to those; dui-jane—two girls; prasada khaoyaila—gave
prasada to eat; nibhrte—without being exposed; dunhare—both of them; nija-
ghare—their homes; pathaila—sent.
TRANSLATION
Then Ramananda Raya fed the two girls sumptuous prasada and sent them
to their homes unexposed.
TEXT 26
প্রতিদিন রায় এঁছে করায় जाधन |
কোন্‌ জানে ক্ষুদ্র জীব Fig তার মন ? ২৬ ॥
prati-dina raya aiche karaya sadhana
kon jane ksudra jiva kanha tanra mana?
SYNONYMS
prati-dina—daily; rdya—Ramananda Raya; aiche—in this way; karaya
sadhana—teaches regularly; kon jane—who can know; ksudra jiva—an insignifi-
cant living entity; kanha—where; tanra—his; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
Every day he trained the two deva-dasis how to dance. Who among the
small living entities, their minds always absorbed in material sense gratifica-
tion, could understand the mentality of Sri Ramananda Raya?


--- Page 132 ---
130 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
PURPORT
Ramananda Raya’s service to the gopis for the satisfaction of Krsna is purely an
affair of the spiritual world. Unless one is fully situated in the spiritual atmosphere,
the activities of Ramananda Raya are most difficult to understand.
TEXT 27
মিথ্রের আগমন রায়ে সেবক কহিলা।
শীঘ্র রামানন্দ তবে ASICS আইলা ॥ ২৭ ॥
misrera agamana raye sevaka kahila
Sighra ramananda tabe sabhate aila
SYNONYMS
misrera—of Pradyumna Misra; agamana—arrival; rdye —to Ramananda Raya;
sevaka kahila—the servant informed; sighra—very soon; ramananda—Ramanan-
da Raya; tabe—thereupon; sabhate aila—came to the assembly room.
TRANSLATION
When the servant informed Ramananda Raya of Pradyumna Misra’s arrival,
Ramananda Raya immediately went to the assembly room.
TEXT 28
মিথ্রেরে নমস্কার করে সম্মান 7m ।
নিবেদন করে কিছু বিনীত হুঞা ॥ २४ ॥
misrere namaskara kare sammana kariya
nivedana kare kichu vinita hana
SYNONYMS
misrere—unto Pradyumna Misra; namaskara kare —offers respectful obei-
sances; sammana kariya—with all respect; nivedana kare—submitted; kichu—
something; vinita hana —with great humility.
TRANSLATION
He offered his obeisances to Pradyumna Misra with all respect and then,
with great humility, spoke as follows.


--- Page 133 ---
Text 31] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 131
TEXT 29
“व्रन्‌ खादेन), মোরে কেহ A कङिनि ।
তোমার চরণে মোর অপরাধ হইল ॥ ২৯ ॥
“bahu-ksana aila, more keha na kahila
tomara carape mora aparadha ha-ila
SYNONYMS
bahu-ksana—long ago; aila—you came; more—me; keha na kahila—no one
informed; tomara carane —unto your lotus feet; mora—my; aparadha—offense;
ha-ila—there was.
TRANSLATION
“Sir, you came here long ago, but no one informed me. Therefore | have
certainly become an offender at your lotus feet.
TEXT 30
তোমার আগমনে মোর পবিত্র হৈল ঘর ।
আজ্ঞা কর, ক্যা FCI | তোমার कित ॥” ৩০ ॥
(0/773/3 4gamane mora pavitra haila ghara
ajna kara, kya karon tomara kinkara”
SYNONYMS
tomara agamane—because of your arrival; mora—my; pavitra—purified;
haila—became; ghara—house; ajia kara—kindly order; kya karon—what can |
do; tomara kinkara—| am your servant.
TRANSLATION
‘My entire home has been purified by your arrival. Kindly order me. What
can | do for you? I am your servant.”
TEXT 31
মিশ্র कटङ,- “coral দেখিতে হৈল sits |
আপনা পবিত্র CFE CSIR দরশনে ॥” © ॥
misra (८2/0९, — “toma dekhite haila agamane
apana pavitra kailur tomara darasane”


--- Page 134 ---
132 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
misra kahe—Pradyumna Misra replied; toma—you; dekhite—to see; haila
agamane—| came; dpana—myself; pavitra kailun—I| have purified; tomara
darasane —by seeing you.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra replied, “I came simply to see you. Now | have purified
myself by seeing Your Honor.”
TEXT 32
खडिकाल দেখি মিশ্র fag না কহিল ।
বিদায় 28a মিশ্র নিজখর গেল ॥ ৩২ ॥
atikala dekhi’ misra kichu na kahila
vidaya ha-iya misra nija-ghara gela
SYNONYMS
atikala dekhi’—seeing that it was too late; misra—Pradyumna Misra; kichu—
anything; na kahila—did not say; viddya ha-iya—taking leave; misra—Pradyumna
Misra; nija-ghara—to his own place; gela—returned.
TRANSLATION
Because Pradyumna Misra saw that it was late, he did not say anything else
to Ramananda Riya. Instead, he took leave of him and returned to his own
home.
TEXT 33
আর দিন মিশ্র আইল প্রভু-বিত্তমানে |
প্রভু কহে, _“কৃষ্ণকথা निल রায়স্থানে” ? ৩৩ ॥
ara dina misra 313 prabhu-vidyamane
prabhu kahe, — ‘krsna-katha sunila raya-sthane’?
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; misra—Pradyumna Misra; dila—came; prabhu-
vidyamane—in the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prabhu kahe—S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired; krsna-katha—talks about Krsna; sunili—have
you heard; raya-sthine—from $ri Rimananda Raya.


--- Page 135 ---
Texts 35-36] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 133
TRANSLATION
The next day, when Pradyumna Misra arrived in the presence of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord inquired, “Have you heard talks about Krsna
from Sri Ramananda Raya?’’
TEXT 34
তবে মিশ্র Aiwa বৃত্তান্ত কহিলা।
শুনি” মহাপ্রভু তবে কহিতে লাগিল ॥ ৩৪ ॥
tabe misra ramanandera vrttanta kahila
Suni” mahaprabhu tabe kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereupon; misra—Pradyumna Misra; ramanandera—of Sri Ramananda
Raya; vrttanta kahila—described the activities; suni’—hearing; mahaprabhu —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tabe—then; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra thereupon described the activities of Sri Ramananda
Raya. After hearing about these activities, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to
speak.
TEXTS 35-36
“আমি © AI, আপনারে বিরক্ত করি” মানি।
দর্শন রহ দুরে, “প্রকৃতির” নাম যদি শুনি ॥ ৩৫ ॥
তবহি" বিকার পায় মোর তনু-মন ।
প্রকৃতি-দর্শনে স্থির হয় কোন্‌ জন ?” ৩৬ ॥
“ami ta’ sannyasi, apandre virakta kari’ mani
darsana rahu dare, ‘prakrtira’ nama yadi Suni
tabahin vikara paya mora tanu-mana
prakrti-darsane sthira haya kon jana?”
SYNONYMS
8111-1; ta’—certainly; sannyasi—in the renounced order of life; apanare—
Myself; virakta kari’—having renounced everything; mani—I| consider; darsana


--- Page 136 ---
134 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
rahu dare—what to speak of seeing; prakrtira—of a woman; nama—name;
yadi—if; suni—I| hear; tabahin—immediately; vikara—transformation; paya—
gets; mora—My; tanu-mana—mind and body; prakrti-darsane —by seeing a
woman; sthira—steady; haya—is; kon jana—what person.
TRANSLATION
‘1 am a sannyasi,”’ He said, (“मातं | certainly consider Myself renounced. But
not to speak of seeing a woman, if | even hear the name of a woman, | feel
changes in My mind and body. Therefore who could remain unmoved by the
sight of a woman? It is very difficult.
TEXT 37
রামানন্দ রায়ের কথা শুন, সর্বজন |
কহিবার কথা নহে, যাহা আশ্চর্য-কথন ॥ ৩৭ ॥
ramananda rayera katha suna, sarva-jana
kahibara katha nahe, yaha ascarya-kathana
SYNONYMS
ramananda rayera—of Sri Ramananda Raya; katha—topics; suna—please hear;
sarva-jana—all people; kahibara—to be spoken; katha—talks; nahe —they are
not; yaha —which; ascarya-kathana—wonderful and uncommon talks.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Everyone please hear these topics about Rimananda Raya, although they
are so wonderful and uncommon that they should not be spoken.
TEXT 38
একে দেবদাসী, আর FAY তরুণী |
তার जव অজঙ্গ-সেবা করেন আপনি ॥ ৩৮ ॥
eke deva-dasi, ara sundari taruni
tara saba anga-seva karena apani
SYNONYMS
eke —on one side; deva-dasi—the professional dancing girls; ara—and; sundari
taruni—very beautiful and youthful; tara—their; saba—all; anga—of the body;
seva—service; karena apani—performs personally.


--- Page 137 ---
Text 40] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 135
TRANSLATION
“The two professional dancing girls are beautiful and youthful, yet Sri
Ramananda Raya personally massages oil upon their bodies.
TEXT 39
স্লানাদি করায়, পরায় বাস-বিভুষণ।
গুহা অঙ্গের হয় তাহা দর্শন-স্পর্শন ॥ ৩৯ ॥
snanadi kardya, pardya vasa-vibhasana
guhya angera haya taha darsana-sparsana
SYNONYMS
snana-adi kardaya—he performs their bathing and so on; pardya vasa-
vibhasana—dresses and decorates the body with various types of omaments;
guhya angera—of the private parts of the body; haya—there is; taha—that; dar-
Sana-sparsana—seeing and touching.
TRANSLATION
‘‘He personally bathes and dresses them and decorates them with orna-
ments. In this way, he naturally sees and touches the private parts of their
bodies.
TEXT 40
তবু নির্বিকার রায়-রামানম্দের मन |
নানাভাবোদগার তারে করায় শিক্ষণ ॥ ৪০ ॥
tabu nirvikara raya-ramanandera mana
nana-bhavodgara tare karaya siksana
SYNONYMS
tabu —still; nirvikara—unchanged; rdya-ramanandera mana—the mind of Sri
Ramananda Raya; nana-bhava-udgara—all the symptoms and transformations of
ecstasy; tare—unto them; karadya Siksana—he teaches.
TRANSLATION
“Nevertheless, the mind of Sri Raimananda Raya never changes, although he
teaches the girls how to physically express all the transformations of ecstasy.


--- Page 138 ---
136 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 41
নির্বিকার দ্বেহ-মন-_কান্ঠ-পাষাণ-সম |
আশ্চর্য, তরুণী-স্পর্শে নিবিকার মন ॥ ৪১ ॥
nirvikara deha-mana——kastha-pasana-sama!
ascarya, — taruni-sparse nirvikara mana
SYNONYMS
nirvikara—unchanged; deha-mana—body and mind; kastha-pasana-sama—
like wood or stone; ascarya—wonderful; taruni-sparse—in touching young girls;
nirvikara—unchanged; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
‘’His mind is as steady as wood or stone. Indeed, it is wonderful that even
when he touches such young girls, his mind never changes.
TEXT 42
এক রামানন্দের হয় এই অধিকার |
তাতে জানি অপ্রাক্ৃত-দেহ তাহার ॥ ৪২ ॥
eka ramanandera haya ei adhikara
tate jani aprakrta-deha tanhara
SYNONYMS
eka—only one; ramanandera—of Sri Ramananda Raya; haya—there is; ei—
this; adhikara—special authority; tate—in that way; jani—we can understand;
aprakrta—spiritual; deha—body; tanhara—his.
TRANSLATION
“The authority for such acts is the prerogative of Ramananda Raya alone,
for 1 can understand that his body is not material but has been completely
transformed into a spiritual entity.
TEXT 43
তাহার মনের ভাব (ST জানে माल |
তাহ৷ জানিবারে আর দ্বিতীয় লাহি পাত্র ॥ ৪৩ ॥
tanhara manera bhava tenha jane matra
taha janibare ara dvitiya nahi patra


--- Page 139 ---
Texts 45-46] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 137
SYNONYMS
tanhara—his; manera—of the mind; bhava—position; tertha—he; jane—
knows; matra—only; taha janibare—to understand that; dra—other; dvitiya—
second; nahi—there is not; patra—eligible person.
TRANSLATION
‘He alone, and no one else, can understand the position of his mind.
TEXT 44
কিন্তু শান্ত্রদৃষ্ট্যে এক করি অনুমান |
জ্রীভাগবত-শাস্ত্র_ তাহাতে প্রমাণ ॥ 88 ॥
kintu Sastra-drstye eka kari anumana
sri-bhagavata-sastra— tahate pramana
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; $astra-drstye—according to the direction of the sastra; eka—one;
kari anumana—| make a guess; sri-bhagavata-sastra— Srimad-Bhagavatam, the
Vedic scripture; tahdte—in that connection; pramana—evidence.
TRANSLATION
“But | can make a guess in terms of directions from the $astra. Srimad-
Bhagavatam, the Vedic scripture, gives the direct evidence in this matter.
TEXTS 45-46
ত্রজবধূংসঙ্গে কৃষ্ণের রাসাদি-বিলাস।
যেই জন কহে, শুনে FAT বিশ্বাস ॥ ৪৫ ॥
ভহৃদ্রোগ-কাম SIT STITH হয় ক্ষয় |
তিনগুণ-ক্ষোভ নহে, “মহাধীর' হয় ॥ ৪৬ ॥
vraja-vadha-sange krsnera rasadi-vilasa
yei jana kahe, Sune kariya visvasa
hrd-roga-kama tarra tat-kale haya ksaya
tina-guna-ksobha nahe, ‘maha-dhira’ haya
SYNONYMS
vraja-vadha-sarige —in the association of the damsels of Vrajabhtimi; krsnera—
of Lord Krsna; rasa-adi-vilasa—pastimes like the rasa dance; yei—which; jana—


--- Page 140 ---
138 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
person; kahe—describes; sune—hears; kariya visvasa—with great faith; hrt-
roga—the disease of the heart; kama—lust; tanra—of him; tat-kale —at that time;
haya ksaya—becomes nullified; tina-guna—of the three modes of material
nature; ksobha—agitation; nahe—is not; maha-dhira—very sober; haya—be-
comes.

TRANSLATION

“When one hears or describes with great faith the pastimes of Lord Krsna,
such as His rasa dance with the gopis, the disease of lusty desires in his heart
and the agitation caused by the three modes of material nature are im-
mediately nullified, and he becomes sober and silent.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in this connection, “Any per-
son seriously inclined to hear about the pastimes of Krsna’s rasa dance, as men-
tioned in Srimad-Bhagavatam, with great faith and a transcendental, spiritually in-
spired mind, is immediately freed from the natural lusty desires found within the
heart of a materialistic man.”

When a pure Vaisnava speaks on S$rimad-Bhagavatam and another pure
Vaisnava hears S$rimad-Bhagavatam from such a realized soul, both of them live in
the transcendental world, where the contamination of the modes of material
nature cannot touch them. Freed from the contamination of the modes of nature,
the speaker and hearer are fixed in a transcendental mentality, knowing that their
position on the transcendental platform is to serve the Supreme Lord. The class
known as prakrta-sahajiya, who consider the transcendental pastimes of Lord
Krsna something like the behavior between a man and a woman in the material
field, artificially think that hearing the rasa-lila will help them by diminishing the
lusty desires of their diseased hearts. But because they do not follow the regula-
tive principles but instead violate even ordinary morals, their contemplation of
rasa-lilais a futile attempt, which sometimes results in their imitating the dealings
of the gopis and Lord Krsna. To forbid such habits of the prakrta-sahajiyds, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has excluded their material intelligence by using the word
vigvasa (“faith”). In Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.31), Srila Sukadeva Gosvami says:

naitat samacarej jatu
manasapi hy anisvarah
vinasyaty acaran maudhyad
yatha rudro ‘bdhijari visam
“Certainly one who is not the Supreme Personality of Godhead should never,
even within his mind, imitate the activities of the transcendental rasa-/ila of Krsna.
If out of ignorance one does so, he will be destroyed, just as if he were to imitate
Lord Siva, who drank poison produced from the ocean.”


--- Page 141 ---
Text 48] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 139
TEXT 47
উজ্জ্বল মধুর প্রেমভক্তি (AR পায়।
আনন্দে কৃষ্ণমাধুর্ে বিহরে সদায় ॥ 8१ ॥
ujjvala madhura prema-bhakti sei paya
anande krsna-madhurye vihare sadaya
SYNONYMS
ujjvala—illuminated; madhura—sweet; prema-bhakti—ecstatic love of Krsna;
sei—he; paya—gets; dnande—in transcendental bliss; krspa-madhurye—the
sweetness of Krsna's pastimes; vihare—enjoys; saddya—always.
TRANSLATION
“Tasting the transcendental, effulgent, sweetly ecstatic love of Krsna, such
a person can enjoy life twenty-four hours a day in the transcendental bliss of
the sweetness of Krsna’s pastimes.
TEXT 48
विकौङ्ङ९ ব্রজবধৃভিরিদঞ্চ বিষেণঃ
অরদ্ধাস্বিতোইষশৃণুররাদথ বণয়েদ্যঃ |
ভক্তিংপরাং ভগবতি প্রতিলভ্য কামং
হৃদ্রোগমাশ্বপহিনোত্য চিরেণ शौ व्रः ॥ ৪৮ ॥
vikriditarh vraja-vadhabhir (वरा) ca visnoh
$raddhanvito ‘nusrnuyad atha varpayed yah
bhaktirh pararh bhagavati pratilabhya kamam
hrd-rogam asv apahinoty acirena dhirah
SYNONYMS
vikriditam —the activity of the rasa dance; vraja-vadhabhih—the damsels of
Vraja, the gopis; idam—this; ca—and; visnoh—of Lord Krsna; sraddha-anvitah —
with transcendental faith; anusrpuyat—continuously hears in the parampara
system; atha—also; varpayet—describes; yah—one who; bhaktim—devotional
service; param—transcendental; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pratilabhya—attaining; kamam—Ilusty material desires; hrt-rogam—
the disease of the heart; asu—very soon; apahinoti—gives up; acirepa—without
delay; dhirah—one who is sober because of advanced devotional service.


--- Page 142 ---
140 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
^“ १4 transcendentally sober person who, with faith and love continuously
hears from a realized soul about the activities of Lord Krsna in His rasa dance
with the gopis, or one who describes such activities, can attain full transcen-
dental devotional service at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Thus lusty material desires, which are the heart disease of all ma-
terialistic persons, are for him quickly and completely vanquished.’
PURPORT
All the activities of Lord Krsna are transcendental, and the gopis are also tran-
scendentally situated. Therefore the activities of the gopis and Lord Krsna, if
seriously understood, will certainly free one from material attachment. Then there
is no possibility that lusty material desires will awaken.
TEXTS 49-50
যে শুনে, যে পড়ে, তার ফল এতাদৃনী |
সেই ভাবাবিষ্ট যেই সেবে অহল্িশি ॥ ৪৯ ॥
তার ফল কি কহিমু, কহনে a qm)
নিত্যসিদ্ধ সেই, প্রায়-সি্ধ ভার কায় ॥ ৫০ ॥
ye ৪0776, ye pade, (37/3 phala etadrsi
sei bhavavista yei seve ahar-nisi
tanra phala ki kahimu, kahane na yaya
nitya-siddha sei, praya-siddha tanra kaya
SYNONYMS
ye sune—anyone who hears; ye pade—anyone who recites; tarra—of him;
phala—the result; etadrsi—this; sei—he; bhava-avista—always absorbed in
thoughts of Krsna; yei seve—who serves; ahah-nisi—day and night; tanra—his;
phala—result; ki kahimu—what shall | say; kahane na yaya—it is impossible to
express; nitya-siddha—eternally liberated; sei—such a person; praya-siddha—
transcendental; tanra—his; kaya—body.
TRANSLATION
“If a transcendentally situated person, following in the footsteps of Srila
Rapa Gosvami, hears and speaks about the rasa-lila dance of Krsna and is al-
ways absorbed in thoughts of Krsna while serving the Lord day and night with-
in his mind, what shall | say about the result? It is so spiritually exalted that it


--- Page 143 ---
Text 52] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 141
cannot be expressed in words. Such a person is an eternally liberated associ-
ate of the Lord, and his body is completely spiritualized. Although he is visi-
ble to material eyes, he is spiritually situated, and all his activities are
spiritual. By the will of Krsna, such a devotee is understood to possess a
spiritual body.
TEXT 51
atstist-atesf कौनि রায়ের ভজন ।
जिकटदनङ- कूल, তাতে ‘AIFS নহে মন ॥ ৫১ ॥
raganuga-marge jani rayera bhajana
siddha-deha-tulya, tate ‘prakrta’ nahe mana
SYNONYMS
raganuga-marge —on the path of spontaneous love of Krsna; jani—we can
understand; rayera bhajana—the devotional service of Ramananda Raya; siddha-
deha—spiritual body; tulya—equal to; tate—therefore; prakrta—material;
nahe—is not; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
“$rila Ramananda Raya is situated on the path of spontaneous love of God-
head. Therefore he is in his spiritual body, and his mind is not materially
affected.
TEXT 52
আমিহ রায়ের স্থানে শুনি FFA ।
শুনিতে ইচ্ছা হয় যদি, পুনঃ যাহ তথা ex ॥
amiha rayera sthane suni krspa-katha
Sunite iccha haya yadi, punah yaha tatha
SYNONYMS
amiha—I| also; rdyera sthane—from Ramananda Raya; suni—hear; krsna-
katha—talks of Krsna; sunite—to hear; iccha—desire; haya—there is; yadi—if;
punah—again; yaha—go; tatha—there.
TRANSLATION
“I also hear topics about Krsna from Ramananda Raya. If you want to hear
such topics, go to him again.


--- Page 144 ---
142 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 53
মোর নাম লইহ, -“তেহো পাঠাইলা মোরে |
তোমার স্থানে FTA শুনিবার তরে ॥” ৫৩ ॥
mora nama la-iha,— ‘teho pathaila more
tornara sthane krsna-katha sunibara tare’
SYNONYMS
mora—My; nama—name; la-iha—take; teho—He; pathaila—sent; more —
me; tomdra sthane—from you; krspa-katha—topics of Krsna; sunibara tare—to
hear.
TRANSLATION
‘You can take My name before him, saying, ‘He has sent me to hear about
Lord Krsna from you.’
TEXT 54
শীঘ্র যাহ, যাবৎ তেঁহে। আছেন সভাতে 1”
এত শুনি' প্রহ্যুক্ম-মিশ্র চলিলা তুরিতে ॥ ৫৪ ॥
$ighra yaha, yavat tenho achena sabhate”
eta suni’ pradyumna-misra calila turite
SYNONYMS
sighra yaha—go hastily; yavat—while; tenho —he; achena—is; sabhate —in the
assembly room; eta suni’—hearing this; pradyumna-misra—Pradyumna Misra;
calila—went; turite—very hastily.
TRANSLATION
“Go hastily while he is in the assembly room.” Hearing this, Pradyumna
Misra immediately departed.
TEXT 55
রায়-পাশ গেল, রায় প্রণতি করিল ।
“আজ্ঞা কর, যে লাগি' আগমন टेङन' ॥ ৫৫ ॥
raya-pasa gela, raya pranati karila
2175 kara, ye lagi’ agamana haila’


--- Page 145 ---
Text 571 Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 143
SYNONYMS
raya-pasa—to Ramananda Raya; gela—he went; raya—Ramananda Raya; pra-
nati karila—offered his respects; ajna kara—please order me; ye lagi’—for what
purpose; dgamana haila—have you come.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra went to Ramananda Raya, who offered him respectful
obeisances and said, ‘Please order me. For what purpose have you ८०१९ २८८
TEXT 56
মিশ্র কহে,-_“মহাপ্রভু পাঠাইল। মোরে |
তোমার স্থানে কৃষ্ণকথা শুনিবার তরে”॥ ৫৬ ॥
misra kahe,— ‘mahaprabhu pathaila more
tomara sthane krsna-katha sunibara tare’
SYNONYMS
misra kahe—Pradyumna Misra said; mahaprabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
pathaila more —has sent me; tomara sthane —from you; krsna-katha—topics of
Lord Krsna; sunibdra tare —to hear.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra answered, ‘Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has sent me to hear
topics about Lord Krsna from you.”
TEXT 57
শুনি' রামানন্দ রায় হৈল। প্রেমাবৰেশে |
কহিতে লাগিলা কিছু মনের হরিষে ॥ ৫৭ ॥
Suni’ ramananda raya haila premavese
kahite lagila kichu manera harise
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; ramananda raya—Ramananda Raya; haila—became; prema-
avese —absorbed in ecstatic love; kahite lagila—began to speak; kichu—some-
thing; manera harise—in transcendental pleasure.


--- Page 146 ---
144 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Ramananda Raya became absorbed in ecstatic love and began
to speak with great transcendental pleasure.
TEXT 58
“প্রভুর আঙ্ঞায় FTA শুনিতে আইলা এথা |
ইহু বই মহাভাগ্য আমি পাব কোথা ?” ৫৮ ॥
“prabhura 3/73)3 krsna-katha sunite ila etha
103 va-i maha-bhagya ami paba kotha?”
SYNONYMS
prabhura ajidya—under the instruction of इन Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna-
katha—topics of Lord Krsna; sunite—to hear; ila etha—you have come here; iha
va-i—without this; maha-bhagya—great fortune; ami—I; paba—will get;
kotha—where.
TRANSLATION
“Following the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, you have come to
hear about Krsna. This is my great fortune. How else would | get such an op-
portunity?”
TEXT 59
এত কহি তারে লঞ fagrs वजिन्‌। |
“কি কথা শুনিতে চাহ ?' মিথ্রেরে পুছিল৷ ॥ ৫৯ ॥
eta kahi tare lana nibhrte vasila
‘ki katha sunite caha?’ misrere puchila
SYNONYMS
eta kahi—saying this; tare—him; landa—taking; nibhrte vasila—sat in a
secluded place; ki katha—what kind of topics; sunite caha—do you want to hear;
misrere puchila—he inquired from Pradyumna Misra.
TRANSLATION
Saying this, Sri Ramananda Raya took Pradyumna Misra to a secluded place
and inquired from him, “What kind of krsna-katha do you want to hear from
me?’


--- Page 147 ---
Text 62] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 145
TEXT 60
তেঁহো कटर, “যে কহিল।৷ বিদ্যানগরে |
সেই কথা ক্রমে তুমি BFA আমারে ॥ ৬০ ॥
tenho kahe, — “ye (9৪013 vidyanagare
sei katha krame tumi kahiba amare
SYNONYMS
tenho kahe—he replied; ye—what; kahila—you spoke; vidya-nagare—at
Vidyanagara; sei katha—those topics; krame—according to the order; tumi—
you; kahiba—please speak; amare—to me.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra replied, “/Kindly tell me about the same topics you spoke
about at Vidyanagara.
TEXT 61
আমনের कि কথা, তুমি- প্রভুর উপদেষ্টা !
আমি ত' ভিক্ষুক विष्य, তুমি মোর পোষ্টা ॥ ৬১ ॥
anera ki katha, tumi——prabhura upadesta!
ami ta’ bhiksuka vipra, tumi——mora posta
SYNONYMS
anera ki katha—what to speak of others; tumi—you; prabhura upadestd—an
instructor of $f Caitanya Mahaprabhu ;ami—I; ta’—certainly; bhiksuka—beggar;
vipra—brahmana; tumi—you; mora—my; posta—maintainer.
TRANSLATION
““You are an instructor even for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, not to speak of
others. | am but a beggar brahmana, and you are my maintainer.
TEXT 62
ভাল, মন্দ_ কিছু আমি পুছিতে না wife
“দীন” দেখি” Fo করি” কহিব। আপনি ॥” ৬২ ॥
bhala, manda——kichu ami puchite na jani
‘dina’ dekhi’ krpa kari’ kahiba apani”


--- Page 148 ---
146 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
bhala—good; manda—bad; kichu—something; ami—I; puchite—to inquire;
na jani—do not know; dina—very poor in knowledge; dekhi’—seeing (me);
krpa kari’—very mercifully; kahiba—please; dpani—by your own good will.
TRANSLATION
‘‘1 do not know how to inquire, for | do not know what is good and what is
bad. Seeing me to be poor in knowledge, kindly speak whatever is good for
me by your own good will.”
TEXT 63
তবে রামানন্দ कट्म কহিতে ল।গিলা।
কৃষ্ণকথা-রসাম্বৃত-সিদ্ধু উৎলিল। ॥ ৬৩ ॥
tabe ramananda krame kahite lagila
krsna-katha-rasamrta-sindhu uthalila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereupon; ramananda—Ramananda Raya; krame—gradually; kahite
lagila—began to speak; krspa-katha—of the topics of Krsna; rasamrta-sindhu—
the ocean of transcendental mellow; uthalili—became agitated.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon Ramananda Raya gradually began speaking on topics of Krsna.
Thus the ocean of the transcendental mellow of those topics became agitated.
TEXT 64
আপনে প্রশ্ন করি” পাছে করেন সিদ্ধান্ত ।
তৃতীয় প্রহর হৈল, নহে কথা-অন্ত ॥ ৬৪ ॥
apane prasna kari’ pache karena siddhanta
trtiya prahara haila, nahe katha-anta
SYNONYMS
apane—personally; prasna kari’—making the question; pache—after that;
karena siddhanta—gives the conclusion; trtiya prahara haila—it became after-
noon; nahe katha-anta—there was no end to such topics.


--- Page 149 ---
Text 66] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 147
TRANSLATION
He began personally posing questions and then answering them with con-
clusive statements. When afternoon came, the topics still did not end.
TEXT 65
वक শ্রোতা কহে শুনে षटं टक्‌ প্রেমাবেশে |
আত্মস্মৃতি নাহি, কাই ऊानिव দিন-শেষে ॥ ve ॥
vakta srota kahe Sune dunhe premavese
atma-smrti nahi, kahan janiba dina-sese
SYNONYMS
vakta—the speaker; srota—the listener; kahe—speaks; sune—hears; dunhe—
both of them; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; atma-smrti nahi—there was no
bodily consciousness; kahan—where; janiba—can understand; dina-sese—the
end of day.
TRANSLATION
The speaker and listener spoke and heard in ecstatic love. Thus they forgot
their bodily consciousness. How, then, could they perceive the end of the
day?
TEXT 66
সেবক কহিল,- “দিন হৈল অবসান” |
তবে রায় কৃষ্ণকথার করিল৷ বিশ্রাম ॥ ৬৬ ॥
sevaka kahila,— ‘dina haila avasana’
tabe raya krspa-kathara karila visrama
SYNONYMS
sevaka kahila—the servant informed; dina—the day; haila avasana—has
ended; tabe —at that time; rdya—Ramananda Raya; krsna-kathara—the talks of
Krsna; karila visrama—ended.
TRANSLATION
The servant informed them, “The day has already ended.” Then Rimanan-
da Raya ended his discourses about Krsna.


--- Page 150 ---
148 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 67
বহুসম্মান FR মিশ্রে বিদায় দিলা ।
“কৃতার্থ হইলাঙ' বলি” মিশ্র নাচিতে লাগিলা ॥ ৬৭ ॥
bahu-sammana kari’ misre vidaya dila
‘krtartha ha-ilana’ bali’ misra nacite lagila
SYNONYMS
bahu-sammana—much respectful behavior; kari’—doing; misre—unto Pra-
dyumna Misra; vidaya dila—bade farewell; krtartha ha-ilana—I! have become very
satisfied; bali’—saying; misra—Pradyumna Misra; nacite lagila—began to dance.
TRANSLATION
Ramananda Raya paid great respect to Pradyumna Misra and bade him
farewell. Pradyumna Misra said, “1 have become very satisfied.” He then
began to dance.
TEXT 68
ঘরে গিয়। মিশ্র কৈল স্নান, ভোজন |
সন্ধ্যাকালে দেখিতে আইল প্রভুর চরণ ॥ ৬৮ ॥
ghare giya misra kaila snana, bhojana
sandhya-kale dekhite dila prabhura carana
SYNONYMS
ghare giya—returning home; misra—Pradyumna Misra; kaila—performed;
snana—bathing; bhojana—eating; sandhya-kiale—in the evening; dekhite—to
see; aila—came; prabhura carana—the lotus feet of $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
After returning home, Pradyumna Misra bathed and ate his meal. In the
evening he came to see the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 69
প্রভুর চরণ বন্দে উল্লসিত-মনে |
প্রভু কহে, FTA হইল অবণে”? ৬৯ ॥
prabhura carana vande ullasita-mane
prabhu kake, — ‘krsna-katha ha-ila sravane’?


--- Page 151 ---
Text 71] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 149
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of ऽवं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carana—the lotus feet; vande—he
worships; ullasita-mane—in great happiness; prabhu kahe—5Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu says; krsna-katha—talks of Krsna; ha-ila sravapne —did you hear.
TRANSLATION
In great happiness he worshiped the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
The Lord inquired, “Have you heard topics about Krsna?”
TEXT 70
মিশ্র कटङ,- “প্রভু, মোরে ক্বতার্থ Fa |
কৃষ্ণকথামৃতার্ণবে মোরে Gara ॥ ৭০ ॥
misra kahe, — “prabhu, more krtartha karila
krsna-kathamrtarpave more dubaila
SYNONYMS
misra kahe—Pradyumna Misra said; prabhu—my dear Lord; more —me;
krtartha—satisfied; (८2/12 -- १06 have made; krsna-katha—of talks about Krsna;
amrta-arnave—in the ocean of the nectar; more—me; dubaila—You have
drowned.
TRANSLATION
Pradyumna Misra said, “My dear Lord, You have made me extremely
obliged to You because You have drowned me in a nectarean ocean of talks
about Krsna.
TEXT 71
রামানন্দ রায়-কথা কহিলে না হয়।
“মনুষ্য” নহে রায়, কৃষ্ণভক্তিরসময় ॥ ৭১ ॥
ramananda raya-katha kahile na haya
‘manusya’ nahe raya, krsna-bhakti-rasa-maya
SYNONYMS
ramananda raya-katha—the speeches of Ramananda Raya; kahile —describing;
na haya—is not possible; manusya—an ordinary human being; nahe—is not;
raya—Ramananda Raya; krspa-bhakti-rasa-maya—absorbed in the devotional
service of Lord Krsna.


--- Page 152 ---
150 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
‘I cannot properly describe the discourses of Rimananda Raya, for he is not
an ordinary human being. He is fully absorbed in the devotional service of the
Lord.
PURPORT
One is forbidden to accept the guru, or spiritual master, as an ordinary human
being (gurusu nara-matih). When Ramananda Raya spoke to Pradyumna Misra,
Pradyumna Misra could understand that Ramananda Raya was not an ordinary
human being. A spiritually advanced person who acts with authority, as the
spiritual master, speaks as the Supreme Personality of Godhead dictates from
within. Thus it is not he that is personally speaking. When a pure devotee or
spiritual master speaks, what he says should be accepted as having been directly
spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the parampara system.
TEXT 72
আর এক কথা রায় कङ्िनि। আমারে |
“কৃষ্ণকথা-বক্ত| করি” न। জানিহ মোরে ॥ ৭২ ॥
ara eka katha raya kahila amare
‘krsna-katha-vakta kari’ na janiha more
SYNONYMS
ara—another; eka—one; katha—topic; rdya—Ramananda Raya; kahila
amare —said to me; krsna-katha-vakta—the speaker on the talks of Krsna; kari’—
as; na janiha more —do not consider me.
TRANSLATION
“There is one other thing Ramananda Raya said to me. ‘Do not consider me
the speaker in these talks about Krsna.
TEXT 73
মোর মুখে কথা কহেন আপনে গৌরূচচ্দ্র |
যৈছে কহায়, তৈছে কহি,- যেন বীণাযন্ত্র ॥ ৭৩ ॥
‘mora mukhe katha kahena apane gauracandra
yaiche kahdya, taiche kahi,——yena vina-yantra


--- Page 153 ---
Text 75] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 151
SYNONYMS
mora mukhe—in my mouth; katha—topics; kahena—speaks; adpane—per-
sonally; gaura-candra—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yaiche kahaya—as He
causes to speak; taiche kahi—so | speak; yena—like; vina-yantra—the stringed
instrument called the vipa.
TRANSLATION
‘Whatever | speak is personally spoken by Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Like a stringed instrument, | vibrate whatever He causes me to speak.
TEXT 74
মোর মুখে কহায় কথা, করে পরচার ।
পৃথিবীতে কে জানিবে এ-লীলা তাহার ? as ॥
mora mukhe kahaya katha, kare paracara
prthivite ke janibe e-lila tanhara?’
SYNONYMS
mora mukhe—in my mouth; kahaya—causes to speak; katha—words; kare
paracara—preaches; prthivite—in this world; ke janibe—who will understand; e-
lila—this pastime; tanhara—His.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘In this way the Lord speaks through my mouth to preach the cult of
Krsna consciousness. Within the world, who will understand this pastime of
the Lord?’
TEXT 75
যে-সব निन, কৃষ্ণ - রসের সাগর |
ত্রন্মাদি-দেবের এ সব না হয় গোচর ॥ ৭৫ ॥
ye-saba Sunilun, krsna-rasera sagara
brahmadi-devera e saba na haya gocara
SYNONYMS
ye-saba—all that; sunilun—I| heard; krsna-rasera—of the nectar of Lord Krsna;
sagara—the ocean; brahma-adi-devera—of the demigods, beginning with Lord
Brahma; e saba—all this; na haya gocara—is not possible to be understood.


--- Page 154 ---
152 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
‘““What 1 have heard from Ramananda Raya is like a nectarean ocean of dis-
courses about Krsna. Even the demigods, beginning with Lord Brahma, cannot
understand all these topics.
TEXT 76
হেন “রস” পান মোরে করাইলা ङूमि ।
ट्र জন্মে তোমার পায় বিকাইলাঙ আমি wav ॥
hena ‘rasa’ pana more karaila tumi
janme janme tomdra paya vikailana ami
SYNONYMS
hena rasa—such transcendental mellows; pana—to drink; more —me; karaila
tumi—You have caused; janme janme—life after life; tomara paya—at Your feet;
vikailana ami—I| have become sold.
TRANSLATION
““My dear Lord, You have made me drink this transcendental nectar of
krsna-katha. Therefore | am sold to Your lotus feet, life after life.”
TEXT 77
প্রভু কহে,-_ “রামানন্দ বিনয়ের খনি ।
আপনার কথা পরমুণ্ডে দেন আমি” ॥ ৭৭ ॥
prabhu (८2/16, --- “ramananda vinayera khani
apandra katha para-munde dena ani’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; ramananda—Ramananda Raya; vinayera
khani—the mine of humility; apandra katha —his own words; para-munde —on
another's head; dena—confers; ani’—bringing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “‘Ramananda Raya is a source of all humility.
Therefore he has attributed his own words to another's intelligence.


--- Page 155 ---
Text 80] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 153
TEXT 78
মহাম্ুভবের এই সহজ “স্বভাব” হয় |
আপনার গুণ নাহি আপনে কহয় ॥ ৭৮ ॥
mahanubhavera ei sahaja ‘svabhava’ haya
apanara guna nahi apane kahaya”
SYNONYMS
mahanubhavera—of those who are advanced in realization; ei—this; sahaja—
natural; svabhava—characteristic; haya—is; apanara guna—their own personal
qualities; nahi—do not; dpane —personally; kahaya—speak.
TRANSLATION
“This is a natural characteristic of those advanced in devotional service.
They do not personally speak of their own good qualities.”
TEXT 79
রামানম্দরায়ের এই কহিন্পু গুণ-লেশ |
প্রদ্্য্ মিশ্রেরে যৈছে কৈল। উপদেশ ॥ ৭৯ ॥
ramananda-rayera ei kahilu guna-lesa
pradyumna misrere yaiche kaila upadesa
SYNONYMS
ramananda-rayera—of 5 Ramananda Raya; ei—this; kahilu—I have spoken;
guna-lesa—a fraction of the transcendental attributes; pradyumna misrere —unto
Pradyumna Misra; yaiche—in which way; kaila upadesa—he gave instruction.
TRANSLATION
1 have described but a fraction of the transcendental attributes of Ramanan-
da Raya, as revealed when he instructed Pradyumna Misra.
TEXT 80
“গৃহস্থ হঞ। নহে রায় ষড় বর্গের বশে ।
“বিষয়ী” =e! সন্য্যাসীরে উপদেশে ॥ ৮০ ॥
‘grhastha’ hana nahe raya sad-vargera vase
‘visayl’ hana sannyasire upadese


--- Page 156 ---
154 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS

grhastha hana—being a householder; nahe—is not; raya—Ramananda Raya;
sat-vargera vase —under the control of the six kinds of bodily change; visay?
hafia—being a pounds-and-shillings man; sannyasire upadese —advises persons in
the renounced order of life.

TRANSLATION

Although Ramananda Raya was a householder, he was not under the control
of the six kinds of bodily change. Although apparently a pounds-and-shillings
man, he advised even persons in the renounced order.

PURPORT

Sri Ramananda Raya externally appeared to be a grhastha who was under the
influence of the external, material energy, not a self-controlled brahmacari,
vanaprastha or sannyasi. Grhasthas (householders) who are under the influence of
the external energy accept householder life for the purpose of sense enjoyment,
but a transcendentally situated Vaisnava is not subjected to the influence of the
senses by the Lord's material rule of the six kinds of bodily change (kama, krodha,
lobha, moha, mada, and matsarya), even when he plays the part of a grhastha.
Thus although Srila Ramananda Raya acted as a grhastha and was accepted as an
ordinary pounds-and-shillings man, he was always absorbed in the transcendental
pastimes of Lord Krsna. Therefore his mind was spiritually situated, and he was in-
terested only in the subject of Krsna. Ramananda Raya was not among the
Mayavadi impersonalists or materialistic logicians who are opposed to the prin-
ciples of Lord Krsna's transcendental pastimes. He was already spiritually situated
in the order of renounced life; therefore he was able to turn sand into gold by
spiritual potency, or, in other words, to elevate a person from a material to a
spiritual position.

TEXT 81
এইসব গুণ ভার প্রকাশ FETS |
মিথ্রেরে পাঠাইল। ङा] শ্রবণ করিতে ॥ ৮১ ॥
ei-saba guna tanra prakasa karite
misrere pathaila tahan sravana karite
SYNONYMS

ei-saba—all these; guna—attributes; tarra—of Ramananda Raya; prakasa
karite—to demonstrate; misrere—Pradyumna Misra; pathaila—He sent; tahan—
there; sravana karite—to hear.


--- Page 157 ---
Text 83] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 155
TRANSLATION
To demonstrate the transcendental attributes of Ramananda Raya, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent Pradyumna Misra to hear discourses about Krsna
from him.
TEXT 82
ভক্তগুণ প্রকাশিতে প্রভু ভাল कोटन |
নানা-ভঙ্গীতে গুণ প্রকাশি' নিজ-লান্ড মানে ॥ ৮২ ॥
bhakta-guna prakasite prabhu bhala jane
nana-bhangite guna prakasi’ nija-labha mane
SYNONYMS
bhakta-guna—the attributes of a devotee; prakasite—to manifest; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhala jane —knows very well how; nana-bhangite —by
various ways; guna—attributes; prakasi’—manifesting; nija-labha—His profit;
mane —He considers.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, knows
very well how to demonstrate the qualities of His devotees. Therefore, acting
like an artistic painter, He does so in various ways and considers this His per-
sonal profit.
TEXT 83
আর এক खावः গৌরের শুন, ভক্তগণ |
এশ্বর্য-স্বভাব গুঢ় করে প্রকটন ॥ ৮৩ ॥
ara eka ‘svabhava’ gaurera suna, bhakta-gana
aisvarya-svabhava gadha kare prakatana
SYNONYMS
ara—another; eka—one; svabhava—characteristic; gaurera—of Lord Si
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; suna—hear; bhakta-gana—O devotees; aisvarya-
svabhava—opulences and characteristics; gtidha—very deep; kare—does; pra-
katana—manifestation.
TRANSLATION
There is yet another characteristic of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. 0
devotees, listen carefully to how He manifests His opulence and charac-
teristics, although they are exceptionally deep.


--- Page 158 ---
156 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 84
সন্ন্যাসী পণ্ডিতগণের করিতে গর্ব নাশ |
নীচ-শৃদ্র-দ্বার৷ করেন৷ ধর্মের প্রকাশ ॥ ৮৪ ॥
sannyasi pandita-ganera karite garva nasa
nica-sadra-dvara karena dharmera prakasa
SYNONYMS

sannyasi—persons in the renounced order; pandita-ganera—of the learned
scholars; karite—to do; garva—pride; nasa—vanquishing; nica—lowborn;
sadra—a fourth-class man; dvara—through; karena—does; dharmera prakasa—
spreading of real religious principles.

TRANSLATION

To vanquish the false pride of so-called renunciants and learned scholars,
He spreads real religious principles, even through a sadra, or lowborn fourth-
class man.

PURPORT

When a man is greatly learned in the Vedanta-satras, he is known as pandita, or
a learned scholar. Generally this qualification is attributed to brahmanas and san-
nyasis. Sannyasa, the renounced order of life, is the topmost position for a
brahmana, a member of the highest of the four varnas (brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya
and suadra). According to public opinion, a person born in a brahmana family, duly
reformed by the purificatory processes and properly initiated by a spiritual master,
is an authority on Vedic literature. When such a person is offered the sannyasa
order, he comes to occupy the topmost position. The brahmana is supposed to be
the spiritual master of the other three varnas, namely ksatriya, vaisya and sadra,
and the sannyasi is supposed to be the spiritual master even of the exalted
brahmanas.

Generally brahmanas and sannyasis are very proud of their spiritual positions.
Therefore, to cut down their false pride, $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu preached Krsna
consciousness through Ramananda Raya, who was neither a member of the
renounced order nor a born bradhmana. Indeed, Sri Ramananda Riya was a
grhastha belonging to the sadra class, yet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arranged for
him to be the master who taught Pradyumna Misra, a highly qualified brahmana
born in a brahmana family. Even Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself, although
belonging to the renounced order, took instruction from $ri Ramananda Raya. In
this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His opulence through Sri Ramananda
Raya. That is the special significance of this incident.


--- Page 159 ---
Text 85] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 157
According to 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s philosophy, yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei
‘guru’ haya: anyone who knows the science of Krsna can become a spiritual
master, without reference to whether or not he is a brahmana or sannyasi. Ordi-
nary people cannot understand the essence of astra, nor can they understand the
pure character, behavior and abilities of strict followers of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s principles. The Krsna consciousness movement is creating pure, ex-
alted Vaisnavas even from those born in families considered lower than those of
50/25. This is proof that a Vaisnava may appear in any family, as confirmed in
Srimad-Bhagavatam:
kirata-hanandhra-pulinda-pulkasa
abhira-sumbha yavanah khasadayah
ye ‘nye ca papa yad-apasrayasrayah
Sudhyanti tasmai prabhavisnave namah
“Kirata, Hana, Andhra, Pulinda, Pulkasa, Abhira, Sumbha, Yavana and the Khasa
races, and even others addicted to sinful acts, can be purified by taking shelter of
the devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme power. | beg to offer my respect-
ful obeisances unto Him.” (Bhag. 2.4.18) By the grace of the Supreme Lord Visnu,
one can be completely purified, become a preacher of Krsna consciousness, and
become the spiritual master of the entire world. This principle is accepted in all
Vedic literature. Evidence can be quoted from authoritative sastras showing how a
lowborn person can become the spiritual master of the entire world. $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is to be considered the most munificent personality, for He dis-
tributes the real essence of Vedic sastras to anyone who becomes qualified by be-
coming His sincere servant.
TEXT 85

“ভক্তি” “প্রেম” ‘TX কহে রায়ে করি” "वका |

আপনি প্রদ্্যন্থমিশ্র-সহ হয় “শ্রোতা” ॥ ৮৫ ॥

‘bhakti’, ‘prema’, ‘tattva’ kahe raye kari’ ‘vakta’

apani pradyumna-misra-saha haya ‘srota’

SYNONYMS
bhakti—devotional service; prema—ecstatic love; tattva—truth; kahe—He

says; rdye—Ramananda Raya; kari’—by making; vakta—the speaker; apani—
Himself; pradyumna-misra—Pradyumna Misra; saha—with; haya srota—be-
comes the listener.


--- Page 160 ---
158 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu preached about devotional service, ecstatic love
and the Absolute Truth by making Ramananda Raya, a grhastha born in a low
family, the speaker. Then Sri Caitanya Mahiprabhu Himself, the exalted
brahmana-sannyasi, and Pradyumna Misra, the purified brahmana, both be-
came the hearers of Ramananda Raya.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya that sannyasis in
the line of Sankaracarya always think that they have performed all the duties of
brahmanas and that, furthermore, having understood the essence of Vedanta-
satra and become sannyasis, they are the natural spiritual masters of all society.
Similarly, persons born in brahmana families think that because they execute the
ritualistic ceremonies recommended in the Vedas and follow the principles of
smirti, they alone can become spiritual masters of society. These highly exalted
brahmanas think that unless one is born in a brahmana family, one cannot become
a spiritual master and teach the Absolute Truth. To cut down the pride of these
birthright brahmanas and Mayavadi sannyasis, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu proved
that a person like Ramananda Raya, although born in a sadra family and situated in
the grhastha-asrama, can become the spiritual master of such exalted personalities
as Himself and Pradyumna Misra. This is the principle of the Vaisnava cult, as
evinced in the teachings of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. A person who knows what
is spiritual and what is material and who is firmly fixed in the spiritual position can
be jagad-guru, the spiritual master of the entire world. One cannot become jagad-
guru simply by advertising oneself as jagad-guru without knowing the essential
principles for becoming jagad-guru. Even people who never see what a jagad-
guru is and never talk with other people become puffed-up sannyasis and declare
themselves jagad-gurus. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not like this. Any person
who knows the science of Krsna and who is fully qualified in spiritual life can be-
come jagad-guru. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally took lessons from Sri
Ramananda Raya and also sent Pradyumna Misra, an exalted brahmana, to take
lessons from him.
TEXT 86

হরিদাস-দ্বারা নাম-মাহাত্ম্য-প্রকাশ |

সনাজঙ্তন-দ্বার। ভক্তি'সিজ্ধান্তবিলাস ॥ ৮৬ ॥

haridasa-dvara nama-mahatmya-prakasa

sanatana-dvara bhakti-siddhanta-vilasa


--- Page 161 ---
Text 88] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 159
SYNONYMS
haridasa-dvara—by Haridasa Thakura; nama-mahatmya—of the glories of
chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra; prakasa—manifestation; sanatana-dvara—
by Sanatana Gosvami; bhakti-siddhanta-vilasa—spreading the essence of devo-
tional life.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited the glories of the holy name of the Lord
through Haridasa Thakura, who was born in a Mohammedan family. Similarly,
He exhibited the essence of devotional service through Sanatana Gosvami,
who had almost been converted into a Mohammedan.
TEXT 87
ল্রীরূপ-দ্বারা ত্রজের প্রেম-রস-লীলা।
কে বুঝিতে পারে গম্ভীর চৈতন্ত্যের খেলা ? ৮৭ ॥
Sri-rapa-dvara vrajera prema-rasa-lila
ke bujhite pare gambhira caitanyera khela?
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa-dvara—through 67 Ripa Gosvami; vrajera—of Vrndavana; prema-
rasa-lila—description of ecstatic love and pastimes; ke—who; bujhite pare —can
understand; gambhira—deep; caitanyera khela—the activities of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The Lord also fully exhibited the ecstatic love and transcendental pastimes
of Vrndavana through Srila Ripa Gosvami. Considering all this, who can
understand the deep plans of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
TEXT 88
প্রীচৈতন্যলীল৷ এই- অম্ৃতের 51% |
लिक्‌ग९ ভাসাইতে পারে যার এক বিদ্দু ॥ ৮৮ ॥
$ri-caitanya-lila ei—amrtera sindhu
trijagat bhasaite pare yara eka bindu


--- Page 162 ---
160 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
$ri-caitanya-lili—transcendental activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei—
these; amrtera sindhu—the ocean of nectar; tri-jagat—the three worlds;
bhasaite —to inundate; pare—is able; yara—of which; eka bindu—one drop.
TRANSLATION
The activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are just like an ocean of nectar.
Even a drop of this ocean can inundate all the three worlds.
PURPORT
To inundate the three worlds with nectar is the purpose of the pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. How this could be possible was exhibited by Srila
Raghunatha Gosvami and later by Thakura Narottama dasa and Syamananda
Gosvami, who all represented the mercy of अ Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Now that
same mercy is overflooding the entire world through the Krsna consciousness
movement. The present Krsna consciousness movement is nondifferent from the
pastimes performed by त Caitanya Mahaprabhu when He was personally pres-
ent, for the same principles are being followed and the same actions performed
without fail.
TEXT 89
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্ৃত নিত্য কর পান |
যাহা হৈতে “প্রেমানম্দ ‘SiS ॥ ৮৯ ॥
caitanya-caritamrta nitya kara pana
yaha haite ‘premananda’, ‘bhakti-tattva-jAana’
SYNONYMS
caitanya-caritamrta—this transcendental literature known as Caitanya-
caritamrta; nitya—daily; kara pana—do relish; yaha haite—by which; prema-
ananda—transcendental bliss; bhakti-tattva-jidna—transcendental knowledge in
devotional service.
TRANSLATION
O devotees, relish daily the nectar of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta and the
pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for by doing so one can merge in the
transcendental bliss and full knowledge of devotional service.


--- Page 163 ---
Text 92] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 161
TEXT 90
এইমত মহাপ্রভু खनन्‌ লঞ।৷ |
নীলাচলে বিহরয়ে ভক্তি প্রচারিয়। ॥ >° ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana lana
nilacale viharaye bhakti pracariya
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-gana
landa—accompanied by His pure devotees; nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri;
viharaye—enjoys transcendental bliss; bhakti pracariya—preaching the cult of
devotional service.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, accompanied by His associates, His
pure devotees, enjoyed transcendental bliss in Jagannatha Puri [Nilacalal
preaching the bhakti cult in many ways.
TEXT 91
বঙ্গদেলী এক বিপ্র প্রভুর চরিতে |
নাটক कत्रि" न] আইল প্রভুকে শুনাইতে ॥৯১॥
bariga-desi eka vipra prabhura carite
nataka kari’ laiia aila prabhuke sunaite
SYNONYMS
bariga-desi—from Bengal; eka vipra—one brahmana; prabhura carite —about
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s characteristics; nataka kari’—making a drama; Jaa —
taking; aila—came; prabhuke sunaite —to induce Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
to hear.
TRANSLATION
A brihmana from Bengal wrote a drama about the characteristics of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and came with his manuscript to induce the Lord to
hear it.
TEXT 92
ভগবান্-আচার্খথ-সনে তার পরিচয় |
তরে মিলি” Sta ঘরে করিল আলয় ॥ ৯২ ॥


--- Page 164 ---
162 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
bhagavan-acarya-sane tara paricaya
tanre mili’ tanra ghare karila alaya
SYNONYMS
bhagavan-acarya—the devotee of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu named
Bhagavan Acarya; sane—with; tara paricaya—his acquaintance; tarnre mili’'—
meeting him; tanra ghare —at his place; karila alaya—made residence.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana was acquainted with Bhagavan Acarya, one of the devotees
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore after meeting him at Jagannatha Puri,
the brahmana made his residence at Bhagavan Acarya’s home.
TEXT 93
প্রথমে নাটক তেঁহো তারে শুনাইল |
তাঁর সঙ্গে অনেক বৈষ্ণব নাটক শুনিল ॥ ৯৩ ॥
prathame nataka tenho tanre sunaila
tanra sange aneka vaispava nataka Sunila
SYNONYMS
prathame—at first; nataka—the drama; tenho—he; tanre—him; sunaila—
made to hear; tarira sarige—with him; aneka—many; vaisnava—devotees; nataka
Sunila—listened to the drama.
TRANSLATION
First the brahmana induced Bhagavan Acarya to hear the drama, and then
many other devotees joined Bhagavan Acarya in listening to it.
TEXT 94
সবেই প্রশংসে নাটক “পরম উত্তম” |
মহাপ্রভুরে অুনাইতে সবার হৈল মন ॥ ৯৪ ॥
sabei prasarse nataka ‘parama uttama’
mahaprabhure sunaite sabara haila mana
SYNONYMS
sabei—all; prasarhse —praised; nataka—the drama; parama uttama—'"very
good, very good”; mahaprabhure—Sn Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sunaite—to cause
to hear; sabara—of everyone; haila—there was; mana—mind.


--- Page 165 ---
Text 971 Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 163
TRANSLATION
All the Vaisnavas praised the drama, saying, ‘Very good, very good.” They
also desired for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear the drama.
TEXT 95
গীত, cat, গ্রন্থ, কবিত্ব - যেই করি” আনে।
প্রথমে WAIT সেই স্বরূপের স্থানে ॥ ৯৫ ॥
gita, sloka, grantha, kavitva——yei kari’ ane
prathame sundya sei svarapera sthane
SYNONYMS
gita—song; sloka—verse; grantha—literature; kavitva—poetry; yei—anyone
who; kari’—making; ane—brings; prathame —first; sunaya—recites; sei—that
person; svartpera sthane—before Svaripa Damodara Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Customarily, anyone who composed a song, verse, literary composition or
poem about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu first had to bring it to Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami to be heard.
TEXT 96
স্বরূপ-ঠাঞি উত্তরে যদি, ae), তার मन ।
তবে মহাপ্রভু-ঠাঞ্ি করায় শ্রবণ ॥ ৯৬ ॥
svarapa-thani uttare yadi, 1303, tarnra mana
tabe mahaprabhu-thani kardya sravana
SYNONYMS
svarapa-thani —before Svaripa Damodara Gosvami; uttare —passes; yadi—if
one; lana—taking; tanra mana—his mind; tabe —thereafter; mahaprabhu-thani—
before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kardya sravana—causes to be heard.
TRANSLATION
If passed by Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, it could be presented for Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear.
TEXT 97
‘Qe হয় যদি “সিজ্ধান্তবিরোধ” |
সহিতে না৷ পারে প্রভু, মনে হয় ক্রোধ ॥ ৯৭ ॥


--- Page 166 ---
164 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
‘rasabhasa’ haya yadi ‘siddhanta-virodha’
sahite na pare prabhu, mane haya krodha
SYNONYMS
rasa-abhasa—overlapping of transcendental mellows; haya—there is; yadi—if;
siddhanta-virodha—against the principles of the bhakti cult; sahite na pare —can-
not tolerate; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mane —within the mind; haya—
is; krodha—anger.
TRANSLATION
If there were a hint that transcendental mellows overlapped in a manner
contrary to the principles of the bhakti cult, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would
not tolerate it and would become very angry.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura quotes the following definition of
rasabhasa from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Uttara-vibhaga, Ninth Wave,
1-3,20,22,24):
parvam evanusistena
vikala rasa-laksana
rasa eva rasabhasa
rasajiiair anukirtitah
syus tridhoparasas canu-
rasas caparasas ca te
uttama madhyamah proktah
kanisthas cety ami kramat
praptaih sthayi-vibhavanu-
bhavadyais tu virapatam
santadayo rasa eva
dvadasoparasa matah
bhaktadibhir vibhavadyaih
krsna-sambandha-varjitaih
rasa hasyadayah sapta
santas canurasa matah
krsna-tat-pratipaksas ced
visayasrayatam gatah
hasadinam tada te ‘tra
prajiair aparasa matah


--- Page 167 ---
Text 98] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 165
bhavah sarve tadabhasa
rasabhasas ca kecana
ami prokta rasabhijnaih
sarve ‘pi rasanad rasah
A mellow temporarily appearing transcendental but contradicting mellows pre-
viously stated and lacking some of a mellow’s necessities is called rasabhasa, an
overlapping mellow, by advanced devotees who know how to taste transcen-
dental mellows. Such mellows are called uparasa (submellows), anurasa (imitation
transcendental mellows) and aparasa (opposing transcendental mellows). Thus
the overlapping of transcendental mellows is described as being first grade, sec-
ond grade or third grade. When the twelve mellows—such as neutrality, servitor-
ship and friendship—are characterized by adverse sthayi-bhava, vibhava and
anubhava ecstasies, they are known as uparasa, submellows. When the seven in-
direct transcendental mellows and the dried up mellow of neutrality are produced
by devotees and moods not directly related to Krsna and devotional service in
ecstatic love, they are described as anurasa, imitation mellows. If Krsna and the
enemies who harbor feelings of opposition toward Him are respectively the ob-
ject and abodes of the mellow of laughter, the resulting feelings are called aparasa,
opposing mellows. Experts in distinguishing one mellow from another sometimes
accept some overlapping transcendental mellows (rasabhasa) as rasas due to their
being pleasurable and tasteful. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says,
paraspara-vairayor yadi yogas tada rasabhasah: “When two opposing transcen-
dental mellows overlap, they produce rasabhasa, or an overlapping of transcen-
dental mellows.”
TEXT 98
অতএব প্রভু কিছু আগে নাহি শুনে ।
এই মর্যাদা প্রভু করিয়াছে নিয়মে ॥ ৯৮ ॥
ataeva prabhu kichu age nahi Sune
ei maryada prabhu kariyache niyame
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kichu—anything;
age—ahead; nahi sune—does not hear; ei maryada—this etiquette; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kariyache niyame —has made a regulative principle.
TRANSLATION
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would not hear anything before
Svaripa Damodara heard it first. The Lord made this etiquette a regulative
principle.


--- Page 168 ---
166 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 99
স্বরূপের $ ॐ আচার্য কৈল৷ নিবেদন |
এক विव्यं প্রভুর নাটক করিয়াছে উত্তম ॥ >> ॥
svarapera thani acarya kaila nivedana
eka vipra prabhura nataka kariyache uttama
SYNONYMS
svarapera thani—before Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; acarya—Bhagavan
Acarya; kaila—did; nivedana—submission; eka vipra—one brahmana;
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nataka—drama; kariyache—has com-
posed; uttama—very nice.
TRANSLATION
Bhagavan Acarya submitted to Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, “A good
brahmana has prepared a drama about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that appears
exceptionally well composed.
TEXT 100
eh তুমি শুন, যদি তোমার मन मोटन |
পাছে মহাপ্রভুরে তবে করাই মু শবণে ॥ ১০০ ॥
3030 tumi Suna, yadi tomara mana mane
pache mahaprabhure tabe karaimu Sravane
SYNONYMS
adau—in the beginning; tumi—you; suna—hear; yadi—if; tomara mana
mane—you accept;  pache—thereafter; mahaprabhure—S$ri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tabe —then; karaimu sravane —I shall request to hear.
TRANSLATION
“First you hear it, and if it is acceptable to your mind, I shall request Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear it.”
TEXT 101
স্বরূপ कटङ,- “তুমি CMA পরম-উদার ।
যে-সে শাপ্ত্র শুনিতে ইচ্ছ। উপজে তোমার ॥ ১০১ ॥
svarapa 10৪06, — “tumi ‘gopa’ parama-udara
ye-se $astra sunite iccha upaje tomara


--- Page 169 ---
Text 103] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 167
SYNONYMS
svarapa kahe —Svarapa Damodara Gosvami said; tumi—you; gopa—cowherd
boy; parama-udara—very liberal; ye-se sastra—anything written as scripture;
sunite—to hear; iccha—desire; upaje—awakens; tomara—of you.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara Gosvami replied, “Dear Bhagavan Acirya, you are a very
liberal cowherd boy. Sometimes the desire awakens within you to hear any
kind of poetry.
TEXT 102
“যদ্বা-তত্বা' কবির বাক্যে হুয় श्रगोरोजः |
সিদ্ধান্তবিরুদ্ধ শুনিতে न। হয় উল্লাস ॥ ১০২ ॥
‘yadva-tadva’ kavira vakye haya ‘rasabhasa’
siddhanta-viruddha sunite na haya ullasa
SYNONYMS
yadva-tadva kavira—of any so-called poet; vakye—in the words; haya—there
is; rasa-abhasa—overlapping of transcendental mellows; siddhanta-viruddha—
against the conclusive understanding; sunite—to hear; na—not; haya—there is;
ullasa—joy.
TRANSLATION
‘‘In the writings of so-called poets there is generally a possibility of over-
lapping transcendental mellows. When the mellows thus go against the con-
clusive understanding, no one likes to hear such poetry.
PURPORT
Yadva-tadva kavi refers to anyone who writes poetry without knowledge of
how to do so. Writing poetry, especially poetry concerning the Vaisnava conclu-
sion, is very difficult. If one writes poetry without proper knowledge, there is
every possibility that the mellows will overlap. When this occurs, no learned or
advanced Vaisnava will like to hear it.
TEXT 103
“রস” “রসাভাস” যার নাহিক বিচার ।
ভক্তিসিদ্ধান্ত-সিদ্ধু নাহি পায় পার ॥ ১০৩ ॥
‘rasa’, ‘rasabhasa’ yara nahika vicara
bhakti-siddhanta-sindhu nahi paya para


--- Page 170 ---
168 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
rasa—transcendental mellows; rasa-abhasa—overlapping of transcendental
mellows; yara—of whom; nahika vicara—there is no consideration; bhakti-sid-
dhanta-sindhu—the ocean of the conclusions of devotional service; nahi—not;
pdya—attains; para—the limit.
TRANSLATION
“^ so-called poet who has no knowledge of transcendental mellows and
the overlapping of transcendental mellows cannot cross the ocean of the con-
clusions of devotional service.
TEXTS 104-105
“ব্যাকরণ” নাহি জানে, Al জানে ‘SAE ।
নাটকালঙ্কার”-ভ্ডান নাহিক যাহার ॥ ১০৪ ॥
Fama বণিতে না জানে সেই ছার !
বিশেষে দুর্গম এই চৈতন্তয-বিহার ॥ ১০৫ ॥
‘vyakarana’ nahi jane, na jane ‘alankara’
‘natakalankara’-jniana nahika yahara
krsna-lila varnite na jane sei chara!
visese durgama ei caitanya-vihara
SYNONYMS
vyakarana—grammar; nahi jane —does not know; na jane —does not know;
alarikara—metaphorical ornaments; nataka-alankara—of the metaphorical orna-
ments of drama; jiana—knowledge; nahika—there is not; yahara—of whom;
krsna-lila—the pastimes of Lord Krsna; varnite—to describe; na jane—does not
know; sei—he; chara—condemned; visese —especially; durgama—very, very
difficult; ei—these; caitanya-vihara—the pastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
‘“A poet who does not know the grammatical regulative principles, who is
unfamiliar with metaphorical ornaments, especially those employed in drama,
and who does not know how to present the pastimes of Lord Krsna is con-
demned. Moreover, the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are especially
difficult to understand.


--- Page 171 ---
Text 107] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 169
TEXT 106
কৃষ্ণলীলা, গৌরলীল৷! সে করে दर्नन्‌ ।
গৌর-পাদপন্ম যার হয় প্রাণ-খন ॥ ১০৬ ॥
10$03-113, gaura-lila se kare varpana
gaura-pada-padma yanra haya prana-dhana
SYNONYMS
krspa-lila—the pastimes of Lord Krsna; gaura-lili—the pastimes of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; se—he; kare varnana—describes; gaura-pada-padma—
the lotus feet of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yarnra—whose; haya—is; prana-
dhana—the life and soul.
TRANSLATION
“One who has accepted the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as his life
and soul can describe the pastimes of Lord Krsna or the pastimes of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 107
গ্রাম্য-কবির कविद्धं শুনিতে হয় ‘as |
বিদম্ধ-আত্মীয়-বাক্য শুনিতে হয় “স্থখ” ॥ ১০৭ ॥
gramya-kavira kavitva Sunite haya ‘duhkha’
vidagdha-atmiya-vakya sunite haya ‘sukha’
SYNONYMS
gramya-kavira—of a poet who writes poetry concerning man and woman;
kavitva—poetry; Sunite—to hear; haya—there is; duhkha—unhappiness;
vidagdha-atmiya—of a devotee fully absorbed in ecstatic love; vakya—the
words; sunite—to hear; haya—there is; sukha—happiness.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Hearing the poetry of a person who has no transcendental knowledge and
who writes about the relationships between man and woman simply causes
unhappiness, whereas hearing the words of a devotee fully absorbed in
ecstatic love causes great happiness.
PURPORT
Gramya-kavi refers to a poet or writer such as the authors of novels and other
fiction who write only about the relationships between man and woman.


--- Page 172 ---
170 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
Vidagdha-atmiya-vakya, however, refers to words written by a devotee who fully
understands pure devotional service. Such devotees, who follow the parampara
system, are sometimes described as sajatiyasaya-snigdha, or “pleasing to the same
class of people.” Only the poetry and other writings of such devotees are ac-
cepted with great happiness by devotees.
TEXT 108
রূপ যৈছে দুই নাটক করিয়াছে WAY |
শুনিতে खानन् বাড়ে যার মুখবন্ধে I” ১০৮ ॥
rapa yaiche dui nataka kariyache arambhe
Sunite dnanda bade yara mukha-bandhe”
SYNONYMS
ripa—Rapa Gosvami; yaiche—as; dui—two; nataka—dramas; kariyache
drambhe —has compiled; sunite—to hear; dnanda bade —transcendental happi-
ness increases; yara—of which; mukha-bandhe —even the introductory portion.
TRANSLATION
“The standard for writing dramas has been set by Ripa Gosvami. If a devo-
tee hears the introductory portions of his two dramas, they enhance his tran-
scendental pleasure.”
TEXT 109
ভগবান্‌-আচার্থ কহে,-_“শুন একবার |
তুমি শুনিলে ভাল-মন্দ জানিবে বিচার ॥১০৯॥
bhagavan-acarya kahe, — ‘suna eka-bara
(८1721 Sunile bhala-manda janibe vicara’
SYNONYMS
bhagavan-acarya—Bhagavan Acarya; kahe—says; suna—please hear; eka-
bara—once; tumi sunile—if you hear; bhala-manda—good or bad; janibe
vicara—will be able to understand.
TRANSLATION
Despite the explanation of Svaripa Damodara, Bhagavan Acarya requested,
‘‘Please hear the drama once. If you hear it, you can consider whether it is
good or bad.”


--- Page 173 ---
Text 112] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 171
TEXT 110
তুই छिन দিন আচার্য আগ্রহ করিল 1
ভার আগ্রহে 'স্বরূপের শুনিতে ইচ্ছা হইল ॥ ১১০ ॥
dui tina dina acarya agraha karila
tanra agrahe svarapera sunite iccha ha-ila
SYNONYMS
dui tina dina—for two or three days; dcarya—Bhagavan Acarya; agraha karila—
expressed his ardent desire; tanra agrahe—by his eagerness; svarapera—of
Svaripa Damodara; sunite—to hear; iccha—desire; ha-ila—there was.
TRANSLATION
For two or three days Bhagavan Aciarya continually asked Svariipa
Damodara Gosvami to hear the poetry. Because of his repeated requests,
Svaripa Damodara Gosvami wanted to hear the poetry written by the
brahmana from Bengal.
TEXT 111
जव লঞ স্বরূপ গোসাঞি শুনিতে वजिन। |
তবে সেই কবি নান্দী-শ্লোক পড়িল ॥ ১১১ ॥
saba lana svarapa gosani Sunite vasila
tabe sei kavi nandi-sloka padila
SYNONYMS
saba lana—in the company of other devotees; svardpa gosani—Svartpa
Damodara Gosvami; sunite vasila—sat down to hear; tabe —thereafter; sei kavi—
that poet; nandi-sloka—the introductory verse; padila—read.
TRANSLATION
Svaripa Damodara Gosvami sat down with other devotees to hear the po-
etry, and then the poet began to read the introductory verse.
TEXT 112
বিকচকমলনেত্রে শ্রীজগল্পাথসংজ্ে
কনকরুচিরিহাত্মন্যাত্মতাং वः প্রপল্পঃ |


--- Page 174 ---
172 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
প্রকৃতিজড়মণেষং চেতয়ন্নাবিরাসীৎ
म शिन्‌ তব ভব্যং কৃষ্ণচৈতন্যদেবঃ ॥ ১১২ ॥
vikaca-kamala-netre sri-jagannatha-sarnjie
kanaka-rucir ihatmany atmatam yah prapannah
prakrti-jadam asesarn cetayann avirasit
sa disatu tava bhavyarn krspa-caitanya-devah
SYNONYMS
vikaca—expanded; kamala-netre—whose lotus eyes; sri-jagannatha-sarnjiie —
named 6 Jagannatha; kanaka-rucih—possessing a golden hue; iha—here in
Jagannatha Puri; dtmani—in the body; atmatam—the state of being the self;
yah—who; prapannah—has obtained; prakrti—matter; jadam—inert; asesam—
unlimitedly; cetayan—enlivening; avirdsit—has appeared; sah —He; disatu —may
bestow; tava—unto you; bhavyam—auspiciousness; krspa-caitanya-devah—
Lord ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu, known as Krsna Caitanya.
TRANSLATION
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead has assumed a golden complexion
and has become the soul of the body named Lord )Jagannatha, whose bloom-
ing lotus eyes are widely expanded. Thus He has appeared in Jagannatha Puri
and brought dull matter to life. May that Lord, $ri Krsna Caitanyadeva, bestow
upon you all good fortune.”
TEXT 113
শ্লোক শুনি” সর্বঙোক তাহারে বাখানে।
স্বরূপ কহে,--“এই শ্লোক করহ ব্যাখ্যানে ॥ ১১৩ ॥
sloka Suni’ sarva-loka tahare vakhane
svarapa kahe,— ‘ei sloka karaha vyakhyane’
SYNONYMS
Sloka suni’—hearing the verse; sarva-loka—everyone; tahare—him; vakhane--
praised; svaripa kahe—Svaripa Damodara Gosvami said; ei sloka—this verse;
karaha vyakhyane—kindly explain.
TRANSLATION
When everyone present heard the verse, they all commended the poet, bui
Svariipa Damodara Gosvami requested him, ‘Kindly explain this verse.”


--- Page 175 ---
Text 115] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 173
TEXT 114
कवि কহে,-_“জগন্লাথ- সুম্দর-শরীর |
চৈতদ্য-গোসাঞ্চি - শরীরী মহাধীর ॥ ১১৪ ॥
kavi kahe, — “jagannatha—sundara-sarira
caitanya-gosani— sariri maha-dhira
SYNONYMS
kavi kahe—the poet said; jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; sundara-sarira—very
beautiful body; caitanya-gosani—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sariri—possessor of
the body; maha-dhira—very grave.
TRANSLATION
The poet said, “Lord Jagannatha is a most beautiful body, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is exceptionally grave, is the owner of that body.
PURPORT
Sariri refers to a person who owns the arira, or body. As stated in Bhagavad-
gita:
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumararn yauvanarm jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati
As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to
old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul
is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13) For the ordinary living being in
material existence there is a division or distinction between the body and the
owner of the body. In spiritual existence, however, there is no such distinction, for
the body is the owner himself and the owner is the body itself. In spiritual exis-
tence, everything must be spiritual. Therefore there is no distinction between the
body and its owner.
TEXT 115
সহজে জড়জগতের চেতন TARTS |
নীলাচলে মহাপ্রভু হৈল। আবিভুতে ॥” ১১৫ ॥
sahaje jada-jagatera cetana karaite
nilacale mahaprabhu haila avirbhute


--- Page 176 ---
174 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
sahaje—naturally; jada-jagatera—the dull material world; cetana karaite —to in-
spire to spiritual consciousness; nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri; mahaprabhu —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; haila avirbhute—has appeared.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has appeared here in Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri]
to spiritualize the entire dull material world.”
TEXT 116
শুনিয়। সবার হৈল আনন্দিত.মন।
তুঃখ পাঞা স্বরূপ কহে जट्कोश বচন ॥ ১১৬ ॥
Suniya sabara haila anandita-mana
duhkha pana svarapa kahe sakrodha vacana
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing; sabara—of all of them; haila—there was; anandita-mana—
great happiness in the mind; duhkha pana—becoming unhappy; svardpa kahe —
SvarGipa Damodara Gosvami began to speak; sa-krodha vacana—angry words.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, everyone present was greatly happy. But Svaripa Damodara,
who alone was very unhappy, began to speak in great anger.
TEXT 117
“আরে মুর্খ; আপনার কৈলি সর্বনাশ |
তুই ॐ ঈশ্বরে জোর नाडिक বিশ্বাস ॥ ১১৭ ॥
“dre markha, 303/73/3 kaili sarva-nasa!
dui ta’ I$vare tora nahika visvasa
SYNONYMS
are markha—O fool; apanara—of yourself; kaili—you have done; sarva-nasa—
loss of all auspiciousness; dui ta’ ISvare—in the two controllers; tora—your;
nahika visvasa—there is no faith.
TRANSLATION
‘“You are a fool,” he said. “You have brought ill fortune upon yourself, for
you have no knowledge of the existence of the two Lords, Jagannathadeva and
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, nor have you faith in Them.


--- Page 177 ---
Text 119] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 175
TEXT 118
পুর্ণানন্দ-চিৎস্বন্মূপ জগল্নাথ-রায়।
তারে देकनि জড়-নশ্বর-প্রাক্কত-কায় !! ১১৮ ॥
[00103/73/7703-010-5310/03 jagannatha-raya
tanre kaili jada-nasvara-prakrta-kaya!!
SYNONYMS
parna-ananda—complete transcendental bliss; cit-svardpa—the spiritual iden-
tity; jagannatha-raya—Lord Jagannatha; tanre—Him; kaili—you have made;
jada—inert; nasvara—perishable; prakrta—material; kadya—possessing a body.
TRANSLATION
‘Lord Jagannatha is completely spiritual and full of transcendental bliss,
but you have compared Him to a dull, destructible body composed of the in-
ert, external energy of the Lord.
PURPORT
If one thinks that the form of Lord Jagannatha is an idol made of wood, he im-
mediately brings ill fortune into his life. According to the direction of the Padma
Purana: arcye visnau Sila-dhih. . .yasya va naraki sah. Thus one who thinks that the
body of Lord Jagannatha is made of matter and who distinguishes between Lord
Jagannatha's body and soul is condemned, for he is an offender. A pure devotee
who knows the science of Krsna consciousness makes no distinction between
Lord Jagannatha and His body. He knows that they are identical, just as Lord Krsna
and His soul are one and the same. When one’s eyes are purified by devotional
service performed on the spiritual platform, one can actually envision Lord Jagan-
natha and His body as being completely spiritual. The advanced devotee,
therefore, does not see the worshipable Deity to have a soul within a body like an
ordinary human being. There is no distinction between the body and soul of Lord
Jagannatha, for Lord Jagannatha is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, just as the body of
Krsna 15 sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha. There is actually no difference between Lord
Jagannatha and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but the ignorant poet from Bengal ap-
plied a material distinction to the body of Lord Sri Jagannatha.
TEXT 119
পূর্ণ-বড়ৈশ্বর্য চৈতন্য স্বয়ং SHI |
তারে বকৈলি ক্ষুদ্র জীব ूलिन्न-नयोन !! >>> ॥
purna-sad-aisvarya caitanya——svayam bhagavan
tanre kaili ksudra jiva sphulinga-samana!!


--- Page 178 ---
176 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS

parpa—complete; sat-aisvarya—possessing six opulences; caitanya—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; svayam—Himself; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tarire—Him; kaili—you have made; ksudra jiva—an ordinary living en-
tity; sphulinga-samana—exactly equal to the spark.

TRANSLATION

“You have calculated Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, full in six opulences, to be on the level of an ordinary liv-
ing being. Instead of knowing Him as the supreme fire, you have accepted
Him as a spark.”

PURPORT

In the Upanisads it is said, yathagner visphulinga vyuccaranti: the living entities
are like sparks of fire, and His Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
considered the original great fire. When we hear this sruti-vakya, or message from
the Vedas, we should understand the distinction between the Supreme Lord
Krsna and the living entities. A person under the control of the external energy,
however, cannot understand that distinction. Such a person cannot understand
that the Supreme Person is the original great fire, whereas the living entities are
simply small fragmental parts of that Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Krsna
says in Bhagavad-gita (15.7):

mamaivamso jiva-loke
jiva-bhatah sanatanah
manah sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati
“The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts. Due
to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which in-
clude the mind.”

There is a distinction between the body and soul of the materially existing liv-
ing being, but because अ Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Jagannatha do not
possess material bodies, there is no distinction between Their bodies and souls.
On the spiritual platform, body and soul are identical; there is no distinction be-
tween them. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam:

etad isanam isasya
prakrti-stho 421 tad-gunaih

na yujyate sadatma-sthair
yatha buddhis tad-asraya


--- Page 179 ---
Text 120] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 177
“This is the divinity of the Personality of Godhead. He is not affected by the
qualities of material nature, even though He is in contact with them. Similarly, the
devotees who have taken shelter of the Lord cannot be influenced by the ma-
terial qualities.” (Bhag. 1.11.38) His Lordship the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Krsna, is unaffected by the influence of the three modes of material nature.
Indeed, His devotees are also unpolluted by the influence of the external energy
because they engage in the service of His Lordship. Even the very body of a devo-
tee becomes spiritualized, just as an iron rod put into fire becomes as qualified as
fire because it becomes red hot and will immediately burn anything it touches.
Therefore the poet from Bengal committed a great offense by treating Lord Jagan-
natha’s body and Lord Jagannatha, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as two
different entities, material and spiritual, as if the Lord were an ordinary living being.
The Lord is always the master of the material energy; therefore He is not doomed
to be covered by the material energy like an ordinary living entity.
TEXT 120
তুই-ঠাঞি অপরাধে পাইবি দুর্গতি !
BST ‘SF বর্ণে, তার এই রীতি ! ১২০ ॥
dui-thani aparadhe paibi durgati!
atattva-jnia ‘tattva’ varnpe, tara ei riti!
SYNONYMS
dui-thani—unto both; aparadhe —by offense; paibi—you will get; durgati—
hellish destination; a-tattva-jia—one who has no knowledge of the Absolute
Truth; tattva varpe—describes the Absolute Truth; tara—his; ei—this; riti—
course.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara continued, “‘Because you have committed an offense to
Lord Jagannatha and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, you will attain a hellish
destination. You do not know how to describe the Absolute Truth, but
nevertheless you have tried to do so. Therefore you must be condemned.
PURPORT
The brahmana poet from Bengal was an offender in the estimation of Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami, for although the poet had no knowledge of the Absolute
Truth, he had nevertheless tried to describe it. The Bengali poet was an offender
to both Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Jagannatha. Because he had made a
distinction between Lord Jagannatha's body and soul and because he had indi-


--- Page 180 ---
178 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
cated that Lord 71 Caitanya Mahaprabhu was different from Lord Jagannatha, he
had committed offenses to Them both. A-tattva-jiia refers to one who has no
knowledge of the Absolute Truth or who worships his own body as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If an ahangrahopasaka-mayavadi, a person engaged in
fruitive activities or a person interested only in sense gratification, describes the
Absolute Truth, he immediately becomes an offender.

TEXT 121
আর এক FRAME পরম “প্রমাদ” !
দেহ-দেহি-ভেদ ঈশ্বরে কৈলে 'অপরাধ' ! ১২১ ॥
ara eka kariyacha parama ‘pramada’!
deha-dehi-bheda isvare kaile ‘aparadha’!
SYNONYMS
ara eka—another one; kariydicha—you have done; parama—the supreme; pra-
mada—illusion; deha-dehi-bheda—the distinction between the body and soul;
isvare—in His Lordship; kaile —you have done; aparadha—an offense.
TRANSLATION
“You are in complete illusion, for you have distinguished between the body
and soul of His Lordship [Lord Jagannatha or Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhul. That
is a great offense.
PURPORT
When one differentiates between the body and soul of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, he immediately becomes an offender. Because the living en-
tities in the material world are generally covered by material bodies, the body and
soul of an ordinary human being cannot be identical. The Supreme Lord bestows
the fruits of one’s activities, for He is the Lord of the results of fruitive action. He is
also the cause of all causes, and He is the master of the material energy. Therefore

He is supreme. An ordinary living being, however, in his material condition, enjoys
the results of his own fruitive activities and therefore falls under their influence.
Even in the liberated stage of brahma-bhata identification, he engages in render-
ing service to His Lordship. Thus there are distinctions between an ordinary
human being and the Supreme Lord. Karmis and jiianis who ignore these distinc-
tions are offenders against the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

An ordinary human being is prone to be subjugated by the material energy,
whereas His Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead—$ri Caitanya

Mahaprabhu, Lord Krsna or Lord Jagannatha—is always the master of the material
energy and is therefore never subject to its influence. His Lordship the Supreme


--- Page 181 ---
Text 122] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 179
Personality of Godhead has an unlimited spiritual identity, never to be broken,
whereas the consciousness of the living entity is limited and fragmented. The liv-
ing entities are fragmental portions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead eter-
nally (mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhatah sanatanah). It is not that they are
covered by the material energy in conditioned life but become one with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead when freed from the influence of material en-
ergy. Such an idea is offensive.

According to the considerations of Mayavadi fools, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead accepts a material body when He appears in the material world. A
Vaisnava, however, knows perfectly well that for Krsna, Lord Jagannatha or Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu—unlike ordinary human beings —there is no distinction
between the body and the soul. Even in the material world His Lordship retains His
spiritual identity; therefore Lord Krsna exhibited all opulences even in His child-
hood body. There is no distinction between the body and soul of Krsna; whether
He is in His childhood body or His youthful body, He is always identical with His
body. Even though Krsna appears like an ordinary human being, He is never sub-
jected to the rules and regulations of the material world. He is svarat, or fully inde-
pendent. He can appear in the material world, but contrary to the offensive con-
clusion of the Mayavda school, He has no material body. In this connection one
may again refer to the above-mentioned verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.11.38):

etad Tsanam isasya
prakrti-stho ‘pi tad-gunaih
na yujyate sadatma-sthair
yatha buddhis tad-asraya
The Supreme Person has an eternal spiritual body. If one tries to distinguish be-
tween the body and soul of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he commits a
great offense.
TEXT 122
ঈশ্বরের নাহি কভু দেহ-দেহি-ভেদ ।
স্বরূপ, দেহ,-__চিদা নন্দ, নাহিক বিভেদ ॥ ५२२ ॥
iSvarera nahi kabhu deha-dehi-bheda
svardpa, deha, —cid-ananda, nahika vibheda
SYNONYMS

$varera—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nahi —there is not; kabhu—

at any time; deha-dehi-bheda—distinction between the body and soul;


--- Page 182 ---
180 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
svarapa—personal identity; deha—body; cit-ananda—all made of blissful
spiritual energy; nahika vibheda—there is no distinction.
TRANSLATION

‘“At no time is there a distinction between the body and soul of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. His personal identity and His body are made of
blissful spiritual energy. There is no distinction between them.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, is advaya-jiana; in other words, there is
no distinction between His body and soul, for His existence is completely spiritual.
According to the verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam beginning with the words vadan-
ti tat tattva-vidas tattvam (1.2.11), the Absolute Truth is always to be understood
from three angles of vision as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Unlike the ob-
jects of the material world, however, the Absolute Truth is always one and always
the same. Thus there is no distinction between His body and soul. His form, name,
attributes and pastimes, therefore, are completely distinct from those of the ma-
terial world. One should know perfectly well that there is no difference between
the body and soul of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one conceives
of a distinction between His body and soul, one is immediately conditioned by
material nature. Because a person in the material world makes such distinctions,
he is called baddha-jiva, a conditioned soul.

TEXT 123
“দেহ্‌-দে হি-বিভাগোইয়ৎ নেশ্বরে विष्ट ক্বচিৎ ॥* ১২৩ ॥
“deha-dehi-vibhago ‘yarn
nesvare vidyate kvacit”
SYNONYMS

deha—of the body; dehi—of the embodied; vibhagah —distinction; ayam—
this; na—not; iSvare—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vidyate—exists;
kvacit—at any time.

TRANSLATION

‘“ ‘There is no distinction between the body and soul of the Supreme Per-

sonality of Godhead at any time.’


--- Page 183 ---
Texts 124-125] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 181
PURPORT
This quotation, which is included in the Laghu-bhagavatamrta (1.5.342), is from
the Karma Purana.
TEXTS 124-125
নাতঃ পরং পরম বষ্ভবতঃ FHA-
মানন্দমাত্রমবিক্ল্পমবিদ্ধবর্চঃ |
পশ্যামি বিশ্বস্হজমেকমবিশ্বমাত্মন্‌
ভূতেন্িয়াত্মকমদস্ত উপাশ্রিতোইস্মি ss ॥
তদ্বা ইদং তুবনমঙ্গল মঙ্গলায়
ধ্যানে স্ম নে৷ দরশিতং ত উপাসকানাম্‌ |
we नटम्‌। ভগবতেইল্বিধেম তুভ্যং
যোইনাদৃতো নরকভাগ_ভিরসংগ্রসঙ্গৈঃ ॥ ১২৫ ॥
natah param parama yad bhavatah svarapam
ananda-matram avikalpam aviddha-varcah
pasyami visva-srjam ekam avisvam atman
bhatendriyatmaka-madas ta upasrito ‘smi
tad va idam bhuvana-mangala marigalaya
dhyane sma no darasitarh ta upasakanam
tasmai namo bhagavate ‘nuvidhema tubhyam
yo ’‘nadrto naraka-bhagbhir asat-prasarigaih
SYNONYMS
na—do not; atah param—here after; parama—O Supreme; yat—that which;
bhavatah —of Your Lordship; svargpam —eternal form; ananda-matram—imper-
sonal Brahman effulgence; avikalpam —without changes; aviddha-varcah —with-
out deterioration of potency; pasyami—do | see; visva-srjam —creator of the cos-
mic manifestation; ekam—one without a second; avisvam—and yet not of mat-
ter; atman—O supreme cause; bhita—body; indriya—senses; atmaka—on such
identification; madah—pride; te—unto You; upasritah—surrendered; asmi—I|
am; tat—the Supreme Personality of Codhead; va—or; idam—this present form;
bhuvana-marigala—they are all-auspicious for all the universes; marigalaya—for
the sake of all prosperity; dhyane—in meditation; sma—as it were; nah—unto
us; darasitam—manifested; (€ —Your; upasakanam—of the devotees; tasmai—


--- Page 184 ---
182 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Antya-lili, Ch. 5
unto Him; namah —my respectful obeisances; bhagavate —unto the Personality of
Godhead; anuvidhema—I| perform; tubhyam—unto You; yah—which;
anadrtah —is neglected; naraka-bhagbhih—by persons destined for hell; asat-
prasangaih —by material topics.
TRANSLATION

110 my Lord, | do not see a form superior to Your present form of eternal
bliss and knowledge. In Your impersonal Brahman effulgence in the spiritual
sky, there is no occasional change and no deterioration of internal potency. |
surrender unto You because, whereas | am proud of my material body and
senses, Your Lordship is the cause of the cosmic manifestation. Yet You are un-
touched by matter.

^“ ‘This present form, or any transcendental form expanded by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, is equally auspicious for all the universes.
Since You have manifested this eternal personal form upon whom Your devo-
tees meditate, | therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Those who
are destined to be dispatched to the path of hell neglect Your personal form
because of speculating on material topics.’

PURPORT
These verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.9.3,4) were spoken by Lord Brahma.
TEXT 126
का] “পূর্ণানন্দৈশ্বর্য' কৃষ্ণ 'মায়েখ্বর !
का) ক্ষুদ্র” জীব “তুঃখী” “মায়ার कितः ! ১২৬ ॥
kahan ‘parpanandaisvarya’ krsna ‘mayesvara’!
kahan ‘ksudra’ jiva ‘dubkhi, ‘mayara kinkara’!
SYNONYMS

kahan—whereas; parpa—full; ananda—bliss; aisvarya—opulences; krsna—
Lord Krsna; madya-isvara—the master of the material energy; kaharn—whereas;
ksudra jiva—the little conditioned soul; duhkhi—unhappy; mayara kirkara—the
servant of the material energy.

TRANSLATION

‘“Whereas Krsna, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
is full of transcendental bliss, possesses all six spiritual opulences in full, and
is the master of the material energy, the small conditioned soul, who is always
unhappy, is the servant of the material energy.


--- Page 185 ---
Text 128] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 183
PURPORT
The living entity is an ever-conditioned servant of the material energy, whereas
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is master of the material energy.
How, then, could they be on an equal level? There can be no comparison be-
tween them. His Lordship is always in a happy condition of transcendental bliss,
whereas the conditioned soul is always unhappy because of his contact with the
material energy. The Supreme Lord controls the material energy, and the material
energy controls the conditioned souls. There is therefore no comparison between
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the ordinary living entities.
TEXT 127
“হলাদিল্য! সম্বিদাশ্লিষ্ট: সচ্চিদানন্দ ঈশ্বরঃ ৷
স্বাবিদ্যা-সংবৃতেো জীবঃ সংক্বেশনিকরাকরঃ॥” ১২৭ ॥
“hladinya samvidaslistah
sac-cid-ananda-isvarah
svavidya samvrto jivah
sanklesa-nikarakara”
SYNONYMS
hladinya—by the hladini potency; samvida—by the samvit potency; aslistah —
surrounded; sat-cit-ananda —always transcendentally blissful; isvarah—the
Supreme Controller; sva—own; avidya—by ignorance; samvrtah—surrounded;
jivah—the living entity; sariklesa—of the three fold miseries; nikara—of the
multitude; akara—the mine.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Controller, is always
full of transcendental bliss and is accompanied by the potencies known as
hladini and samvit. The conditioned soul, however, is always covered by ig-
norance and embarassed by the threefold miseries of life. Thus he is a treasure
house of all kinds of tribulations.” ^^
PURPORT
This verse is found in Sridhara 5৬315 Bhavartha-dipika (1.7.6), wherein he
quotes ঠা Visnusvami.
TEXT 128
শুনি' ASAE চিত্তে হৈল চমৎকার |
“সত্য কহে (नजा ७, দু'হার করিয়াছে তিরস্কার” ॥


--- Page 186 ---
184 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
Suni’ sabha-sadera citte haila camatkara
‘satya kahe gosani, dunhara kariyache tiraskara’
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; sabha-sadera—of all the members of the assembly; citte—in
the minds; haila—there was; camatkara—wonder; satya—the truth; kahe —said;
gosani—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; dunhara—of both; kariyache—has done;
tiraskara—offense.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this explanation, all the members of the assembly were struck with
wonder. ‘‘Svariipa Damodara Gosvami has spoken the real truth,” they admit-
ted. “The brahmana from Bengal has committed an offense by wrongly de-
scribing Lord Jagannatha and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.”
TEXT 129
শুনিয়| কবির হৈল লংঙ্জ ভয়, বিস্ময় ।
হংস-মধ্যে বক যৈছে কিছু নাহি কয় ॥ ১২৯ ॥
Suniya kavira haila lajja, bhaya, vismaya
hamsa-madhye baka yaiche kichu nahi kaya
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing; kavira—of the poet; haila—there was; lajja—shame;
bhaya—fear; vismaya—astonishment; harsa-madhye—in a society of white
swans; baka—a duck; yaiche—just as; kichu—anything; nahi—not; kaya—ut-
ters.
TRANSLATION
When the Bengali poet heard this chastisement from Svariipa Damodara
Gosvami, he was ashamed, fearful and astonished. Indeed, being like a duck
in a society of white swans, he could not say anything.
TEXT 130
তার দুঃখ দেখি, স্বরূপ সদয়-হুৃদয় |
উপদেশ देकन। তারে যৈছে ZS’ হয় ॥ ১৩০ ॥
tara duhkha dekhi, 5৮/31/0009 sadaya-hrdaya
upadesa kaila tare yaiche ‘hita’ haya


--- Page 187 ---
Text 131] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 185
SYNONYMS
tara—his; duhkha dekhi—observing the unhappiness; svardpa—Svarpa
Damodara Gosvami; sadaya-hrdaya—very kindhearted; upadesa kaila—gave in-
struction; tare—unto him; yaiche—so that; hita—benefit; haya—there can be.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the poet's unhappiness, Svariipa Damodara Gosvami, who was
naturally very kindhearted, advised him so that he could derive some benefit.
TEXT 131
“যাহ, ভাগবত পড় বৈষ্ণবের স্থানে |
একান্ত আশ্রয় কর চৈতন্তয-চরণে ॥ ১৩১ ॥
“yaha, bhagavata pada vaispavera sthane
ekanta asraya kara caitanya-carane
SYNONYMS
yaha—just go; bhagavata pada—read S$rimad-Bhagavatam; vaisnavera sthane—
from a self-realized Vaisnava; ekanta asraya kara—fully surrender; caitanya-
carape—at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
“If you want to understand Srimad-Bhagavatam,”’ he said, “you must ap-
proach a self-realized Vaisnava and hear from him. You can do this when you
have completely taken shelter of the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.””
PURPORT
, Herein Svaropa Damodara Gosvami instructs the poet from Bengal to hear
Srimad-Bhagavatam from a pure Vaisnava and learn from him. In India especially,
there is now a class of professional Bhagavatam readers whose means of liveli-
hood is to go from village to village, town to town, reading Bhagavatam and col-
lecting daksina, or rewards, in the form of money or goods, like umbrellas, cloth
and fruit. Thus there is now a system of Bhagavata business, with recitations called
Bhagavata-saptaha that continue for one week, although this is not mentioned in
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Nowhere does Srimad-Bhagavatam say that the Bhagavatam
should be heard for one week from professionals. Rather, Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.2.17) says: Srnvatarh sva-kathah krsnah punya-sravana-kirtanah. One should
regularly hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from a self-realized Vaisnava. By such hearing,
one becomes pious. Hrdy antahstho hy abhadrani vidhunoti suhrt-satam. As one


--- Page 188 ---
186 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
thus hears the Bhagavatam regularly and sincerely, his heart is purified of all ma-
terial contamination.
nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityarn bhagavata-sevaya
bhagavaty uttama-sloke
bhaktir bhavati naisthiki
“As one regularly hears the Bhagavatam or renders service unto the pure devotee,
all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving service
unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as
an irrevocable fact.” (Bhag. 1.2.18)

This is the proper process, but people are accustomed to being misled by
professional Bhagavatam reciters. Therefore SvariGpa Damodara Gosvami herein
advises that one should not hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from professional reciters.
Instead, one must hear and learn the Bhagavatam from a self-realized Vaisnava.
Sometimes it is seen that when a Mayavadi sannyasi reads the Bhagavatam, flocks
of men go to hear jugglery of words that cannot awaken their dormant love for
Krsna. Sometimes people go to see professional dramas and offer food and money
to the players, who are expert at collecting these offerings very nicely. The result
is that the members of the audience remain in the same position of grham andha-
kapam, family affection, and do not awaken their love for Krsna.

In the Bhagavatam (7.5.30), it is said, matir na krsne paratah svato va mitho
‘bhipadyeta grha-vratanam: the grhavratas, those who are determined to continue
following the materialistic way of life, will never awaken their dormant love of
Krsna, for they hear the Bhagavatam only to solidify their position in household life
and to be happy in family affairs and sex. Condemning this process of hearing the
Bhagavatam from professionals, Svarapa Damodara Gosvami says, yaha, bhagavata
pada vaispavera sthane: “To understand the Srimad-Bhagavatam, you must ap-
proach a self-realized Vaisnava.” One should rigidly avoid hearing the Bhagavatam
from a Mayavadi or other nondevotee who simply performs a grammatical jug-
glery of words to twist some meaning from the text, collect money from the inno-
cent public, and thus keep people in darkness.

Svartipa Damodara Gosvami strictly prohibits the behavior of the materialistic
so-called hearers of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Instead of awakening real love for Krsna,
such hearers of the Bhagavatam become more and more attached to household
affairs and sex life (yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukham hi tuccham). One should
hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from a person who has no connection with material ac-
tivities, or, in other words, from a paramahamsa Vaisnava, one who has achieved
the highest stage of sannyasa. This, of course, is not possible unless one takes
shelter of the lotus feet of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Srimad-Bhagavatam is
understandable only for one who can follow in the footsteps of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 189 ---
Text 133] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 187
TEXT 132
WET ভক্তগণের নিত্য কর Tw |
তবেত জানিবা সিদ্ধান্তসমুদ্র-তরঙ্গ ॥ ১৩২ ॥
caitanyera bhakta-ganera nitya kara ‘sanga’
tabeta janiba siddhanta-samudra-taranga
SYNONYMS
caitanyera—of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-ganera—of the devo-
tees; nitya—regularly; kara—do; sariga—association; tabeta—then only;
janiba—you will understand; siddhanta-samudra-taranga—the waves of the
ocean of devotional service.
TRANSLATION
Svaripa Damodara continued, “Associate regularly with the devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for then only will you understand the waves of the
ocean of devotional service.
PURPORT
It is clearly to be understood in this connection that the followers of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s way of devotional service are eternally associates of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and perfect knowers of the Absolute Truth. If
one immediately follows the principles of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu by associating
with His devotees, lusty desires for material enjoyment will vanish from one’s
heart. Then one will be able to understand the meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam
and the purpose of listening to it. Otherwise such understanding is impossible.
TEXT 133
তবেত ने] खि তোমার হইবে जकन |
কৃষ্ণের স্বরূপ-লীল৷ বর্ণিবা নির্মল ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
tabeta panditya tomara ha-ibe saphala
krsnera svaripa-lila varniba nirmala
SYNONYMS
tabeta—then only; panditya—learning; tomara—your; ha-ibe—will become;
sa-phala—successful; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; svardpa-lila—the transcendental
pastimes; varniba—you will describe; nirmala—without material contamination.


--- Page 190 ---
188 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch.5
TRANSLATION
“Only if you follow the principles of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His
devotees will your learning be successful. Then you will be able to write about
the transcendental pastimes of Krsna without material contamination.
TEXT 134
এই গ্লোক করিয়াছ পাঞ। সন্তোষ |
তোমার হৃদয়ের অর্থে BEA লাগে “দোষ ॥১৩৪॥
ei loka kariyacha pana santosa
tomara hrdayera arthe dunhaya lage ‘dosa’
SYNONYMS
ei sloka—this verse; kariydcha—you have composed; pana santosa—getting
satisfaction; tomara hrdayera—of your heart; arthe—by the meaning; dunhaya—
to both; lage dosa—there is an offense.
TRANSLATION
“You have composed this introductory verse to your great satisfaction, but
the meaning you have expressed is contaminated by offenses to both Lord
Jagannatha and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 135
তুমি বৈছে-তৈছে কহ, না জানিয়। রীতি |
সরস্বতী সেই-শব্দে করিয়াছে BS ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
tumi yaiche-taiche kaha, na janiya riti
sarasvati sei-sabde kariyache stuti
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; yaiche-taiche—somehow or other; kaha—speak; na janiya riti—
not knowing the regulative principles; sarasvati—the goddess of learning; sei-
s$abde—in those words; kariyache stuti—has made prayers.
TRANSLATION
“You have written something irregular, not knowing the regulative prin-
ciples, but the goddess of learning, Sarasvati, has used your words to offer her
prayers to the Supreme Lord.


--- Page 191 ---
Text 137] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 189
PURPORT
SvarGpa Damodara Gosvami informed the Bengali poet, “Because of your ig-
norance and your leaning toward Mayavada philosophy, you cannot distinguish
the difference between the Mayavada and Vaisnava philosophies. Therefore the
process you have adopted to praise Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord
Jagannatha does not follow the proper system; indeed, it is irregular and offensive.
Fortunately, however, through your words, the goddess of learning, mother
Sarasvati, has tactfully offered her prayers to her master, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.”
TEXT 136
যৈছে ইন্দ্র, দৈত্যাদি করে কৃষ্ণের SL AA |
TLC সরস্বতী করেন স্তবন ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
yaiche indra, daityadi kare krsnera bhartsana
sei-sabde sarasvati karena stavana
SYNONYMS
yaiche—just like; indra—Lord Indra, the King of heaven; daitya—demons;
adi—and others; kare—do; krspera bhartsana—chastisement to Krsna; sei-
sabde—by those words; sarasvati—the goddess of learning; karena stavana—
offers prayers.
TRANSLATION
“Sometimes demons, and even Lord Indra, the King of heaven, chastised
Krsna, but mother Sarasvati, taking advantage of their words, offered prayers
to the Lord.
TEXT 137
বাচালং বালিশং স্তব্ধমজ্ঞং পণ্ডিতমানিনম্‌ ৷
ক্বষ্ণং মর্ত্য মূপা শ্রিত্য গোপা মে চক্রুরপ্রিয়মূ ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
vacalarn balisam stabdharn
ajiam pandita-maninam
krspar martyam upasritya
gopa me cakrur apriyam
SYNONYMS
vacalam —talkative; balisam—childish; stabdham—impudent; ajaam—foolish;
pandita-maninam —thinking Himself a very learned scholar; krspam —Krsna; mar-


--- Page 192 ---
190 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-Iila, Ch. 5
tyam —an ordinary mortal human being; upasritya—taking shelter of; gopah—the
cowherd men; me—unto me; cakruh—committed; apriyam—that which is not
very much appreciated.

TRANSLATION
‘/[Lord Indra 5310:] ‘This Krsna, who is an ordinary human being, is talka-
tive, childish, impudent and ignorant, although He thinks Himself very
learned. The cowherd men in Vrndavana have offended me by accepting Him.
This has not been greatly appreciated by me.’
PURPORT
This verse is from S$rimad-Bhagavatam (10.25.5).
TEXT 138
जश्वर्द-मटकं মত্ত Le, (वन म।ट्डो स्नान |
বুদ্ধিনাশ হৈল, কেবল নাহিক नादान ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
aisvarya-made matta indra,—yena matoyala
buddhi-nasa haila, kevala nahika sambhala
SYNONYMS
aisvarya-made —being proud of his opulence; matta—maddened; indra—the
King of heaven; yena—as if; matoyala—a mad person; buddhi-nasa—bereft of
intelligence; haila—became; kevala—only; nahika—there is not; sambhala—cau-
tion.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Indra, the King of heaven, being too proud of his heavenly opulences, be-
came like a madman. Thus bereft of his intelligence, he could not restrain
himself from speaking nonsensically about Krsna.
TEXT 139
Few वदन, “यूः কৃষ্ণের করিয়াছি निम्न” ।
তারই মুখে সরস্বতী করেন BAA ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
indra bale, — “muni krsnera kariyachi nindana”
tara-i mukhe sarasvati karena stavana


--- Page 193 ---
Text 141] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 191
SYNONYMS
indra bale—Indra says; mufi—I; krspera—of Lord Krsna; kariyachi—have
done; nindana—chastisement and defamation; tara-i mukhe —from his mouth;
sarasvati—mother Sarasvati, the goddess of learning; karena stavana—offers
prayers.
TRANSLATION
“Thus Indra thought, ‘I have properly chastised Krsna and defamed Him.’
But Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, took this opportunity to offer prayers to
Krsna.
TEXT 140
“বাচাল” কহিয়ে-“বেদপ্রবর্তক'” 4 |
“বালিশ” তথাপি “শিশু-প্রায়” stg ॥ ১৪০ ॥
‘vacala kahiye —veda-pravartaka’ dhanya
‘balisa’—tathapi ‘Sisu-praya’ garva-sanya
SYNONYMS
vacala—talkative; kahiye—| say; veda-pravartaka—one who can speak with
the authority of the Vedas; dhanya—glorious; balisa—childish; tathapi—still;
sisu-praya—like a child; garva-sanya—without pride.
TRANSLATION
“The word ‘vacala’ is used to refer to a person who can speak according to
Vedic authority, and the word (0३115 ग/ means ‘innocent.’ Krsna spoke the
Vedic knowledge, yet He always presents Himself as a prideless, innocent
boy.
TEXT 141
বন্দ্যান্ডাবে ‘TT — BH 5TH FH |
যাহ হৈতে অন্ত “বিজ্ঞ” नाडि (म ‘as’ হয় ॥১৪১॥
vandyabhave ‘anamra’— ‘stabdha’-sabde kaya
yaha haite anya ‘vijiia’ nahi—se ‘ajiia’ haya
SYNONYMS
vandya-abhave —because there is no one else to be offered obeisances;
anamra—the one who does not offer obeisances; stabdha-sadbe—by the word
stabdha (“impudent”); kaya—says; yaha haite—than whom; anya—other;
vijia—learned scholar; nahi—is not; se—He; ajia—one by whom nothing is
unknown; haya—is.


--- Page 194 ---
192 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
“When there is no one else to receive obeisances, one may be called
‘anamra,’ or one who offers obeisances to no one. This is the meaning of the
word ‘stabdha.” And because no one is found to be more learned than Krsna,
He may be called “3]73, indicating that nothing is unknown to Him.
TEXT 142
“পণ্ডিতের মান্ত-পাত্র _ হয় পণ্ডিতমানী” ।
তথাপি ভক্তবাৎসলোয “মনুষ্য” অভিমানী ॥ ১৪২ ॥
‘panditera manya-patra— haya ‘pandita-mani’
tathapi bhakta-vatsalye ‘manusya’ abhimani
SYNONYMS
panditera—of learned scholars; manya-patra—worshipable object; haya—is;
pandita-mani—a person honored by the learned scholars; tathapi—still; bhakta-
vatsalye —because of being very affectionate to the devotees; manusya abhi-
mani —presents Himself as an ordinary human being.
TRANSLATION
“The word ‘pandita-mani’ can be used to indicate that Krsna is honored
even by learned scholars. Nevertheless, because of affection for His devotees,
Krsna appears like an ordinary human being and may therefore be called ‘mar-
1৭.
TEXT 143
জরাসন্ধ कटङ, — “FP —YFI-A4T |
তোর সঙ্গে না J, “যাহি agza” ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
jarasandha kahe, — “krsna— purusa-adhama
tora sange na yujhimu, “yahi bandhu-han”
SYNONYMS
jarasandha kahe —Jarasandha says; krsna—Krsna; purusa-adhama—the lowest
of human beings; tora sarige —with You; na yujhimu—I shall not fight; yahi—be-
cause; bandhu-han—killer of Your own relatives.
TRANSLATION
“The demon Jarasandha chastised Krsna, saying, ‘You are the lowest of
human beings. | shall not fight with You, for You killed Your own relatives.’


--- Page 195 ---
Text 145] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 193
PURPORT
In this verse also, mother Sarasvati offers prayers to Krsna. The word purusa-
adhama refers to the Personality of Godhead, under whom all other persons
remain, or, in other words, purusa-uttama, the best of all living beings. Similarly,
the word bandhu-han means “the killer of maya.” In the conditioned state of life,
one is closely related with maya as a friend, but when one comes in contact with
Krsna one is freed from that relationship.
TEXT 144
যাহা হৈতে TD পুবুষসকল — “অধম” |
সেই হয় “পুক্ুষাধম”- সরস্বতীর মল ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
yaha haite anya purusa-sakala— ‘adhama’
sei haya ‘purusadhama’——sarasvatira mana
SYNONYMS
yaha haite—from whom; anya—other; purusa—persons; sakala—all;
adhama—subordinate; sei—he; haya—is; purusa-adhama—the person under
whom all others remain; sarasvatira mana—the explanation of mother Sarasvati.
TRANSLATION
‘Mother Sarasvati takes ‘purusadhama’ to mean ‘purusottama,’ He to whom
all men are subordinate.
TEXT 145
‘ITH ANCA —SICS অবিদ্যা “বন্ধু হয় |
“অবিদ্যা-নাশক*-_“বন্ধুহল্‌'-শব্দে কয় ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
‘bandhe sabare’——tate avidya ‘bandhu’ haya
‘avidya-nasaka’— ‘bandhu-han’-sabde kaya
SYNONYMS
bandhe—binds; sabdre —everyone; tate—therefore; avidyd—nescience, or
maya; bandhu—binder or relative; haya—is; avidya-nasaka—vanquisher of
maya; bandhu-han-sabde—by the word “bandhu-han”’; kaya—mother Sarasvati
says.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Nescience, or maya, may be called ‘bandhu’ because she entangles
everone in the material world. Therefore by using the word ‘bandhu-han,’
mother Sarasvati says that Lord Krsna is the vanquisher of maya.


--- Page 196 ---
194 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
PURPORT
Everyone is entangled in the illusory energy, but as stated in Bhagavad-gita,
mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etarn taranti te: as soon as one surrenders to
Krsna, he is freed from maya. Therefore Krsna may be called bandhu-han, the killer
of maya.
TEXT 146
এইমত শিশুপাল করিল निम्न ।
সেইবাকে্যে সরস্বতী করেন BIA ॥ ১৪৬ |
ei-mata $/$003/3 karila nindana
sei-vakye sarasvati karena stavana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; $isu-pala—of the name Sisupala; karila nindana—
blasphemed; sei-vakye—by those words; sarasvati—the goddess of learning;
karena stavana—offers prayers.
TRANSLATION
+Sisupala also blasphemed Krsna in this way, but the goddess of learning,
Sarasvati, offered her prayers to Krsna even by his words.
TEXT 147
তৈছে এই calles তোমার অর্থে নিন্দা” আইসে |
সরস্বতীর অর্থ শুন, যাতে “স্তুতি” ভাসে ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
taiche ei $loke tomara arthe ‘ninda’ aise
sarasvatira artha Suna, yate ‘stuti’ bhase
SYNONYMS
taiche—in that way; ei sloke—in this verse; tomara—your; arthe—by the
meaning; ninda—blasphemy; aise—comes; sarasvatira artha—the meaning of
mother Sarasvati; suna—hear; yate—by which; stuti—prayers; bhase—appear.
TRANSLATION
‘‘In that way, although your verse is blasphemous according to your mean-
ing, mother Sarasvati has taken advantage of it to offer prayers to the Lord.


--- Page 197 ---
Text 150] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 195
TEXT 148
জগন্নাথ হন কৃষ্ণের “আত্মস্বর্ূপ) |
कि टे] দারুত্রম্ম _স্থাবর-স্বরূপ ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
jagannatha hana krsnera ‘atma-svarapa’
kintu ihan daru-brahma——sthavara-svarapa
SYNONYMS
jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; hana—is; krsnera atma-svarapa—identical with
Krsna; kintu—but; ihan—here, at Jagannatha Puri; daru-brahma—the Absolute
appearing as wood; sthavara-svaripa—nonmoving identity.
TRANSLATION
“There is no difference between Lord Jagannatha and Krsna, but here Lord
Jagannatha is fixed as the Absolute Person appearing in wood. Therefore He
does not move.
TEXT 149
তাহা-সহ আত্মতা একক্ূপ 29 ।
কৃষ্ণ একতন্বরূপ- দুই রূপ TP! ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
tanha-saha atmata eka-rapa hana
krsna eka-tattva-rapa——dui rapa 0373
SYNONYMS
tanha-saha—with Him; atmata—the quality of being the self; eka-rapa hafna—
being one form; krspna—Lord Krsna; eka-tattva-rapa—one principle; dui—two;
rapa—forms; hafa—becoming.
TRANSLATION
“Thus Lord Jagannatha and $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, although appearing
as two, are one because They are both Krsna, who is one alone.
TEXT 150
সংসারতারণ-হেতু যেই ইচ্ছা-শক্তি।
তাহার মিলন করি” একতা tate প্রাপ্তি ॥ ১৫০ ॥
samsara-tarana-hetu yei iccha-sakti
tahara milana kari’ ekata yaiche prapti


--- Page 198 ---
196 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
sarnsara-tarana-hetu—for delivering the entire world; yei—that; iccha-sakti—
the potency of will; tahara—of that will; milana kari’—by the meeting; ekata—
oneness; yaiche—so that; prapti—obtainment.
TRANSLATION
‘The supreme desire to deliver the entire world meets in both of Them, and
for that reason also They are one and the same.
TEXT 151
সকল সংসারী লোকের করিতে উদ্ধার ।
গৌর-জঙ্গম-রূপে टेकल। অবতার ॥ ১৫১ ॥
sakala sarhsari lokera karite uddhara
gaura-jangama-rape kaila avatara
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; sarhsari—materially contaminated; lokera—persons; karite ud-
dhara—to deliver; gaura—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jarigama—moving; ripe —in
the form; kaild avatara—has descended.
TRANSLATION
“To deliver all the materially contaminated people of the world, that same
Krsna has descended, moving as Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 152
জগন্নাথের দর্শনে খণ্ডায় সংসার |
সব-দেশের সব-লো ক নারে আসিবার ॥ ১৫২ ॥
jagannathera darsane khanddya 53/753/3
saba-desera saba-loka nare asibara
SYNONYMS
jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; darsane—by visiting; khanddya sarhsara—
one is freed from material existence; saba-desera—of all countries; saba-loka—all
men; nare asibara—cannot come.


--- Page 199 ---
Text 154] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 197
TRANSLATION
“By visiting Lord Jagannatha one is freed from material existence, but not
all men of all countries can come or be admitted here in Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 153
জ্রীকুষ্ণচৈতজ্তপ্রভু দেশে দেশে বাঞ। |
সব-লোকে निी्रिन। জঙ্গন-ত্রম্ম 243] ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
$ri-krspa-caitanya-prabhu dese dese yana
saba-loke nistarila jangama-brahma hana
SYNONYMS
$ri-krspa-caitanya-prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dese dese yana—
moving from one country to another; saba-loke nistarila—delivered all condi-
tioned souls; jarigama-brahma—moving Brahman; haia—being.
TRANSLATION
“$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, moves from one country to another,
personally or by His representative. Thus He, as the moving Brahman, delivers
all the people of the world.
TEXT 154
সরস্বতীর অর্থ এই कङ्क বিবরণ |
«TE ভাগ্য তোমার এঁছে করিলে বর্ণন ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
sarasvatira artha ei 130/0/7 vivarana
eho bhagya tomara aiche karile varnana
SYNONYMS
sarasvatira—of Sarasvati; artha—meaning; ei—this; kahilun vivarana—I| have
explained; eho—this; bhagya—great fortune; tomara aiche—in such a way;
karile varnana—you have described.
TRANSLATION
“Thus I have explained the meaning intended by mother Sarasvati, the god-
dess of learning. It is your great fortune that you have described Lord Jagan-
natha and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in that way.


--- Page 200 ---
198 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 155
Free গালি দিতে করে নাম উচ্চারণ |
সেই নাম হয় তার “মুক্তির” কারণ ॥” ১৫৫ ॥
krsne gali dite kare nama uccarana
sei nama haya tara ‘muktira’ karapa”
SYNONYMS
krsne—Lord Krsna; gali dite—to blaspheme or chastise; kare nama uccarana—
chants the name of Krsna; sei ndma—that holy name; haya—becomes; tara—his;
muktira karana—the cause of liberation.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Sometimes it so happens that one who wants to chastise Krsna utters the
holy name, and thus the holy name becomes the cause of his liberation.”
TEXT 156
তবে সেই कवि সবার চরণে পড়িয়া |
সবার শরণ লৈল GCE তৃণ লঞ। ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
tabe sei kavi sabara carane padiya
sabara sarapa laila dante trpa lana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereupon; sei—that; kavi—poet; sabara—of all; carane—at the feet;
padiya—falling down; sabara—of all the devotees; sarana laila—took shelter;
dante—in the mouth; trpa lafnda—taking a straw.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this proper explanation by Svariipa Damodara Gosvami, the
Bengali poet fell down at the feet of all the devotees and took shelter of them
with a straw in his mouth.
TEXT 157
তবে जव ভক্ত তারে অঙ্গীকার কৈলা |
তার গুণ TF’ মহাপ্রভুরে মিলাইলা ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
tabe saba bhakta tare angikara kaila
tara guna kahi’ mahaprabhure milaila


--- Page 201 ---
Text 159] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 199
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereupon; saba bhakta—all the devotees; tare—him; argikara kaila—
accepted as one of the associates; tara guna kahi’—explaining his humble
behavior; mahaprabhure milaila—introduced him to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon all the devotees accepted his association. Explaining his humble
behavior, they introduced him to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 158
সেই कवि जर्वखाकिः ब्रङ्नि। নীলাচলে |
গৌরভক্তগণের Fo কে কহিতে পারে ? ১৫৮ ॥
sei kavi sarva tyaji’ rahila nilacale
gaura-bhakta-ganera krpa ke kahite pare?
SYNONYMS
sei kavi—that poet; sarva tyaji’—giving up all nonsensical activities; rahila—
remained; nilacale—at Jagannatha Purl; gaura-bhakta-ganera—of the devotees of
Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa—the mercy; ke —who; kahite pare —can ex-
plain.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of the devotees of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, that poet
from Bengal gave up all other activities and stayed with them at Jagannatha
Puri. Who can explain the mercy of the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
TEXT 159
এই @ Fy প্রদ্যন্সমিশ্র-বিবরণ ।
প্রভুর আঙ্ঞায় কৈল কুষ্ণকথার শ্রবণ ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
ei ta’ kahilun pradyumna-misra-vivarana
prabhura ajfaya kaila krsna-kathara sravana
SYNONYMS
ei ta’ kahilun—thus | have described; pradyumna-misra-vivarana—the descrip-
tive narration of Pradyumna Misra; prabhura ajiidya—on the order of SrT Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kaila—did; krsna-kathara sravana—listening to discourses on topics
concerning Krsna.


--- Page 202 ---
200 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
1 have thus described the narration concerning Pradyumna Misra and how,
following the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he listened to discourses
about Krsna spoken by Ramiananda Raya.
TEXT 160
তার মধ্যে কহিল্পু: রামানন্দের মহিমা ।
আপনে শ্রীমুখে প্রভু বর্ণে যার সীমা ॥ ১৬০ ॥
tara madhye (3৪/01/1017) ramanandera mahima
apane sri-mukhe prabhu varpe yarra sima
SYNONYMS
tara madhye—within these statements; kahilun—I have explained; ramanan-
dera mahima—the glories of Ramananda Raya; apane—personally; sri-mukhe—
from his mouth; prabhu—the Lord; varne—explains; yarnra—of whom; sima—the
limit of ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Within the narration | have explained the glorious characteristics of Sri
Ramananda Raya, through whom Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally de-
scribed the limits of ecstatic love for Krsna.
TEXT 161
প্রস্তাবে কহিল্যু: কবির নাটক-বিবরণ ।
অজ্ঞ হঞা শ্রদ্ধায় পাইল প্রভুর চরণ ॥ ১৬১ ॥
prastave [((৪/01107) kavira nataka-vivarana
ajia hana sraddhaya paila prabhura carana
SYNONYMS
prastave —by the way; kahiluri—I| have explained; kavira—of the poet; nataka-
vivarana—description of the drama; ajfia hana—although being ignorant; $rad-
dhaya—with faith and love; paila—got; prabhura carana—the shelter of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
In the course of the narration, 1 have also told about the drama by the poet
from Bengal. Although he was ignorant, because of his faith and humility he
nevertheless obtained the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 203 ---
Text 164] Ramananda Raya Instructs Pradyumna Misra 201
TEXT 162
জীকৃষ্ণচৈতন্য-লীল।- অম্তের সার |
একলীলা-প্রবাহে বহে শত-শত ধার ॥ ১৬২ ॥
$ri-krspa-caitanya-lila —amrtera sara
eka-lila-pravahe vahe sata-sata dhara
SYNONYMS
$ri-krspa-caitanya-lili—the pastimes of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; amrtera
sara—the essence of nectar; eka-lila—of one pastime; pravahe —by the stream;
vahe —flow; sata-sata dhara—hundreds and hundreds of branches.
TRANSLATION
The pastimes of Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu are the essence of
nectar. From the stream of one of His pastimes flow hundreds and thousands
of branches.
TEXT 163
শ্রদ্ধ! করি' এই লীলা ষেই পড়ে, শুনে |
গৌরলীলা, ভক্তি-ভক্ত-রস-তত্ব জানে ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
$raddha kari’ ei lila ১০1 pade, sune
gaura-lila, bhakti-bhakta-rasa-tattva jane
SYNONYMS
$raddha kari’—with faith and love; ei lila—these pastimes; yei—anyone who;
pade, sune—reads and hears; gaura-lila—the pastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhakti-bhakta-rasa-tattva—the truth about devotional service,
devotees and their transcendental mellows; jane —understands.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who reads and hears these pastimes with faith and love can under-
stand the truth about devotional service, devotees and the transcendental
mellows of the pastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 164
জীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ ।
চৈতন্তচরিতামৃত TCT কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ১৬৪ ॥


--- Page 204 ---
202 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 5
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—>Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvam;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and Sri Raghunitha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritimrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-lfla,
Fifth Chapter, describing how Pradyumna Misra received instructions from Rama-
nanda Raya.


--- Page 205 ---
CHAPTER 6
The Meeting of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami

A summary of this chapter is given by Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-
bhasya as follows. When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went into transcendental fits
of ecstatic love, Ramananda Raya and Svarapa Damodara Cosvami attended to
Him and satisfied Him as He desired. Raghunatha dasa Gosvami had been at-
tempting to come to the lotus feet of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for a long time,
and finally he left his home and met the Lord. When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had
gone to Santipura on His way to Vrndavana, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami had
offered to dedicate his life at the Lord's lotus feet. In the meantime, however, a
Mohammedan official became envious of Hiranya dasa, Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami's uncle, and induced some big official court minister to have him ar-
rested. Thus Hiranya dasa left his home, but by the intelligence of Raghunatha
dasa the misunderstanding was mitigated. Then Raghunatha dasa went to
Panihati, and, following the order of Nityananda Prabhu, he observed a festival
(cida-dadhi-mahotsava) by distributing chipped rice mixed with yogurt. The day
after the festival, Nityananda Prabhu gave Raghunatha dasa the blessing that he
would very soon attain the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. After this inci-
dent, Raghunatha dasa, with the help of his priest, whose name was Yadunandana
Acarya, got out of his house by trickery and thus ran away. Not touching the
general path, Raghunatha dasa Cosvami secretly went to Jagannatha Puri. After
twelve days, he arrived in Jagannatha Puri at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entrusted Raghunatha dasa Gosvami to Svardpa
Damodara Gosvami. Therefore another name for Raghunatha dasa Gosvami is
Svartipera Raghu, or the Raghunatha of Svarapa Damodara. For five days
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami took prasada at the temple, but later he would stand at
the Sirmha-dvara gate and eat only whatever he could gather by alms. Later he
lived by taking alms from various chatras, or food distributing centers. When
Raghunatha’s father received news of this, he sent some men and money, but
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami refused to accept the money. Understanding that
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was living by begging from the chatras, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu presented him with His own guija-mala and a stone from
Govardhana Hill. Thereafter, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami used to eat rejected food
that he had collected and washed. This renounced life greatly pleased both

203


--- Page 206 ---
204 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
Svarpa Damodara Gosvami and जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One day 5 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu took by force some of the same food, thus blessing Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami for his renunciation.
TEXT 1
Felted: কুগৃহাদ্ধকুপা-
তুদ্ধৃত্য ভঙ্গ্যা রঘুলাথদ।সম্্‌ |
छाच्छ স্বরূপে विटे खचर
ল্রীরুষ্চৈতন্যমমুং প্ুপছ্যে ॥ > ॥
krpa-gunair yah kugrhandha-kapad
uddhrtya bhangya raghunatha-dasam
nyasya svartipe vidadhe ‘ntararigarn
$ri-krspa-caitanyam amu prapadye
SYNONYMS
krpa-gunaih—by the ropes of causeless mercy; yah—who; ku-grha—of con-
temptible family life; andha-kapat—from the blind well; uddhrtya—having
raised; bhangya—by a trick; raghunatha-dasam—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
nyasya—giving over; svarpe —to Svaripa Damodara Gosvami; vidadhe —made;
antarangam—one of His personal associates; sri-krsna-caitanyam—unto Lord Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu; amum—unto Him; prapadye—I offer my obei-
sances.
TRANSLATION
With the ropes of His causeless mercy, Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu em-
ployed a trick to deliver Raghunatha dasa Gosvami from the blind well of con-
temptible family life. He made Raghunatha dasa Gosvami one of His personal
associates, placing him under the charge of Svariipa Damodara Gosvami. |
offer my obeisances unto Him.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় Abe জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়।দ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya, jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra, jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda


--- Page 207 ---
Text 4] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 205
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; sri-caitanya—to Lord Caitanya; jaya—all glories; nitya-
nanda—to Lord Nityananda; jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to Advaita
Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glory to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glory to Lord Nityananda! All
glory to Sri Advaita Acarya! And all glory to all the devotees of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 3
এইমত (a6 ভক্তগণ-সঙ্গে |
नोनाण्टन नाना লীল৷ করে नांन।-तटक ॥ ৩ ॥
ei-mata gauracandra bhakta-gana-sarnge
nilacale nana lila kare nana-range
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; gauracandra—Lord 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-
gana-sange —with His associates; nilacale—at Nilacala (Jagannatha Puri); nana—
various; lila—pastimes; kare —performs; nana-range —in varieties of transcenden-
tal pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Gauracandra performed various pastimes with His associates at
Jagannatha Puri in varieties of transcendental pleasure.
TEXT 4
सनि অন্তরে রুষ্ণ-বিয়োগ বাধয়ে।
ৰাহিরে না প্রকাশয় ভক্ত-তুঃখ-ভয়ে ॥ 8 ॥
yadyapi antare krsna-viyoga badhaye
bahire na prakasaya bhakta-duhkha-bhaye
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; antare—within the heart; krsna-viyoga—separation from
Krsna; badhye—obstructs; bahire—externally; na prakasaya—does not exhibit;
bhakta-duhkha-bhaye —fearing the unhappiness of the devotees.


--- Page 208 ---
206 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt pangs of separation from Krsna, He
did not manifest His feelings externally, for He feared the unhappiness of His
devotees.
TEXT 5
উৎকট বিরহ-তুঃখ যবে বাহিরায় |
তবে যে বৈকল্য প্রভুর বর্ণন না যায় ॥ ৫ ॥
utkata viraha-duhkha yabe bahiraya
tabe ye vaikalya prabhura varpana na yaya
SYNONYMS
utkata—severe; viraha-duhkha—unhappiness of separation; yabe—when;
bahiraya—is manifested; tabe—at that time; ye—what; vaikalya—transforma-
tions; prabhura—of the Lord; varpana na yaya—cannot be described.
TRANSLATION
The transformations undergone by the Lord when He manifested severe
unhappiness due to separation from Krsna cannot be described.
TEXT 6
রামানন্দের কৃষ্ণকথা, স্বরূপের शन 1
বিরহ-বেদনায় প্রভুর AATF =A ॥ ৬ ॥
ramanandera krspa-katha, 5৮3/0/292/3 gana
viraha-vedanaya prabhura rakhaye parana
SYNONYMS
ramanandera—of Ramananda Raya; krspa-katha—talks of Lord Krsna; svariapera
gana—the songs of Svarpa Damodara; viraha-vedanaya—at the time of pangs of
separation; prabhura—of Lord Sri. Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rakhaye—keep;
parana—the life.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord acutely felt pangs of separation from Krsna, only Sri Rama-
nanda Raya’s talk about Krsna and the sweet songs of Svariipa Damodara kept
Him alive.


--- Page 209 ---
Text 9] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 207
TEXT 7
দিনে প্রভু নানা৷-সঙ্গে হয় অন্য मन |
রাতজ্রিকালে বাড়ে প্রভুর বিরহ-বেদন ॥ ৭ ॥
dine prabhu nana-sarige haya anya mana
ratri-kale bade prabhura viraha-vedana
SYNONYMS
dine—during the daytime; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; Aana-
sange—by different association; haya—becomes; anya—diverted; mana—His
mind; ratri-kale—at night; bade —increase; prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; viraha-vedana—pangs of separation.
TRANSLATION
Because the Lord associated with various devotees during the day, His mind
was somewhat diverted, but at night the pangs of separation from Krsna in-
creased very rapidly.
TEXT 8
ভার স্থখ-হেতু সঙ্গে রহে দুই कन |
কৃষ্ণরস-শ্লোক-গীতে করেন FGF ॥ ৮ ॥
tanra sukha-hetu sange rahe dui jana
krsna-rasa-sioka-gite karena santvana
SYNONYMS
tarira suk ha-hetu —for His happiness; sarige—in His association; rahe —remain;
dui jana —two personalities; krspa-rasa—of the transcendental mellows of Krsna;
sloka—verses; gite—by songs; karena santvana—they pacified.
TRANSLATION
Two people—Ramananda Raya and Svariipa Damodara Gosvami—stayed
with the Lord to pacify Him by reciting various verses about Krsna’s pastimes
and by singing appropriate songs for His satisfaction.
TEXT 9
श्रवन दषटष् পূর্বে কৃষ্ণস্মখের সহায় |
গোৌরস্থখদান-হেতু তৈছে রাম-রায় > ॥


--- Page 210 ---
208 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
subala yaiche parve krsna-sukhera sahaya
gaura-sukha-dana-hetu taiche rama-raya

SYNONYMS
subala—Subala, one of the cowherd boy friends of Krsna; yaiche—just as;
[001৮9 —previously; krsna-sukhera—to give happiness to Krsna; sahdya—helper;
gaura-sukha-dana-hetu—for giving happiness to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
taiche—similarly; rama-radya—Ramananda Raya.
TRANSLATION
Previously, when Lord Krsna was personally present, Subala, one of His
cowherd boy friends, gave Him happiness when He felt separation from
Radharani. Similarly, Ramananda Raya helped give happiness to Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 10
পূর্বে যৈছে রাধার ললিতা সহায়-প্রধান।
তৈছে স্ব্ূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞি রাখে মহাপ্রভুর প্রাণ ison
001৮6 yaiche radhara lalita sahdya-pradhana
taiche svarapa-gosani rakhe mahaprabhura prana
SYNONYMS
parve—previously; yaiche—just as; radhara—of Srimati Radharani; lalita—Her
companion named Lalita; sahdya-pradhana—the best helper; taiche —similarly;
svarpa-gosani—Svaripa Damodara Cosvami; rakhe —keeps; mahaprabhura
prana—the life of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Previously, when Srimati Radharani felt the pangs of separation from Krsna,
Her constant companion Lalita kept Her alive by helping Her in many ways.
Similarly, when $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt Radharani’s emotions, Svariipa
Damodara Gosvami helped Him maintain His life.
TEXT 11
এই দুই জনার সৌভাগ্য কহুন না যায়!
প্রভুর “অন্তরঙ্গ” বলি” যারে লোকে গায় ॥ ১১ ॥


--- Page 211 ---
Text 13] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 209
ei dui janara saubhagya kahana na yaya
prabhura ‘antaranga’ bali’ yanre loke gaya
SYNONYMS
ei dui janara—of these two personalities; saubhagya—fortune; kahana na
ydya—cannot be described; prabhura—of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; an-
tarariga—very intimate and confidential associates; bali’—as; yarre—whom;
loke —people; gaya—say.
TRANSLATION
To describe the fortunate position of Ramananda Raya and Svariopa
Damodara Gosvami is extremely difficult. They were renowned as intimately
confidential friends of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 12
এইমত বিহরে গৌর লঞ ভক্তগণ |
রঘুনাথ-মিলন टव শুন, ভক্তগণ ॥ ১২ ॥
ei-mata vihare gaura 1405 bhakta-gana
raghunatha-milana ebe suna, bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; vihare—enjoys; gaura—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
1205 bhakta-gana—keeping company with His devotees; raghunatha-milana—
meeting with Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; ebe—now; suna—hear; bhakta-gana—
O devotees.
TRANSLATION
The Lord thus enjoyed His life with His devotees. O devotees of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, now hear how Raghunatha dasa Gosvami met the Lord.
TEXT 13
পূর্বে শাস্তিপুরে রঘুনাথ যবে আইলা |
মহাপ্রভু কৃপা করি' ভারে শিখাইলা ॥ ১৩ ॥
parve $3/7700008/76 raghunatha yabe aila
mahaprabhu krpa kari’ tanre sikhaila


--- Page 212 ---
210 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
puarve—previously; $antipure—to Santipura; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa;
yabe aila—when he came; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa kari’—
showing causeless mercy; tarire sikhaila—gave him lessons.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunitha dasa, during his family life, went to meet Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Santipura, the Lord gave him worthy instructions by His cause-
less mercy.
TEXT 14
প্রভুর শিক্ষাতে তেঁহে। নিজ-ঘরে 9m ।
মর্কট-বৈরাগ্য ছাড়ি' een “বিষয়ি-প্রায়” ॥ ১৪ ॥
prabhura Siksate tenho nija-ghare yaya
markata-vairagya chadi’ haila ‘visayi-praya”
SYNONYMS
prabhura Siksate—by the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; (60/00 -11€;
nija-ghare yaya—returned to his home; markata-vairagya—monkey renunciation;
chadi’—giving up; haila—became; visayi-praya—Ilike a pounds-and-shillings man.
TRANSLATION
Instead of becoming a so-called renunciate, Raghunatha dasa, following the
instructions of the Lord, returned home and played exactly like a pounds-and-
shillings man.
TEXT 15
ভিতরে বৈরাগ্য, বাহিরে করে जर्व-कर्ब ।
wR ङ" মাতা-পিতার আনন্দিত মন ॥ se ॥
bhitare vairagya, bahire kare sarva-karma
dekhiya ta’ mata-pitara anandita mana
SYNONYMS
bhitare—within his heart; vairagya—complete renunciation; bahire —exter-
nally; kare —does; sarva—all; karma—activities; dekhiya—seeing; ta’—certainly;
mata-pitara—of the father and mother; anandita—satisfied; mana—the mind.


--- Page 213 ---
Text 17] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 211
TRANSLATION
Raghuniatha dasa was inwardly completely renounced, even in family life,
but he did not express his renunciation externally. Instead, he acted just like
an ordinary businessman. Seeing this, his father and mother were satisfied.
TEXT 16
मभूत হৈতে প্রভু खेन, বার্তা टव পাইলা।
প্রভু-পাশ চলিবারে উদ্যোগ করিল। ॥ ১৬ ॥
‘mathura haite prabhu &ila’, —varta ১৭০০ paila
prabhu-pasa calibare udyoga karila
SYNONYMS
mathura haite —from Mathura; prabhu ila—Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
come back; varta—message; yabe paila—when he received; prabhu-pasa—to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calibare—to go; udyoga karila—made an endeavor.
TRANSLATION
When he received a message that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had
returned from Mathura City, Raghunatha dasa endeavored to go to the lotus
feet of the Lord.
TEXT 17
হেন-কালে মুল্যুকের এক গ্লেচ্ছ অধিকারী |
সপ্ুগ্রাম-মুল্পুকের সে হয় “চৌধুরী” ॥ ১৭ ॥
hena-kale mulukera eka mleccha adhikari
saptagrama-mulukera se haya ‘caudhuri’
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; mulukera—of the country; eka—one; mleccha—
Mohammedan; adhikari—official; saptagrama-mulukera—of the place known as
Saptagrama; se —that person; haya—is; caudhuri—tax collector.
TRANSLATION
At that time there was a Mohammedan official collecting the taxes of Sap-
tagrama.


--- Page 214 ---
212 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
PURPORT
Formerly, when the Mohammedan government was in power, the person ap-
pointed tax collector would collect the taxes of the local Zamindars, or land-
holders. He would keep one-fourth of the collection for himself as a profit, and
the balance he would deliver to the treasury of the government.
TEXT 18
হিরণ্যদাস यूलुक निन “মক্ররি' করিয়। ৷
তার অধিকার গেল, মরে সে দেখিয়। ॥ ১৮ ॥
hiranya-dasa muluka nila ‘makrari’ kariya
tara adhikara gela, mare se dekhiya
SYNONYMS
hiranya-dasa—the uncle of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; muluka nila—took
charge of the country; makrari kariya—by some agreement; tara adhikara gela—
the Mohammedan caudhuri lost his position; mare se dekhiya—became ex-
tremely envious of Hiranya dasa.
TRANSLATION
When Hiranya dasa, Raghunatha dasa’s uncle, made an agreement with the
government to collect taxes, the Mohammedan caudhuri, or tax collector,
having lost his position, became extremely envious of him.
TEXT 19
বার লক্ষ দেয় রাজায়, সাথে বিশ नक्त |
সে gw fog न। পাঞ। হৈল প্রতিপক্ষ ॥ >> ॥
bara laksa deya rajaya, sadhe bisa laksa
se ‘turuk’ kichu na pana haila pratipaksa
SYNONYMS
bara laksa—1,200,000 coins; deya—delivers; rdjdya—unto the Mohammedan
government; sadhe—collects; bisa laksa—2,000,000 coins; se turuk—that Turk;
kichu—anything; na pana—not getting; haila pratipaksa—became his rival.
TRANSLATION
Hiranya dasa was collecting 2,000,000 coins and therefore should have
delivered 1,500,000 to the government. Instead, he was giving only 1,200,-


--- Page 215 ---
Text 22] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 213
000, thus making an extra profit of 300,000 coins. Seeing this, the Moham-
medan caudhuri, who was a Turk, became his rival.
TEXT 20
রাজ-ঘরে टेककिञ्च< Wal উজীরে আনিল।
হিরণ্যদাস পল।ইল, রখুনাথেরে বান্ধিল ॥ ২০ ॥
raja-ghare kaiphiyat diya ujire anila
hiranya-dasa palaila, raghunathere bandhila
SYNONYMS
raja-ghare—to the government treasury; kaiphiyat diya—sending a confiden-
tial account; ujire anila—brought the minister in charge; hiranya-dasa palaila—
Hiranya dasa fled; raghunathere bandhila—he arrested Raghunatha dasa.
TRANSLATION
After sending a confidential account to the government treasury, the
caudhuri brought the minister in charge. The caudhuri came, wanting to ar-
rest Hiranya dasa, but Hiranya dasa had left home. Therefore the caudhuri ar-
rested Raghunatha dasa.
TEXT 21
প্রতিদিন রঘুনাথে করয়ে Te TAN |
বাপ-জ্যেঠারে खानः, নহে পাইবা যাতনা ॥ ২১ ॥
prati-dina raghunathe karaye bhartsana
‘bapa-jyethare ana’, nahe paiba yatana
SYNONYMS
prati-dina—daily; raghunathe —Raghunatha dasa; karaye bhartsana—he
chastised; bapa-jyethare ana—bring your father and his elder brother; nahe—
otherwise; paiba yatana—you will be punished.
TRANSLATION
Every day, the Mohammedan would chastise Raghunatha dasa and tell him,
‘Bring your father and his elder brother. Otherwise you will be punished.’
TEXT 22
মারিতে ख।नट्स যদ্ধি দেখে রঘুনাথে |
মন ফিরি” যায়, তবে न প।রে মারিতে ॥ ২২ ॥


--- Page 216 ---
214 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
marite anaye yadi dekhe raghunathe
mana phiri’ yaya, tabe na pare marite
SYNONYMS
marite—to beat; anaye—brings; yadi—when; dekhe—sees; raghunathe—
Raghunatha dasa; mana—his mind; phiri’ ydya—becomes changed; tabe —at that
time; na pare marite—he could not beat.
TRANSLATION
The caudhuri wanted to beat him, but as soon as he saw Raghunatha’s face,
his mind changed, and he could not beat him.
TEXT 23
বিশেষে কায়স্থ-বুদ্ধে? অন্তরে করে छन्न |
ALY তর্জে গর্জে: মারিতে ASW অন্তর ॥ ২৩ ॥
visese kayastha-buddhye antare kare dara
mukhe tarje garje, marite sabhaya antara
SYNONYMS
visese —specifically; kayastha-buddhye —considering a kayastha; antare—
within his heart; kare dara—is afraid; mukhe—with his mouth; tarje garje—
threatens; mdrite—to beat; sa-bhaya—afraid; antara—at heart.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, the caudhuri was afraid of Raghunatha dasa because Raghunatha
dasa belong to the kayastha community. Although the caudhuri would
chastise him with oral vibrations, he was afraid to beat him.
PURPORT
Raghunatha dasa belonged to a very aristocratic family of the kayastha com-
munity. He had substantial influence with the local people, and therefore the
caudhuri, or minister, was afraid to beat him. Superficially he would chastise
Raghunatha dasa with threatening vibrations, but he did not beat him. The mem-
bers of the kayastha community in India are generally very intelligent and expert
in business management. Formerly they were mostly government officers. They
were mentioned even by Yajiavalkya, as quoted by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in
his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya:


--- Page 217 ---
Text 25] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 215
cata-taskara-durvrttair
maha-sahasikadibhih
pidyamana praja rakset
kayasthais ca visestah
From this verse it appears that the governmental officials of the kayastha com-
munity would sometimes chastise the citizens, and thus it was the duty of the
king to protect the people in general from the atrocities of the kayasthas. In
Bengal the kayastha community is honored almost as much as the brahmana com-
munity, but in the up-country of India the kdyasthas are considered $00/35 be-
cause they generally eat meat and drink wine. In any case, from history the
kayasthas appear very intelligent. Thus the Mohammedan caudhuri was afraid of
Raghunatha dasa because he belonged to the kayastha community.
TEXT 24
তবে Agate কিছু छिखिन। উপায় ।
বিনতি করিয়। কহে সেই ম্লেচ্ছ-পায় ॥ ২৪ ॥
tabe raghunatha kichu cintila upaya
vinati kariya kahe sei mleccha-paya
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; kichu—some; cintila—
thought of; updya—means; vinati kariya—in great humility; kahe —he says; sei
mleccha—of that Mohammedan caudhuri; paya—at the feet.
TRANSLATION
While this was going on, Raghunatha dasa thought of a tricky method of
escape. Thus he humbly submitted this plea at the feet of the Mohammedan
caudhuri.
TEXT 25
“আমার পিতা, (प्र) হয় তোমার দুই ভাই |
ভাই-ভাইয়ে তোমরা কলহ কর সর্বদাই ॥ ২৫ ॥
“amara pita, jyetha haya tomara dui bhai
bhai-bhaiye tomara kalaha kara sarvadai


--- Page 218 ---
216 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
amara pita—my father; jyetha—and his elder brother; haya—are; tomara—
your; dui bhai—two brothers; bhai-bhaiye—between brother and brother;
tomara—all of you; kalaha kara—fight; sarvadai—always.
TRANSLATION
“My dear sir, my father and his elder brother are both your brothers. All
brothers always fight about something.
TEXT 26
কভু কলহ, কভু প্রীতি ইহার নিশ্চয় नादे |
কালি পুনঃ তিন ভাই ङ्व এক-ঠা এ ॥ ২৬ ॥
kabhu kalaha, kabhu priti—ihara niscaya nai
kali punah tina bhai ha-iba eka-thani
SYNONYMS
kabhu—sometimes; kalaha—fight; kabhu—sometimes; priti—very intimate
friendly behavior; ihara—of these things; niscaya nai—there is no certainty;
kali—the next day; punah—again; tina bhai—three brothers; ha-iba—will be;
eka-thani—at one place.
TRANSLATION
‘Sometimes brothers fight among themselves, and sometimes they have
very friendly dealings. There is no certainty when such changes will take
place. Thus | am sure that although today you are fighting, tomorrow you
three brothers will be sitting together in peace.
TEXT 27
আমি Lace পিতার, তৈছে তোমার वानक |
আমি তোমার পাল্য, তুমি আমার পালক ॥ ২৭ ॥
ami yaiche pitara, taiche tomara balaka
ami tomdra palya, tumi amara palaka
SYNONYMS
ami—I|; yaiche—just like; pitara—of my father; taiche—similarly; tomara—
your; balaka—son; ami—I|; tomara—your; palya—person to be maintained;
tumi—you; amara—my; palaka—maintainer.


--- Page 219 ---
Text 30] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 217
TRANSLATION
‘Just as | am my father’s son, so | am also yours. | am your dependent, and
you are my maintainer.
TEXT 28
পালক 2p পাল্যেরে তাড়িতে না যুয়ায়।
তুমি সর্বশান্ত্র জান “জিন্দাপীর*-প্রায় ॥” ২৮ ॥
palaka hana palyere tadite na yuyaya
tumni sarva-sastra jana ‘jinda-pira’-praya’’
SYNONYMS
palaka hana—being a maintainer; palyere—the person who is maintained;
tadite —to punish; na yuyaya—is not good; tumi—you; sarva-sastra—all scrip-
tures; jana—know; jinda-pira—a living saintly person; praya—just like.
TRANSLATION
‘‘For a maintainer to punish the person he maintains is not good. You are ex-
pert in all the scriptures. Indeed, you are like a living saint.”
TEXT 29
धि 1
এত শুনি' সেই ম্লেচ্ছের মন আদ্র হৈল।
ছাড়ি বাহি” कख পড়ে, কাদিতে লাগিল ॥ ২৯ ॥
eta Suni’ sei mlecchera mana ardra haila
dadi vahi’ asru pade, kandite lagila
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; sei mlecchera—of that Mohammedan; mana—mind;
ardra haila—became softened; dadi vahi’—flowing over his beard; asru pade—
tears fell; kandite lagila—began to cry.
TRANSLATION
Hearing Raghunitha dasa’s appealing voice, the Mohammedan’s heart
softened. He began to cry, and tears glided down his beard.
TEXT 30
ম্লেচ্ছ বলে,_“আজি হৈতে তুমি-_মোর A 1
আজি ছাড়াইমু তোমা' করি” এক সূত্র 1” ৩০ ॥


--- Page 220 ---
218 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
mleccha bale, — “2/1 haite tumi——mora ‘putra’
2/1 chadaimu toma’ kari’ eka satra”
SYNONYMS
mleccha bale —the Mohammedan said; ji haite —from this day; tumi—you;
mora putra—my son; &ji—today; chadaimu toma’—! shall get you released; kari’
eka satra—by some means.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan caudhuri told Raghunatha dasa, “You are my son from
this day on. Today, by some means, | shall have you released.”
TEXT 31
উজিরে কহিয়৷ রঘুনাথে ছাড়াইল |
প্রীতি করি' রঘুনাথে কহিতে লাগিল ॥ <> ॥
ujire kahiya raghunathe chadaila
priti kari’ raghunathe kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
ujire—unto the minister; kahiya—speaking; raghunathe chadaila—released
Raghunatha dasa; priti kari’—with great affection; raghunathe —unto Raghunatha
dasa; kahite lagila—began to say.
TRANSLATION
After informing the minister, the caudhuri released Raghunatha dasa and
then began to speak to him with great affection.
TEXT 32
“তোমার candi fag Te অষ্টলক্ষ খায় ।
আমি--ভাগী, আমারে কিছু দিবারে যুয়ায় ॥ ৩২ ॥
“tomdra jyetha nirbuddhi asta-laksa khaya
ami ——bhagi, amare kichu dibare yuyaya
SYNONYMS
tomara jyetha—the elder brother of your father; nirbuddhi—bereft of intelli-
gence; asta-laksa khaya—enjoys 800,000 coins; ami—I; bhagi—shareholder;
amare —unto me; kichu—something; dibare —to give; yuyaya—is proper.


--- Page 221 ---
Text 34] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 219
TRANSLATION
“The elder brother of your father is less intelligent,” he said. ‘He enjoys
800,000 coins, but since | am also a shareholder, he should give some portion
of it to me.
TEXT 33
याड তুমি, তোমার জেযঠারে মিলাহু আমারে ।
যে-মতে ভাল হয় করুন, ভার fag ভারে ॥ ৩৩ ॥
yaha tumi, tomara jyethare milaha amare
ye-mate bhala haya karuna, bhara dilun tarnre
SYNONYMS
ydha—go; tumi—you; tomara—your; jyethare—the elder brother of your
father; milaha amare—arrange to meet with me; ye-mate —in whatever way;
bhala—good; haya—is; karuna—let him do; bhara dilun {^€ —I shall completely
depend upon him.
TRANSLATION
‘Now you go arrange a meeting between me and your uncle. Let him do
whatever he thinks best. | shall completely depend on his decision.”
TEXT 34
রঘুনাথ আসি” তবে জেযঠারে মিলাইল |
(अष्ड-मद्िङ বশ কৈল- সব শান্ত হৈল ॥ ৩৪ ॥
raghunatha asi’ tabe jyethare milaila
mleccha-sahita vasa kaila——saba santa haila
SYNONYMS
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; asi’—coming; tabe—then; jyethare milaila—
arranged a meeting between the caudhuri and the elder brother of his father;
mleccha-sahita—with the Mohammedan; vasa kaila—he settled; saba—every-
thing; santa haila—became peaceful.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa arranged a meeting between his uncle and the caudhuri.
He settled the matter, and everything was peaceful.


--- Page 222 ---
220 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 35
এইমত রঘুনাথের বৎসরেক গেল।
দ্বিতীয় বৎসরে পলাইতে মন टक्न ॥ ৩৫ ॥
ei-mata raghunathera vatsareka gela
dvitiya vatsare paldite mana kaila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; vatsareka—one
year; gela—passed; dvitiya vatsare—the next year; paliite—to go away from
home; mana kaila—he decided.
TRANSLATION
In this way Raghunatha dasa passed one year exactly like a first-class busi-
ness manager, but the next year he again decided to leave home.
TEXT 36
রাত্রে উঠি' टकन। एनिन। পলাঞা।
দুর হৈতে পিতা ভারে আনিল ধরিয়া ॥ ৩৬ ॥
ratre uthi’ ekela calila palana
0013 haite pita tanre anila dhariya
SYNONYMS
ratre —at night; uthi’—getting up; ekela—alone; calila—left; palaina—running
away; dara haite—from a distant place; pita—his father; tanre —him; anila—
brought back; dhariya—catching.
TRANSLATION
He got up alone one night and left, but his father caught him in a distant
place and brought him back.
TEXT 37
এইমতে বারে বারে পলায়, ধরি” আনে 1
তবে छत्र মাতা কহে তার পিতা সনে ॥ ৩৭ ॥
ei-mate bare bare palaya, dhari’ ane
tabe tanra mata kahe tanra pita sane


--- Page 223 ---
Text 39] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 221
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; bare bare—again and again; paldya—he goes away;
dhari’ ane—brings him back; tabe —then; tanra mata—his mother; kahe —speaks;
tanra pita sane—with his father.
TRANSLATION
This became almost a daily affair. Raghunatha would run away from home,
and his father would again bring him back. Then Raghunitha dasa’s mother
began speaking to his father.
TEXT 38
“পুত্র ‘Alger হইল, ইহায় রাখহ বান্তিয়া” |
ভার नि] কহে তারে निर्वि gael ॥ ৩৮ ॥
“putra ‘batula’ ha-ila, 1//3)3 rakhaha bandhiya”
tanra pita kahe tare nirvinna hana
SYNONYMS
putra—son; batula ha-ila—has become mad; ihaya—him; rakhaha bandhiya—
just keep by binding; tanra pita—his father; kahe —says; tare—to her; nirvinna
127 06118 very unhappy.
TRANSLATION
“Our son has become mad,” she said. “Just keep him by binding him with
ropes.” His father, being very unhappy, replied to her as follows.
TEXT 39
“RET এশ্বর্য, স্ত্রী অম্সরা-সম।
এ সব वांकिटङ নারিলেক খার মন ॥ ৩৯ ॥
“indra-sama aisvarya, stri apsara-sama
€ saba bandhite narileka yanra mana
SYNONYMS
indra-sama—Ilike the heavenly King, Indra; aisvarya—material opulence; stri—
wife; apsara-sama—like an angel of heaven; € saba—all this; bandhite—to bind;
ndrileka—was not able; yanra mana—whose mind.


--- Page 224 ---
222 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
‘Raghunatha dasa, our son, has opulences like Indra, the heavenly King,
and his wife is as beautiful as an angel. Yet all this could not tie down his mind.
TEXT 40
দড়ির বন্ধনে ভারে রাখিবা কেমতে ?
জন্মদাতা পিতা নারে ‘elias খণ্ডাইতে ॥ ৪০ |
dadira bandhane tanre rakhiba ke-mate?
janma-data pita nare ‘prarabdha’ khandaite
SYNONYMS
dadira bandhane —by bonds of ropes; tarire—him; rakhiba—will you keep; ke-
mate —how; janma-data pita—the father who begets the child; nare—is not able;
prarabdha—the reaction of previous activities; khandaite —to nullify.
TRANSLATION
‘‘How then could we keep this boy home by binding him with ropes? It is
not possible even for one’s father to nullify the reactions of one’s past ac-
tivities.
TEXT 41
চৈতন্যচন্দ্রের Foil হঞাছে 22TH |
देङ्काणटल्छत् “বাতুল” কে রাখিতে পারে ?” ॥ ৪১ ॥
caitanya-candrera krpa hanache inhare
caitanya-candrera ‘batula’ ke rakhite pare?”
SYNONYMS
caitanya-candrera—of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa—mercy; haAache
inhare—has been bestowed upon him; caitanya-candrera—of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; batula—madman; ke —who; rakhite pare —can keep.
TRANSLATION
“Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has fully bestowed His mercy on him. Who
can keep home such a madman of Caitanyacandra?”’


--- Page 225 ---
Text 44] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 223
TEXT 42
তবে রখুনাথ কিছু विषं द्धिन। মনে ।
নিত্যানম্দর-গোসাঞির পাশ চলিলা আর দিনে ॥ ৪২ ॥
tabe raghunatha kichu vicarila mane
nityananda-gosanira pasa calila ara dine
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereupon; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; kichu—something; vicarila
mane —considered within his mind; nityananda-gosarira pasa—unto Nityananda
Cosafii; calili—went; dra dine—the next day.
TRANSLATION
Then Raghunatha dasa considered something in his mind, and the next day
he went to Nityananda Gosaii.
TEXT 43
পানিহাটি-গ্রামে পাইল। প্রভুর দরশন |
কীর্তনীয়। সেবক সঙ্গে আর বহুজন ॥ ৪৩ ॥
panihati-grame paila prabhura darasana
kirtaniya sevaka sange ara bahu-jana
SYNONYMS
panihati-grame—in the village known as Panihati; paila—got; prabhura
darasana—the audience of Nityananda Prabhu; kirtaniya sevaka—performers of
sankirtana and servants; sarige—with; ara—and; bahu-jana—many other per-
sons.
TRANSLATION
In the village of Panihati, Raghunatha dasa obtained an interview with
Nityananda Prabhu, who was accompanied by many kirtana performers, ser-
vants and others.
TEXT 44
গঙ্গাতীরে বৃক্ষ-মূলে পিণ্ডার উপরে ।
বসিয়াছেন-_-যেন (कोशो সূর্যোদয় করে ॥ ৪৪ ॥


--- Page 226 ---
224 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
ganga-tire vrksa-male pindara upare
vasiydchena——yena koti saryodaya kare
SYNONYMS
ganga-tire—on the bank of the Ganges; vrksa-mile —underneath a tree; pin-
dara upare—on a rock; vasiyachena—was sitting; yena—as if; koti sarya—
hundreds of thousands of suns; udaya kare —rise.
TRANSLATION
Sitting on a rock under a tree on the bank of the Ganges, Lord Nityananda
seemed as effulgent as hundreds and thousands of rising suns.
TEXT 45
তলে উপরে বহুভক্ত' হঞাছে বেষ্টিত ৷
দেখি” প্রভুর প্রভাব রঘুনাথ- বিস্মিত ॥ ৪৫ ॥
tale upare bahu-bhakta hanache vestita
dekhi’ prabhura prabhava raghunatha— vismita
SYNONYMS
tale—the surface; upare—upon; bahu-bhakta—many devotees; hanache
vestita—He was surrounded; dekhi’—seeing; prabhura prabhava—the influence
of Nityananda Prabhu; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; vismita—astonished.
TRANSLATION
Many devotees sat on the ground surrounding Him. Seeing the influence of
Nityananda Prabhu, Raghunatha dasa was astonished.
TEXT 46
Fede হঞ। সেই পড়িল। কতদুরে।
সেবক কহে,-_“রঘুলাথ দণ্ডবৎ করে” ॥ ৪৬ ॥
dandavat hana sei padila kata-dare
sevaka kahe, — ‘raghunatha dandavat kare’
SYNONYMS
dandavat hana—falling flat like a rod; sei—he; padila kata-dare —fell down at a
distant place; sevaka kahe—the servant of Nityananda Prabhu said; raghunatha—
Raghunatha dasa; dandavat kare—is offering obeisances.


--- Page 227 ---
Text 48] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 225
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa offered his obeisances by falling prostrate at a distant
place, and the servant of Nityananda Prabhu pointed out, “There is
Raghunatha dasa, offering You obeisances.’”
TEXT 47
শুনি” প্রভু কহে,__“চোর। দিলি দরশন।
আয়, আয়, আজি তোর कतिगू खन” ॥ ৪৭ ॥
Suni’ prabhu kahe, — “cora dili darasana
aya, dya, aji tora karimu dandana”
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; prabhu kahe—Lord Nityananda Prabhu said; cora—thief; dili
darasana—you have come to see Me; aya aya—come here, come here; 3ji—
today; tora—your; karimu—I shall do; dandana—punishment.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Lord Nityananda Prabhu said, You are a thief. Now you have
come to see Me. Come here, come here. Today | shall punish ०४१८.
TEXT 48
প্রভু বোলায়, ঙেঁহে। নিকটে না৷ করে গমন |
আকরিয়। তার মাথে প্রভু «Fer চরণ ॥ ৪৮ ॥
prabhu bolaya, tenho nikate na kare gamana
akarsiya tanra mathe prabhu dharila carana
SYNONYMS
prabhu bolaya—the Lord calls; tenho—he; nikate —nearby; na kare gamana—
does not come; akarsiya—bringing him near; tanra mathe—on his head;
prabhu—Nityananda Prabhu; dharila carana—placed His feet.
TRANSLATION
The Lord called him, but Raghunatha dasa did not go near the Lord. Then
the Lord forcibly caught him and placed His lotus feet upon Raghunatha
dasa’s head.


--- Page 228 ---
226 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 49
কোৌতুকী নিত্যানন্দ সহজে দয়াময় |
AYA কহে কিছু হুঞা সদয় ॥ ৪৯ ॥
kautuki nityananda sahaje dayamaya
raghunathe kahe kichu hana sadaya
SYNONYMS
kautuki—very funny; nityananda—Lord Nityananda; sahaje —by nature; daya-
maya—very merciful; raghunathe —unto Raghunatha dasa; kahe—says; kichu—
something; hana sa-daya—being merciful.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda was by nature very merciful and funny. Being merciful, He
spoke to Raghunatha dasa as follows.
TEXT 50
“নিকটে न। আইস, চোরা, ভাগ' দূরে দুরে |
আজি লাগ. পাঞাছি, দণ্ডিনু তোমারে ॥ ৫০ ॥
“nikate na aisa, cord, bhaga’ dare dare
8/1 lag panachi, dandimu tomare
SYNONYMS
nikate—nearby; na disa—you do not come; cord—thief; bhaga’—you go
away; dare dare—a long distance; dji—today; lag panachi—I| have caught; dan-
dimu tomare—1 shall punish you.
TRANSLATION
“८१०४ are just like a thief, for instead of coming near, you stay away at a dis-
tant place. Now that | have captured you, | shall punish you.
TEXT 51
नदि, চিড়। ভক্ষণ করাহ মোর গণে 1”
শুনি” আনন্দিত হৈল Agate মনে ॥ ৫১ ॥
03001, 093 bhaksana karaha mora 8৭097
Suni’ anandita haila raghunatha mane


--- Page 229 ---
Text 53] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 227
SYNONYMS
dadhi—yogurt; cida—chipped rice; bhaksana karaha—feed; mora gane —My
associates; suni’—hearing; anandita haila—became very happy; raghunatha—
Raghunatha dasa; mane —in the mind.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Make a festival and feed all My associates yogurt and chipped rice.” Hear-
ing this, Raghunatha dasa was greatly pleased.
TEXT 52
সেইক্ষণে निक-८नो क পাঠাইলা গ্রামে 1
ভক্ষ্য-দ্বেব্য লোক সব গ্রাম হৈতে আনে ॥ ৫২ ॥
sei-ksane nija-loka pathaila grame
bhaksya-dravya loka saba grama haite ane
SYNONYMS
sei-ksane —immediately; nija-loka—his servants; pathaila grame—he sent to
the nearby village; bhaksya-dravya—eatables; loka saba—all the persons; grama
haite—from the village; ane —bring.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa immediately sent his own men to the village to purchase
all kinds of eatables and bring them back.
TEXT 53
চিড়া, फक, gw, সম্দেশ, আর চিনি, কলা ।
সব দ্রেব্য আনাঞা চৌদিকে «FE ॥ ৫৩ ॥
003, dadhi, dugdha, sandesa, ara cini, kala
saba dravya anana caudike dharila
SYNONYMS
cida—chipped rice; dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—milk; sandesa—sweetmeats;
ara—and; cini—sugar; kali—banana; saba—all; dravya—materials; anana—caus-
ing to be brought; cau-dike —all around; dharila—kept.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa brought chipped rice, yogurt, milk, sweetmeats, sugar,
bananas and other eatables and placed them all around.


--- Page 230 ---
228 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 54
“মহোৎসব-নাম BF लाच्न-मखञ्न |
আসিতে লাগিল লোক অসং্খ্য-গণন ॥ ৫৪ ॥
‘mahotsava’-nama Suni’ brahmana-sajjana
asite lagila loka asankhya-ganana
SYNONYMS
mahotsava—festival; nama—name; suni—hearing; brahmana-sat-jana—
brahmanas and other gentlemen; asite lagila—began to pour in; loka—people;
asankhya-ganana—innumerable.
TRANSLATION
As soon as they heard that a festival was going to be held, all kinds of
brahmanas and other gentlemen began to arrive. Thus there were innumera-
ble people.
TEXT 55
আর খ্রামান্তর হৈতে সামগ্রী আমিল।
শত তুই-চারি হোল্ন। Siz! আনাইল ॥ ৫৫ ॥
ara gramantara haite samagri anila
Sata dui-cari holna tanha anaila
SYNONYMS
dra—also; grama-antara haite —from other villages; samagri—articles; anila—
brought; sata—hundred; dui-cari—two to four; holnda—round earthen pots;
tartha—there; anaila—caused to be brought.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the crowd increasing, Raghunitha dasa arranged to get more eat-
ables from other villages. He also brought two to four hundred large, round
earthen pots.
TEXT 56
বড় © Fe ow wards পাঁচ ATs |
এক विध्य প্রভু লাগি” চিড়া ভিজায় তাতে ॥ ৫৬ ॥


--- Page 231 ---
Text 58] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 229
bada bada mrt-kundika anaila panca sate
eka vipra prabhu lagi’ cida bhijaya tate
SYNONYMS
bada bada—big, big; mrt-kundika—earthen basins; anaila—arranged to be
brought; panca sate—five or seven; eka vipra—one brahmana; prabhu lagi'—for
Nityananda Prabhu; cida —the chipped rice; bhijaya—soaked; tate —in those.
TRANSLATION
He also obtained five or seven especially large earthen pots, and in these
pots abrahmana began soaking chipped rice for the satisfaction of Lord Nitya-
nanda.
TEXT 57
এক-ঠাণঞি তপ্ত-দুষ্ধে চিড়া ভিজাঞা।
অধ্যেক ছানিল छि, চিনি, কলা দিয়] ॥ ৫৭ ॥
eka-thani tapta-dugdhe 0103 bhijana
ardheka chanila dadhi, cini, kala diya
SYNONYMS
eka-thani—in one place; tapta-dugdhe —in hot milk; cida—the chipped rice;
bhijana—soaking; ardheka—half of it; chanila—mixed; dadhi—yogurt; cini—
sugar; kala—bananas; diya—putting in.
TRANSLATION
In one place, chipped rice was soaked in hot milk in each of the large pots.
Then half the rice was mixed with yogurt, sugar and bananas.
TEXT 58
আর SET ঘন।বৃত-দুষ্ধেতে छ निन |
টাপাকলা, চিনি, श, কপূর তাতে দিল ॥ ৫৮ ॥
ara ardheka ghanavrta-dugdhete chanila
canpa-kala, cini, ghrta, karpara tate dila
SYNONYMS
ara ardheka—the other half; ghana-avrta—condensed; dugdhete—in milk;
chanila—mixed; canpa-kala—a special type of banana; cini—sugar; ghrta—
clarified butter, ghee; karpara—camphor; tate dila—put into that.


--- Page 232 ---
230 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
The other half was mixed with condensed milk and a special type of banana
known as canpa-kala. Then sugar, clarified butter and camphor were added.
TEXT 59
ধুতি পরি” প্রভু যদি পিণডাতে বসিলা।
সাতকুণ্ডী विद्य छन्न আগেতে ধরিলা ॥ ৫৯ ॥
dhuti pari’ prabhu yadi pindate vasila
sata-kundi vipra tanra agete dharila
SYNONYMS
dhuti pari’—putting on a new cloth; prabhu—Lord Nityananda; yadi—when;
pindate vasilai—sat on a high platform; sata-kundi—the seven big, big earthen
pots; vipra—the brahmana; tanra agete—in front of Him; dharila—placed.
TRANSLATION
After Nityananda Prabhu had changed His cloth for a new one and sat on a
raised platform, the brahmana brought before Him the seven huge pots.
TEXT 60
চবুতর।-উপরে যত প্রভুর নিজগণে।
বড় বড় লোক वजिन। মণ্ডলী-রচনে ॥ ৬০ ॥
cabutara-upare yata prabhura nija-gane
bada bada loka vasila mandali-racane
SYNONYMS
cabutara-upare—on the raised platform; yata—all; prabhura nija-gane—very
intimate associates of the Lord; bada bada loka—big, big people; vasila—sat
down; mandali-racane —in a circle.
TRANSLATION
On that platform, all the most important associates of Sri Nityananda
Prabhu, as well as other important men, sat down in a circle around the Lord.
TEXT 61
রামদাস, সুন্দরানন্দ, দাস-গদাধর |
FAITE, কমলাকর, সদ।শিব, FFA ॥ ৬১ ॥


--- Page 233 ---
Text 63] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 231
ramadasa, sundarananda, dasa-gadadhara
murdri, kamalakara, sadasiva, purandara
SYNONYMS
ramadasa—Ramadasa; sundarananda—Sundarananda; dasa-gadadhara—
Gadadhara dasa; murari—Murari; kamaldkara—Kamalakara; sadasiva—Sadasiva;
purandara—Purandara.
TRANSLATION
Among them were Ramadasa, Sundarananda, Gadadhara dasa, Murari,
Kamalakara, Sadasiva and Purandara.
TEXT 62
धनगर, জগদীশ, পরমেশ্বর-দাস |
মহেশ, গৌরীদাস, হোড়-কৃষ্ণনাল ॥ ৬২ ॥
dhanaijaya, jagadisa, paramesvara-dasa
mahesa, gauridasa, hoda-krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
dhananjaya—Dhanaijaya; jagadisa—Jagadisa; paramesvara-dasa—
Paramesvara dasa; mahesa—Mahesa; gauridasa—Gauridasa; hoda-krsnadasa—
Hoda Krsnadasa.
TRANSLATION
Dhanaiijaya, Jagadisa, Paramesvara dasa, Mahesa, Gauridasa and Hoda
Krsnadasa were also there.
TEXT 63
উদ্ধারণ দত্ত আদি যত निजेन |
উপরে বসিলা সব, কে করে भेनेन ? ৬৩ ॥
uddharana datta adi yata nija-gana
upare vasila saba, ke kare ganana?
SYNONYMS
uddharana datta—Uddharana Datta; adi—and similar other persons; yata nija-
gana—all personal associates; upare —above; vasila—sat down; saba—all; ke—
who; kare ganana—can count.


--- Page 234 ---
232 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-1il3, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Similarly, Uddharana Datta Thakura and many other personal associates of
the Lord sat on the raised platform with Nityananda Prabhu. No one could
count them all.
PURPORT
The devotees mentioned herein are described by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura in his Anubhasya. For further information one may consult the following
references in the Adi-lila. Ramadasa—Chapter Ten, texts 116 and 118, and
Chapter Eleven, texts 13 and 16. Sundarananda—11.23. Gadadhara dasa—10.53,
11.13-14 and 11.17. The Murari mentioned herein is different from Murari Gupta.
His full name is Murari Caitanya dasa, and he is a personal associate of Nityananda
Prabhu. Thus one should consult Chapter Eleven, text 20. Kamaldkara—11.24.
Sadasiva—11.38. Purandara—11.28. Dhanafjaya—11.31. Jagadisa—11.30.
Paramesvara—11.29. Mahe$a—11.32. Gauridasa—11.26. Hoda Krsnadasa—
11.47. Uddharana Datta Thakura—11.41.
TEXT 64
শুনি” পণ্ডিত ভট্টাচার্য যত বিপ্র আইলা ।
AY করি” প্রভু সবারে উপরে বসাইল। ॥ ৬৪ ॥
Suni’ pandita bhattacarya yata vipra aila
manya kari’ prabhu sabare upare vasaila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; pandita bhattacarya—learned scholars and priests; yata—all;
vipra—brahmanas; aila—came; manya kari’—giving honor; prabhu—Lord Nitya-
nanda Prabhu; sabdre—all of them; upare vasaili—seated on the top.
TRANSLATION
Hearing about the festival, all kinds of learned scholars, brahmanas and
priests went there. Lord Nityananda Prabhu honored them and made them sit
on the raised platform with Him.
TEXT 65
22 22 মৃতৎকুণ্ডিক৷ সবার আগে किन ।
একে তুষ্ক-চিড়া, আরে দথি-চিড়া কৈল ॥ ৬৫ ॥
dui dui mrt-kundika sabara age dila
eke dugdha-cida, are dadhi-cida kaila


--- Page 235 ---
Text 67] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 233
SYNONYMS
dui dui—two and two; mrt-kundika—earthen pots; sabara age —before every-
one; dila—offered; eke—in one; dugdha-cigda—chipped rice with condensed
milk; are—in the other; dadhi-cigda—chipped rice with yogurt; kaila—put.
TRANSLATION
Everyone was offered two earthen pots. In one was put chipped rice with
condensed milk and in the other chipped rice with yogurt.
TEXT 66
অআর यङ (न। क जव চৌতরা-তলানে |
ग्नौ -वटकष বসিলা, তার না হয় গণনে ॥ ৬৬ ॥
ara yata loka saba cotara-talane
mandali-bandhe vasila, tara na haya ganane
SYNONYMS
ara—other; yata—as many as; loka—people; saba—all; cotara-talane—at the
base of the platform; mandali-bandhe—in groups; vasili—sat down; tara—of
them; na haya ganane—there was no counting.
TRANSLATION
All the other people sat in groups around the platform. No one could count
how many people there were.
TEXT 67
একেক জনারে দুই দুই ८९) मून निनि 1
দথি-চিড়া দুগ্ধ-চিড়া, 22s ভিজাইল ॥ ৬৭ ॥
ekeka janare dui dui holna dila
dadhi-cida dugdha-cida, duite bhijaila
SYNONYMS
ekeka janare—to each and every one of them; dui dui—two and two; holna
dila—earthen pots were supplied; dadhi-cidi—chipped rice with yogurt;
dugdha-cida —chipped rice with condensed milk; duite—in the two pots; bhi-
jaila—were soaked.
TRANSLATION
Each and every one of them was supplied two earthen pots—one of chipped
rice soaked in yogurt and the other of chipped rice soaked in condensed milk.


--- Page 236 ---
234 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 68
কোন কোন विय উপরে স্থান না नअ |
তুই হোল্নায় চিড় ভিজায় গঙ্গাতীরে fal nv
kona kona vipra upare sthana na pana
dui holnaya cida bhijaya ganga-tire giya
SYNONYMS
kona kona—some; vipra—brahmanas; upare—on the platform; sthana na
pana—not having gotten a place; dui holndya—in two earthen pots; cida bhi-
jdya—soak chipped rice; gariga-tire—on the bank of the Ganges; giya—going.
TRANSLATION
Some of the brahmanas, not having gotten a place on the platform, went to
the bank of the Ganges with their two earthen pots and soaked their chipped
rice there.
TEXT 69
তীরে স্থান না नो) আর কত ऊन |
জলে নামি” দথি-চিড়। করয়ে ভক্ষণ ॥ ৬৯ ॥
tire sthana na pana ara kata jana
jale nami’ dadhi-cida karaye bhaksana
SYNONYMS
tire—on the bank; sthana—place; na pana—not having gotten; ara—other;
kata—some; jana—persons; jale nami’—getting down into the water; dadhi-
cida—yogurt and chipped rice; karaye bhaksana—began to eat.
TRANSLATION
Others, who could not get a place even on the bank of the Ganges, got
down into the water and began eating their two kinds of chipped rice.
TEXT 70
কেহ উপরে, কেহ SLA, কেহ গঙ্গাতীরে।
বিশজন छिन-छ] ख পরিবেশন করে ॥ ৭০ ॥
keha upare, keha tale, keha gariga-tire
bisa-jana tina-thani parivesana kare


--- Page 237 ---
Text 72] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 235
SYNONYMS
keha upare—some on the platform; keha tale —some at the base of the plat-
form; keha ganga-tire—some on the bank of the Ganges; bisa-jana—twenty
men; tina-thani—in three places; parivesana kare —distributed.
TRANSLATION
Thus some sat on the platform, some at the base of the platform, and some
on the bank of the Ganges, and they were all supplied two pots each by the
twenty men who distributed the food.
TEXT 71
(ङ्नकाटल আইল। তথা রাঘব পণ্ডিত |
হাসিতে লাগিল৷ দেখি” zest বিস্মিত ॥ ৭১ ॥
hena-kale aila (3003 raghava /23001(9
hasite lagila dekhi’ hana vismita
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; aila—arrived; tatha—there; raghava pandita—the
great scholar named Raghava Pandita; hasite lagila—began to laugh; dekhi’'—
seeing; hana vismita—being astonished.
TRANSLATION
At that time, Raghava Pandita arrived there. Seeing the situation, he began
to laugh in great surprise.
TEXT 72
নি-সকুড়ি নানামত প্রসাদ আমিল।
প্রভুরে আগে foal ভক্তগণে বটি দিল ॥ ৭২ ॥
ni-sakdi nana-mata prasada anila
prabhure age diya bhakta-gane banti dila
SYNONYMS
ni-sakdi—food cooked in ghee; nana-mata—various types; prasada—remnants
of the Lord's food; anila—he brought; prabhure age —in front of Lord Nityananda;
diya—placing; bhakta-gane—to all the devotees; banti dila—distributed.


--- Page 238 ---
236 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
He brought many other kinds of food cooked in ghee and offered to the
Lord. This prasada he first placed before Lord Nityananda and then distributed
among the devotees.
TEXT 73
প্রভুরে FTLH— “CSI FAI ভোগ লাগাইল |
তুমি ইই। উৎসব কর, ঘরে প্রসাদ রহিল ॥” १७ ॥
prabhure kahe, — “toma lagi’ bhoga lagaila
tumi ihan utsava kara, ghare prasada rahila”
SYNONYMS
prabhure kahe —he said to Lord Nityananda Prabhu; toma lagi’—for You; bhoga
lagaila—| have offered food to the Deity; tumi—You; ihan—here; utsava kara—
are engaged in a festival; ghare—at home; prasada—the prasada; rahila—
remained.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita said to Lord Nityananda, ‘For You, sir, | have already
offered food to the Deity, but You are engaged in a festival here, and so the
food is lying there untouched.”
TEXT 74
প্রভু TCE, -५थ-खंव जिटन করিয়ে ভোজন |
রাত্র্যে তোমার ঘরে প্রসাদ করিমু ভক্ষণ ॥ ৭৪ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “e-dravya dine kariye bhojana
ratrye tomara ghare prasada karimu bhaksana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Lord Nityananda Prabhu said; e-dravya—this food; dine—dur-
ing the daytime; kariye bhojana—let Me eat; ratrye—at night; tomara ghare—in
your house; prasada—the prasada; karimu bhaksana—! shall eat.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda replied, “Let Me eat all this food here during the day, and |
shall eat at your home at night.


--- Page 239 ---
Text 77] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 237
TEXT 75
গোপ-জাতি আমি ag গোপণ সঙ্গে ৷
আমি छश পাই এই পুলিনভোজন-রঙ্গে ” ৭৫ ॥
gopa-jati ami bahu gopa-gana sarge
ami sukha pai ei pulina-bhojana-rarige”
SYNONYMS
gopa-jati—belonging to the community of cowherd boys; ami—I; bahu—
many; gopa-gana—cowherd boys; sarge —with; ami—I; sukha pai—become
very happy; ei—this; pulina—by the riverside; bhojana-rarige —in the enjoyment
of eating.
TRANSLATION
“4 belong to a community of cowherd boys, and therefore | generally have
many cowherd associates with Me. | am happy when we eat together in a pic-
nic like this by the sandy bank of the river.”
TEXT 76
TACT বসাঞ দুই কুণ্ডী দেওয়াইল। |
রাঘব দ্বিবিধ চিড়। তাতে ভিজাইলা ॥ av ॥
raghave ৪5৭৭3 dui kundi deoyaila
raghava dvividha cida tate bhijaila
SYNONYMS
raghave —Raghava Pandita; vasana—making sit down; dui—two; kundi—
earthen pots; deoyaild—arranged to be delivered to him; raghava—Raghava Pan-
dita; dvi-vidha—two kinds; cidd—chipped rice; tate—in them; bhijaila —soaked.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda made Raghava Pandita sit down and had two pots
delivered to him also. There were two kinds of chipped rice soaked in them.
TEXT 77
সকল-লোকের চিড়া পূর্ণ যবে হইল 1
ধ্যানে তবে AG মহাপ্রভুরে আমনিল ॥ ৭৭ ॥


--- Page 240 ---
238 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
sakala-lokera cida [20103 yabe ha-ila
dhyane tabe prabhu mahaprabhure anila
SYNONYMS
sakala-lokera—of everyone; cida—chipped rice; parna—full; yabe—when;
ha-ila—was; dhyane—in meditation; tabe—at that time; prabhu—Lord Nitya-
nanda Prabhu; mahaprabhure anila—brought Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
When chipped rice had been served to everyone, Lord Nityananda Prabhu,
in meditation, brought Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 78
मर्‌] थद्‌ खरेल দেখি' নিতাই छिन |
তারে লঞ। সবার BGI দেখিতে লাগিলা ॥ ৭৮ ॥
mahaprabhu 3//3 dekhi’ nitai uthila
tanre 127 sabara cida dekhite lagila
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; aila—came; dehki’—seeing; nitai—
Lord Nityananda; uthila—stood up; tarnre lana—with Him; sabara—of everyone;
cida—chipped rice; dekhite lagila—began to see.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived, Lord Nityananda Prabhu stood up.
They then saw how the others were enjoying the chipped rice with yogurt and
condensed milk.
TEXT 79
AFH কুণ্তীর, হোল্নার চিড়ার এক এক alta |
মহাপ্রভুর মুখে দেন করি” পরিহাস॥ ৭৯ ॥
sakala kundira, holnara cidara eka eka grasa
mahaprabhura mukhe dena kari’ parihasa
SYNONYMS
sakala kundira—from all the pots; holnara—from the big pots; cidara—of
chipped rice; eka eka grasa—one morsel; mahaprabhura mukhe —into the mouth
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dena—puts; kari’ parihasa—making a joke.


--- Page 241 ---
Text 82] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 239
TRANSLATION
From each and every pot, Lord Nityananda Prabhu took one morsel of
chipped rice and pushed it into the mouth of Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu as a
joke.
TEXT 80
হাসি” মহাপ্রভু আর এক গ্রাস नयश |
তার মুখে দিয় খাওয়ায় হাসিয় হাসিয়। ॥ ৮০ ॥
01451“ mahaprabhu ara eka grasa lana
tanra mukhe diya khaoyaya hasiya hasiya
SYNONYMS
hasi’—smiling; mahaprabhu—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ara—another; eka
grasa—one morsel; lafia—taking; tarnra mukhe —in the mouth of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu; diya—putting; khaoyaya—makes eat; hasiya hasiya—laughing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, also smiling, took a morsel of food, pushed it into
the mouth of Nityananda and laughed as He made Lord Nityananda eat it.
TEXT 81
এইনমত নিতাই বুলে সকল মণ্ডলে |
Flan] রঙ্গ দেখে বৈষ্ণব সকলে ॥ ৮১ ॥
ei-mata nitai 0016 sakala mandale
dandana ranga dekhe vaisnava sakale
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; nitai bule—Lord Nityananda was walking; sakala man-
dale—through all the groups; dandana—standing; rarga dekhe —see the fun;
vaispava sakale —all the Vaisnavas.
TRANSLATION
In this way Lord Nityananda was walking through all the groups of eaters,
and all the Vaisnavas standing there were seeing the fun.
TEXT 82
कि कश्चिन्न বেড়ায়, _ইহ। কেহ নাহি জানে।
মহাপ্রভুর দর্শন পায় কোন ভাগ্যবানে ॥ ৮২ ॥


--- Page 242 ---
240 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
ki kariya bedaya, —iha keha nahi jane
mahaprabhura darsana paya kona bhagyavane
SYNONYMS
ki kariya—doing what; bedaya—walks through; iha—this; keha nahi jane—no
one could understand; mahaprabhura darsana paya—see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kona bhagyavane—some fortunate men.
TRANSLATION
No one could understand what Nityananda Prabhu was doing as He walked
about. Some, however, who were very fortunate, could see that Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was also present.
TEXT 83
তবে হাসি” নিত্যানন্দ वजिन्‌। खांजटन ।
চারি 29 আরো।য়। Bol রাখিলা ডাহিনে ॥ ৮৩ ॥
tabe hasi’ nityananda vasila asane
cari kundi aroya cida rakhila dahine
SYNONYMS
tabe hasi’—thereupon smiling; nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; vasila
asane—sat down on His seat; cari kundi—four earthen pots; droya cida—
chipped rice not made from boiled paddy; rakhila dahine—He kept on His right
side.
TRANSLATION
Then Nityananda Prabhu smiled and sat down. On His right side He kept
four pots of chipped rice that had not been made from boiled paddy.
TEXT 84
আসন जिघ्र) মহা প্রভুরে তাহ বসাইলা |
তুই ভাই তবে চিড়া খাইতে লাগিল ॥ ৮৪ ॥
asana diya mahaprabhure tahan vasaila
dui bhai tabe cida khaite lagila
SYNONYMS
asana diya—offering a sitting place; mahdprabhure—unto ऽव॒ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tahan—there; vasaila—made sit; dui bhai—the two brothers;
tabe —at that time; cida—chipped rice; khaite lagila—began to eat.


--- Page 243 ---
Text 87] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 241
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda offered Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu a place and had Him sit
down. Then together the two brothers began eating chipped rice.
TEXT 85
দেখি' নিত্যানম্দগ্রভু আনন্দিত Leal |
কত কত ভাবাবেশ প্রকাশ করিল। ॥ ৮৫ ॥
dekhi’ nityananda-prabhu anandita haila
kata kata bhavavesa prakasa karila
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; nityananda-prabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; anandita
haila—became very happy; kata kata—so much; bhava-avesa—ecstatic love;
prakasa karila—He manifested.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu eating with Him, Lord Nityananda
Prabhu became very happy and exhibited varieties of ecstatic love.
TEXT 86
আজ্ঞা किन।+- “ङि বলি” করহ ভোজন” |
“হরি” “হরি'-ধ্বনি छि ভরিল ভুবন ॥ ৮৬ ॥
32/75 dila, — ‘hari bali’ karaha bhojana’
‘hari’ ‘hari’-dhvani uthi’ bharila bhuvana
SYNONYMS
2/7 dili—He ordered; hari bali’—saying “Hari”; karaha bhojana—all of you
eat; hari hari-dhvani—the resounding of “Hari, Hari”; uthi’—rising; bharila
bhuvana—filled the universe.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda Prabhu ordered, “All of you eat, chanting the holy name of
Hari.” Immediately the holy names ‘“Hari, Hari’ resounded, filling the entire
universe.
TEXT 87
wf gf’ afer বৈষ্ণব করয়ে ভোজন ।
পুলিন-ভোজন সবার হইল স্মরণ ॥ ৮৭ ॥


--- Page 244 ---
242 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
‘hari’ ‘hari’ bali’ vaisnava karaye bhojana
pulina-bhojana sabara ha-ila smarana
SYNONYMS
hari hari bali’—chanting Hari, Hari; vaisnava—all the Vaisnavas; karaye bho-
jana—eat; pulina-bhojana—eating on the bank of the Yamuna; sabara ha-ila
smarana—everyone could remember.
TRANSLATION
When all the Vaisnavas were chanting the holy names “Hari, Hari’ and eat-
ing, they remembered how Krsna and Balarama ate with Their companions the
cowherd boys on the bank of the Yamuna.
TEXT 88
নিত্যানন্দ गरोव्यड्‌ - कनाल, উদার |
व्रघून।दयत्र खाट এত CFE) অঙ্গীকার ॥ ৮৮ ॥
nityananda mahaprabhu——krpalu, udara
raghunathera bhagye eta kaila angikara
SYNONYMS
nityananda mahaprabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu and Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; krpalu—merciful; udara—liberal; raghunathera bhagye—by the
great fortune of Raghunatha dasa; eta—all this; kaila arigikara— They accepted.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Nityananda Prabhu are extremely mer-
ciful and liberal. It was Raghunatha dasa’s good fortune that They accepted all
these dealings.
TEXT 89
নিত্যানমন্দ-প্রভাব-কৃপ। जं निटव কোন্‌ জন ?
মহাপ্রভু আনি” করায় পুলিন-ভোজন ॥ ৮৯ ॥
nityananda-prabhava-krpa janibe kon jana?
mahaprabhu ani’ karaya pulina-bhojana
SYNONYMS
nityananda—of Nityananda Prabhu; prabhava-krpa—influence and mercy;
janibe—can know; kon jana—who; mahaprabhu ani’—bringing Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karaya pulina-bhojana—induces Him to eat on the river bank.


--- Page 245 ---
Text 911 Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 243
TRANSLATION
Who can understand the influence and mercy of Lord Nityananda Prabhu?
He is so powerful that He induced Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to come eat
chipped rice on the bank of the Ganges.
TEXT 90
প্রীরামদাসাদি গোপ প্রেমাবিষ্ট হৈলা।
গঙ্গাতীরে “যমুনা-পুলিন' জ্ঞান কৈল৷। ॥ >° ॥
$ri-ramadasadi gopa premavista haila
ganga-tire ‘yamuna-pulina’ 75/12 kaila
SYNONYMS
$ri-ramadasa-adi—headed by Sri Ramadasa; gopa—the cowherd boys;
prema-avista haila—became absorbed in ecstatic love; garnga-tire—the bank of
the Ganges River; yamuna-pulina—the bank of the Yamuna River; jAana kaila—
they thought.
TRANSLATION
All the confidential devotees who were cowherd boys, headed by Sri
Ramadasa, were absorbed in ecstatic love. They thought the bank of the
Ganges to be the bank of the Yamuna.
TEXT 91
মহোৎসব শুনি” পসারি নানা-গ্রাম হৈতে |
চিড়, लवि, সন্দেশ, कन আমিল বেচিতে ॥ >> ॥
mahotsava suni’ pasari nana-grama haite
cida, dadhi, sandesa, kala anila vecite
SYNONYMS
mahotsava suni’—hearing about this festival; pasari—the shopkeepers; nana-
grama—various villages; haite—from; cida—chipped rice; dadhi—yogurt; san-
desa—sweetmeats; kala—bananas; anila—brought; vecite—to sell.
TRANSLATION
When the shopkeepers of many other villages heard about the festival, they
arrived there to sell chipped rice, yogurt, sweetmeats and bananas.


--- Page 246 ---
244 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 92
যত ठंव} नं আইসে, जव মূল্য করি” লয়।
তার দ্রেব্য মূল্য দিয়া তাহারে খাওয়ায় ॥ ৯২ ॥
yata dravya 1303 aise, 5303 malya kari’ laya
tara dravya malya diya tahare khaoyaya
SYNONYMS
yata dravya—all materials; land—bringing; aise—come; saba—all; malya kari’
laya—Raghunatha purchased; tara dravya—of their goods; malya diya—giving
the price; tahare khaoyaya—fed them.
TRANSLATION
As they came, bringing all kinds of food, Raghunatha dasa purchased it all.
He gave them the price for their goods and later fed them the very same food.
TEXT 93
কৌতুক দেখিতে আইল যত TS कन |
সেই চিড়া, দধি, कल। করিল ভক্ষণ ॥ ৯৩ ॥
kautuka dekhite aila yata yata jana
sei cida, dadhi, kala karila bhaksana
SYNONYMS
kautuka—these funny things; dekhite —to see; aila—arrived; yata yata jana—
all kinds of men; sei—they; cida—chipped rice; dadhi—yogurt; kala—bananas;
karila bhak sana —ate.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who came to see how these funny things were going on was also fed
chipped rice, yogurt and bananas.
TEXT 94
ভোজন করি' নিত্যানন্দ আচমন टेकन |
চারি কুণ্ডীর অবশেষ agate किन ॥ ৯৪ ॥
bhojana kari’ nityananda acamana kaila
cari kundira avasesa raghunathe dila


--- Page 247 ---
Text 96] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 245
SYNONYMS
bhojana  kari’—after finishing eating; nityananda—Nityananda Prabhu;
acamana kaila—washing His hands and mouth; cari kundira—of the four pots;
avasesa—what was remaining; raghunathe dila—delivered to Raghunatha dasa.
TRANSLATION
After Lord Nityananda Prabhu finished eating, He washed His hands and
mouth and gave Raghunatha dasa the food remaining in the four pots.
TEXT 95
আর তিন কুণ্ডিকায় অবশেষ fea |
গ্রাসে-গ্রাসে করি” विध्य সব ভক্তে দিল ॥ ৯৫ ॥
ara tina kundikaya avasesa chila
grase-grase kari’ vipra saba bhakte dila
SYNONYMS
dra—other; tina kundikdya—in three pots; avasesa chila—there was food
remaining; grase-grase—by morsel; kari’—delivering; vipra—a brahmana; saba
bhakte —to all the devotees; dila—delivered.
TRANSLATION
There was food remaining in the three other big pots of Lord Nityananda,
and a brahmana distributed it to all the devotees, giving a morsel to each.
TEXT 96
পুষ্পমালা বিপ্র আনি' প্রভু-গলে किनि |
চম্দন আনিয়া প্রভুর সর্বাঙ্গে লেপিল ॥ ৯৬ ॥
puspa-mala ৮1013 ani’ prabhu-gale dila
candana aniya prabhura sarvange lepila
SYNONYMS
puspa-mala—a flower garland; vipra—one brahmana; ani’—bringing; prabhu-
gale —on the neck of Lord Nitydnanda Prabhu; dila—placed; candana aniya—
bringing sandalwood pulp; prabhura—of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; sarvange
lepila—smeared all over the body.


--- Page 248 ---
246 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Then a brahmana brought a flower garland, placed the garland on Nityanan-
da Prabhu’s neck and smeared sandalwood pulp all over His body.
TEXT 97
সেবক StF Al করে সমর্পণ |
হাসিয়া হাসিয়া প্রভু করয়ে 546 ॥ ৯৭ ॥
sevaka tambdala lana kare samarpana
hasiya hasiya prabhu karaye carvana
SYNONYMS
sevaka—servant; tambula—betel nuts; laAa—bringing; kare samarpana—
offers; hasiya hasiya—smiling; prabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; karaye car-
vapna—chews.
TRANSLATION
When a servant brought betel nuts and offered them to Lord Nityananda,
the Lord smiled and chewed them.
TEXT 98
মালা-চন্দন-তাচ্ববল শেষ যে আছিল |
ল্ীহস্তে প্রভু তাহ। দবাকারে বটি” দিল ॥ ৯৮ ॥
mala-candana-tambula esa ye achila
Sri-haste prabhu taha sabakare banti’ dila
SYNONYMS
mala-candana-tambila—the flower garlands, sandalwood pulp and betel; sesa
ye achila—whatever remained; $ri-haste —in His own hand; prabhu—Nityananda
Prabhu; tdha—that; sabakare—to all; banti’ dila—distributed.
TRANSLATION
With His own hands Lord Nityananda Prabhu distributed to all the devotees
whatever flower garlands, sandalwood pulp and betel nuts remained.
TEXT 99
আনন্দিত রঘুনাথ প্রভুর “শেব” Alp! |
আপনার গণ-সহ খাইলা বটিয়। ॥ >> ॥


--- Page 249 ---
Text 101] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 247
anandita raghunatha prabhura ‘Sesa’ pana
apanara gana-saha khaila bantiya
SYNONYMS
anandita—being very happy; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; prabhura sesa
pana—after getting the remnants left by Lord Nityananda Prabhu; dpanara gana—
his own associates; saha—with; khaila—ate; bantiya—distributing.
TRANSLATION
After receiving the remnants of food left by Lord Nityananda Prabhu,
Raghunatha dasa, who was greatly happy, ate some and distributed the rest
among his own associates.
TEXT 100
এই © wfzy নিত্যানন্দের বিহার |
“श्ङा-मवि-टङोरगजक-नांटम খ্যাতি যার ॥ ১০০ ॥
ei ta’ kahilun nityanandera vihara
‘cida-dadhi-mahotsava’-name khyati yara
SYNONYMS
ei ta’—in this way; kahilun—! have described; nityanandera vihara—the
pastimes of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; cida-dadhi-mahotsava—the festival of eat-
ing chipped rice and yogurt; name—of the name; khyati—the fame; yara—of
which.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have described the pastimes of Lord Nityananda Prabhu in relation to
the celebrated festival of chipped rice and yogurt.
TEXT 101
প্রভু বিশ্রাম কৈলা, যদি দিন-শেষ হৈল।
রাঘব-মন্দিরে তবে কীর্তন আরম্তিল ॥ ১০১ ॥
prabhu visrama kaila, yadi dina-sesa haila
raghava-mandire tabe kirtana arambhila
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Nityananda Prabhu; visrama kaila—took rest; yadi—when; dina-sesa
haila—the day was ended; raghava-mandire—at the temple of Raghava Pandita;


--- Page 250 ---
248 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
tabe—at that time; kirtana arambhila—began congregational chanting of the holy
name.
TRANSLATION
Nityananda Prabhu rested for the day, and when the day ended He went to
the temple of Raghava Pandita and began congregational chanting of the holy
name of the Lord.
TEXT 102
ভক্ত जव নাচাঞা নিত্যানন্দ-রায় |
শেষে নৃত্য করে প্রেমে জগৎ SAH ॥ So ॥
bhakta saba nacana nityananda-raya
Sese nrtya kare preme jagat bhasaya
SYNONYMS
bhakta saba—all the devotees; nacana—making to dance; nityananda-raya—
Lord Nityananda Prabhu; sese—at the end; nrtya kare—began to dance; preme —
in ecstatic love; jagat bhasaya—inundated the entire world.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda Prabhu first influenced all the devotees to dance, and
finally He Himself began dancing, thus inundating the entire world in ecstatic
love.
TEXT 103
মহাপ্রভু তার নৃত্য করেন দরশন |
সবে নিত্যানন্দ দেখে, न) দেখে অন্যজন ॥ ১০৩ ॥
mahaprabhu tanra nrtya karena darasana
sabe nityananda dekhe, na dekhe anya-jana
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu - তা Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarra—His; nrtya—dancing; karena
darasana—sees; sabe—all; nityananda dekhe—Nityananda Prabhu sees; na
dekhe —do not see; anya-jana—others.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was observing the dancing of Lord Nityanan-
da Prabhu. Nityananda Prabhu could see this, but the others could not.


--- Page 251 ---
Text 106] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 249
TEXT 104
নিত্যানম্দের নৃত্য, যেন কাহার नटन |
উপমা দিবার নাহি এ-তিন ভুবনে ॥ ১০৪ ॥
nityanandera nrtya, —yena tanhara nartane
upama dibara nahi e-tina bhuvane
SYNONYMS
nityanandera nrtya—the dancing of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; yena—as;
tanhara nartane—with the dancing of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; upama dibara
nahi—there cannot be any comparison; e-tina bhuvane—within these three
worlds.
TRANSLATION
The dancing of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, like the dancing of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, cannot be compared to anything within these three worlds.
TEXT 105
নৃত্যের মাধুরী (कव বর্ণিবারে नात्र ।
মহাপ্রভু আইসে যেই নৃত্য দেখিবারে ॥ ১০৫ ॥
nrtyera madhuri keba varnibare pare
mahaprabhu aise yei nrtya dekhibare
SYNONYMS
nrtyera madhuri—the sweetness of the dancing; keba—who; varnibare pare—
can describe; mahaprabhu aise—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu comes; yei—that;
nrtya—dancing; dekhibare—to see.
TRANSLATION
No one can properly describe the sweetness of Lord Nityananda’s dancing.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally comes to see it.
TEXT 106
নৃত্য করি' প্রভু যবে [aw করিল। ।
ভোজনের লাগি” পণ্ডিত নিবেদন देकल। ॥ ১০৬ ॥
nrtya kari’ prabhu yabe visrama karila
bhojanera lagi’ pandita nivedana kaila


--- Page 252 ---
250 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
nrtya kari’—after dancing; prabhu—Lord Nityananda; yabe—when; visrama
karila—took rest; bhojanera lagi’—for His eating; pandita—Raghava Pandita;
nivedana kaila—submitted a request.
TRANSLATION
After the dancing and after Lord Nityananda had rested, Raghava Pandita
submitted his request that the Lord take supper.
TEXT 107
ভোজনে वजिन। প্রভু নিজগণ नग ।
মহাপ্রভুর আসন ডাহিমনে পাতিয়া ॥ ১০৭ ॥
bhojane vasila prabhu nija-gana laha
mahaprabhura asana dahine patiya
SYNONYMS
bhojane—to eat; vasila—sat down; prabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; nija-
gana lana—with His own personal associates; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; asana—sitting place; dahine patiya—setting on the right side.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda Prabhu sat down for supper with His personal associates
and made a sitting place on His right side for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 108
মহাপ্রভু আসি' সেই আসনে বসিল।
দেখি রাঘবের মনে আনন্দ বাড়িল ॥ ১০৮ ॥
mahaprabhu asi’ sei asane vasila
dekhi’ raghavera mane ananda badila
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 4si’—coming; sei dsane—on that
seat; vasila—sat down; dekhi’—seeing; raghavera mane —in the mind of Raghava
Pandita; ananda—great happiness; badila—increased.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came there and sat down at His place. Seeing this,
Raghava Pandita felt increasing happiness.


--- Page 253 ---
Text 111] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 251
TEXT 109
তুইভাই-আগে প্রসাদ আনিয়া ধরিল৷ ।
সকল (ARCA পিছে পরিবেশন CFT ॥ ১০৯ ॥
dui-bhai-age prasada aniya dharila
sakala vaisnave piche parivesana kaila
SYNONYMS
dui-bhai-age—in front of the two brothers; prasada—the remnants of food
offered to Lord Krsna; aniya—bringing; dharila—put; sakala vaisnave—to all the
Vaisnavas; piche—thereafter; parivesana kaila—distributed.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita brought the prasada before the two brothers and thereafter
distributed prasada to all the other Vaisnavas.
TEXT 110
নানাপ্রকার পিঠা, পায়স, দিব্য শাল্যন্ন ৷
অমৃত নিন্দয়ে এছে বিবিধ aga ॥ ১১০ ॥
nana-prakara pitha, payasa, divya salyanna
amrta nindaye aiche vividha vyanjana
SYNONYMS
nana-prakara pitha—various types of cake; pdyasa—sweet rice; divya salyan-
na—fine cooked rice; amrta—nectar; nindaye—surpassed; aiche—such; vividha
vyanjana—varieties of vegetables.
TRANSLATION
There were varieties of cakes, sweet rice and fine cooked rice that sur-
passed the taste of nectar. There were also varieties of vegetables.
TEXT 111
রাঘব-ঠাকুরের প্রসাদ অনৃৃতের সার |
মহাপ্রভু যাহ। খাইতে আইসে বার বার ॥ ১১১ ॥
raghava-thakurera (2185508 amrtera sara
mahaprabhu yaha khaite aise bara bara


--- Page 254 ---
252 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
raghava-thakurera—of Raghava Pandita; prasada—food offered to the Deity;
amrtera sara—the essence of nectar; mahaprabhu—Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
yaha—which; khaite—to eat; aise—came; bara bara—again and again.
TRANSLATION
The food prepared and offered to the Deity by Raghava Pandita was like the
essence of nectar. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came there again and again to eat
such prasada.
TEXT 112
পাক TE রাঘব যবে ভোগ ল৷গায়।
মহাপ্রভুর লাগি” ভোগ FF বাড়য় ॥ ১১২ ॥
paka kari’ raghava yabe bhoga lagaya
mahaprabhura lagi’ bhoga prthak badaya
SYNONYMS
paka kari’—after cooking; raghava—Raghava Pandita; yabe—when; bhoga
lagaya—offers food to the Deity; mahaprabhura lagi’—for Lord ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhoga—offering; prthak —separate; badlaya—arranges.
TRANSLATION
When Raghava Pandita offered the food to the Deity after cooking, he
would make a separate offering for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 113
প্রতিদিন মহাপ্রভু করেন (खोजन |
মধ্যে মধ্যে প্রভু তারে দেন দরশন ॥ ১১৩ ॥
prati-dina mahaprabhu karena bhojana
madhye madhye prabhu tarire dena darasana
SYNONYMS
prati-dina—daily; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karena bhojana—
eats; madhye madhye—sometimes; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarire—
unto him; dena darasana—gives His audience.


--- Page 255 ---
Text 114] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 253
TRANSLATION
Every day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would eat at the house of Raghava Pan-
dita. Sometimes He would give Raghava Pandita the opportunity to see Him.
TEXT 114
তুই ভাইরে রাঘব আনি” পরিবেশে |
যত্ন করি” খাওয়ায়, ন| রহে অবশেষে ॥ ১১৪ ॥
dui bhaire raghava ani’ parivese
yatna kari’ khaoyaya, na rahe avasese
SYNONYMS
dui bhaire—to the two brothers; raghava—Raghava Pandita; ani’—bringing;
parivese—distributed; yatna kari’—with great attention; khioydya—fed Them;
na rahe avasese —there were no remnants.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita would bring and distribute prasada to the two brothers,
feeding Them with great attention. They ate everything, and therefore there
were no remnants left.
TEXT 115
কত উপহার আমে, হেন নাহি জানি!
রাখঘবের ঘরে ACH রাধা-ঠাকুরাণী ॥ >> ॥
kata upahara ane, hena nahi jani
raghavera ghare randhe radha-thakurani
SYNONYMS
kata upahara—many presentations; ane —brings; hena—such; nahi jani—I can-
not understand; raghavera ghare—at the house of Raghava Pandita; randhe—
cooks; radha-thakurani—the supreme mother, Srimati Radharani.
TRANSLATION
He brought so many presentations that no one could know them perfectly.
Indeed, it was a fact that the supreme mother, Radharani, personally cooked
in the house of Raghava Pandita.


--- Page 256 ---
254 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 116
তুর্বসোর ॐ ख (Stel পাঞাছেন ৰর |
YS হইতে পাক SIF অধিক मधुन्र ॥ ১১৬ ॥
durvasara thani tenho panachena vara
amrta ha-ite paka tanra adhika madhura
SYNONYMS
durvasara thani—from Durvasa Muni; tenho—She; panachena vara—got the
benediction; amrta ha-ite—than nectar; paka—cooking; tarra—Her; adhika
madhura—more sweet.
TRANSLATION
Srimati Radharani received from Durvasa Muni the benediction that what-
ever She cooked would be sweeter than nectar. That is the special feature of
Her cooking.
TEXT 117
স্থগন্গি न्मत्र AT মাধুূর্যের সার |
দুই ভাই তাহা খাঞ সন্তোষ অপার ॥ ১১৭ ॥
sugandhi sundara prasada——madhuryera sara
dui bhai taha khana santosa apara
SYNONYMS
su-gandhi—fragrant; sundara—beautiful; prasada—food; madhuryera sara—
the essence of all sweetness; dui bhai—the two brothers; taha—that; khana—
eating; santosa apara—very, very happy.
TRANSLATION
Aromatic and pleasing to see, the food was the essence of all sweetness.
Thus the two brothers, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Nityananda
Prabhu, ate it with great satisfaction.
TEXT 118
ভোজনে AACS রখুনাথে কহে সর্বজন |
পণ্ডিত কহে, “ইহ পাছে করিবে ভোজন ॥ ১১৮ ॥


--- Page 257 ---
Text 120] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 255
bhojane vasite raghunathe kahe sarva-jana
pandita kahe, — inha pache karibe bhojana’
SYNONYMS
bhojane—to eat; vasite—to sit down; raghunathe—unto Raghunatha dasa;
kahe—requested; sarva-jana—everyone; pandita kahe —Raghava Pandita said;
inha—this; pache—later; karibe bhojana—will take food.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees present requested Raghunatha dasa to sit down and take
prasada, but Raghava Pandita told them, “1162 will take prasada later.”
TEXT 119
ভক্তগণ खा कर ভরিয়া করিল ভোজন |
“হরি” ধ্বনি করি” উঠি” কৈল। আচমন ॥ ১১৯ ॥
bhakta-gana akantha bhariya karila bhojana
‘hari’ dhvani kari’ uthi’ kaila acamana
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gana—all the devotees; akantha—up to the neck; bhariya—filling;
karila bhojana—took prasada; hari dhvani—chanting of the holy name of Hari;
kari’—doing; uthi’—getting up; kaila acamana—washed their mouths and hands.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees took prasada, filling themselves to the brim. Thereafter,
chanting the holy name of Hari, they stood up and washed their hands and
mouths.
TEXT 120
ভোজন করি” দুই ভাই टकन। আচমন |
রাঘব আনি' পরাইল৷ মাল্য-চন্দন ॥ ১২০ ॥
bhojana kari’ dui bhai kaila acamana
raghava ani’ paraila malya-candana
SYNONYMS
bhojana kari’—after eating; dui bhai—the two brothers; kaila acamana—
washed Their hands and mouths; raghava—Raghava Pandita; ani’—bringing;


--- Page 258 ---
256 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
paraila—decorated Them with; malya-candana—flower garlands and sandal-
wood pulp.
TRANSLATION
After eating, the two brothers washed Their hands and mouths. Then
Raghava Pandita brought flower garlands and sandalwood pulp and decorated
Them.
TEXT 121
বিড়৷ খাওয়াইলা, কৈল। চরণ a |
ভক্তগণে দিলা বিড়, মাল্য-চন্দন ॥ ১২১ ॥
bida khaoyaila, kaila carapa vandana
bhakta-gane dila bida, malya-candana
SYNONYMS
bida khaoyaila—he offered betel nuts; kaila carana vandana—prayed to the
lotus feet; bhakta-gane—unto the devotees; dila—gave; bida—betel nuts;
malya-candana—garlands and sandalwood pulp.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita offered Them betel nuts and worshiped Their lotus feet.
He also distributed betel nuts, flower garlands and sandalwood pulp to the
devotees.
TEXT 122
রাখবের Fo রঘুনাথের উপরে ।
দুই ভাইএর অবশিষ্ট नोल निन তঁারে ॥ ১২২ ॥
raghavera krpa raghunathera upare
dui bhaiera avasista patra dila tarnre
SYNONYMS
raghavera—of Raghava Pandita; krpa—mercy; raghunathera upare—unto
Raghunatha dasa; dui bhaiera—of the two brothers; avasista—of remnants of
food; patra—the dishes; dila tanre —offered to him.
TRANSLATION
Raghava Pandita, being very merciful toward Raghunatha dasa, offered him
the dishes with the remnants of food left by the two brothers.


--- Page 259 ---
Text 125] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 257
TEXT 123
কহিলা,-“চৈতন্ত৷ গোসাঞ্জি করিয়াছেন ভোজন |
ভার (भस পাইলে, তোমার খণ্ডিল বন্ধন 1” ১২৩ ॥
kahila, — “caitanya gosani kariyachena bhojana
tanra sesa paile, tomara khandila bandhana”
SYNONYMS
kahila—he said; caitanya gosani—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kariyachena
bhojana—has eaten; tanra sesa—His remnants; paile—if you take; tomara—your;
khandila—will cease; bandhana—bondage.
TRANSLATION
He said, “Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has eaten this food. If you take His
remnants, you will be released from the bondage of your family.”
TEXT 124
ভক্ত-চিত্তে ভক্ত-গৃহে সদা অবস্থান |
কভু গুপ্ত: কভু ব্যক্ত, TSA SAF ॥ ১২৪ ॥
bhakta-citte bhakta-grhe sada avasthana
kabhu gupta, kabhu vyakta, svatantra bhagavan
SYNONYMS
bhakta-citte—in the heart of a devotee; bhakta-grhe —at the house of a devo-
tee; sada avasthana—always resides; kabhu gupta—sometimes hidden; kabhu
vyakta—sometimes manifest; svatantra—fully independent; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead always resides either in the heart or in
the home of a devotee. This fact is sometimes hidden and sometimes
manifest, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead is fully independent.
TEXT 125
र्वलि “वनै क' প্রভুর সদা ALG वांज |
ইহাতে সংশয় যার, সেই যায় নাশ ॥ ১২৫ ॥


--- Page 260 ---
258 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
sarvatra ‘vyapaka’ prabhura sada sarvatra vasa
10306 samsaya yara, sei ydya nasa
SYNONYMS
sarvatra—everywhere; vyapaka—pervading; prabhura—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; sada—always; sarvatra—everywhere; vasa—residence;
ihate—about this; sarisaya—doubt; yara—of whom; sei—he; yaya nasa—be-
comes annihilated.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-pervasive, and therefore He
resides everywhere. Anyone who doubts this will be annihilated.
TEXT 126
প্রাতে निङग़ नन्त প্রভু গঙ্গাস্নান করিয়|।
সেই বৃক্ষমূলে वजिन। निग tal ॥ ১২৬ ॥
prate nityananda prabhu ganga-snana kariya
sei vrksa-male vasila nija-gana lana
SYNONYMS
prate—in the morning; nityananda prabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; ganga-
snana—bathing in the Ganges; kariya—after doing; sei vrksa-male —under that
tree; vasila—sat down; nija-gana (202 -- 1111 His associates.
TRANSLATION
In the morning, after taking His bath in the Ganges, Nityananda Prabhu sat
down with His associates beneath the same tree under which He had pre-
viously sat.
TEXT 127
রঘুনাথ আসি” বৈলা চরণ বন্দন |
রাঘবপণ্ডিত-দ্বারা কৈল। নিবেদন ॥ ১২৭ ॥
raghunatha asi’ kaila carana vandana
raghava-pandita-dvara kaila nivedana


--- Page 261 ---
Text 129] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 259
SYNONYMS
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; asi’—coming; kaila carapa vandana—
worshiped His lotus feet; raghava-pandlita-dvara—through Raghava Pandita; kaila
nivedana—submitted his desire.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa went there and worshiped Lord Nityananda’s lotus feet.
Through Raghava Pandita, he submitted his desire.
TEXT 128
“অধম, পামর মুই হীন জীবাধম !
মোর ইচ্ছা হুয়--পাঙ চৈতন্য-চরণ ॥ ১২৮ ॥
“adhama, pamara mui hina jivadhama!
mora 10003 haya——pana caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
adhama—the most fallen; pamara—the most sinful; mui—I; hina—con-
demned; jiva-adhama—the lowest of all living beings; mora—my; iccha—desire;
haya—is; pana—| can get; caitanya-carana—the shelter of the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
‘1 am the lowest of men, the most sinful, fallen and condemned. Neverthe-
less, | desire to attain the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 129
বামন ₹<3] যেন চান্দধরিবারে চায়।
অনেক যত্ন SFY, তাতে FG faim নয় ॥ ১২৯ ॥
vamana hana yena canda dharibare caya
aneka yatna kainu, tate kabhu siddha naya
SYNONYMS
vamana hafa—being a dwarf; yena—as if; canda—the moon; dharibare —to
catch; caya—wants; aneka yatna—many attempts; kainu—I have made; tate —in
that; kabhu siddha naya—I have not been successful.


--- Page 262 ---
260 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
“Like a dwarf who wants to catch the moon, | have tried my best many
times, but | have never been successful.
TEXT 130
যতবার পলাই আমি शानि ছাড়িয়া |
পিতা, মাতা দুই মোরে রাখয়ে ATE ॥ ১৩০ ॥
yata-bara palai ami grhadi chadiya
pita, mata— dui more rakhaye bandhiya
SYNONYMS
yata-bara—as many times; palai—go away; ami—I; grha-adi chadiya—giving
up my relationship with home; pita mata—father and mother; dui—both of
them; more—me; rakhaye bandhiya—keep bound.
TRANSLATION
१६५९१ time 1 tried to go away and give up my home relationships, my father
and mother unfortunately kept me bound.
TEXT 131
তোমার Foil fast কেহ “চৈতন্য” न। পায়।
তুমি कृण] কৈলে ভারে অধমেহ পায় ॥ ১৩১ ॥
tomara krpa vina keha ‘caitanya’ na paya
tumi krpa kaile tanre adhameha paya
SYNONYMS
tomara krpa—Your mercy; vind—without; keha—anyone; caitanya—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na paya—cannot get; tumi krpa kaile —if You are merciful;
tanre—Him; adhameha—even the fallen soul; paya—can get.
TRANSLATION
“No one can attain the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu without Your
mercy, but if You are merciful, even the lowest of men can attain shelter at His
lotus feet.


--- Page 263 ---
Text 134] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 261
TEXT 132
অযোগ্য মুই নিবেদন করিতে করি ভয়।
মোরে “চৈতন্য” দেহ” গোসা यि asl সদয় ॥ ১৩২ ॥
ayogya mui nivedana karite kari bhaya
more ‘caitanya’ deha’ gosarii hana sadaya
SYNONYMS
ayogya—unfit; mui—!; nivedana karite—to submit my desires; kari bhaya—I
am afraid; more—unto me; caitanya deha’—kindly give the shelter of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gosani—O my Lord; 0205 sa-daya—being merciful.
TRANSLATION
“Although | am unfit and greatly afraid to submit this plea, | nevertheless
request You, sir, to be especially merciful toward me by granting me shelter at
the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 133
মোর मोद्य পদ ধরি” করহ প্রসাদ ।
নিব্িস্মে LoD পাঙ- কর আশীর্বাদ ॥” ১৩৩ ॥
mora mathe pada dhari’ karaha prasada
nirvighne caitanya pana— kara asirvada”
SYNONYMS
mora mathe—upon my head; pada dhari’—keeping Your feet; karaha
prasada—bless me; nirvighne —without difficulty; caitanya pana—| may get the
shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kara asirvada—give this benediction.
TRANSLATION
‘Placing Your feet on my head, give me the benediction that | may achieve
the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu without difficulty. | pray for this
benediction.”
TEXT 134
শুনি' হাসি” কহে প্রভু जव ভক্তগণে |
“ইহার বিষয়স্থুখ- ই ভ্দস্থখ-সমে ॥ ১৩৪ ॥


--- Page 264 ---
262 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
Suni’ hasi’ kahe prabhu saba bhakta-gane
“ihara visaya-sukha——indra-sukha-sama
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; hasi’—smiling; kahe —says; prabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu;
saba bhakta-gane—unto all the devotees; ihara—of Raghunatha dasa; visaya-
sukha—material happiness; indra-sukha—the material happiness of the King of
heaven, Indra; sama—equal to.
TRANSLATION
After hearing this appeal by Raghunatha dasa, Lord Nityananda Prabhu
smiled and told all the devotees, ““Raghunatha 03535 standard of material
happiness is equal to that of Indra, the King of heaven.
TEXT 135
চৈতন্ত-কূপাতে সেহ নাহি ভায় मटन |
সবে আশীর্বাদ কর- পাউক চৈতন্য-চরণে ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
caitanya-krpate 5203 nahi bhaya mane
sabe asirvada kara——pauka caitanya-carane
SYNONYMS
caitanya-krpate—by the mercy of Lord जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; seha—such a
standard of material happiness; nahi bhaya—he does not take as valuable;
mane —at mind; sabe—all of you; asirvada kara—give the benediction; pauka—
let him get; caitanya-carane—the shelter of the lotus feet of St Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
“Because of the mercy bestowed upon him by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Raghunatha dasa, although situated in such material happiness, does not like
it at all. Therefore let every one of you be merciful toward him and give him
the benediction that he may very soon attain shelter at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 136
কৃষ্ণপাদপদ্ম-গন্ধ যেই জন পায়।
ব্রহ্মলোক-আদি-সুখ তরে নাহি ভায় ॥১৩৬ ॥


--- Page 265 ---
Text 137] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 263
krsna-pada-padma-gandha yei jana paya
brahmaloka-adi-sukha tanre nahi bhaya”

SYNONYMS

krsna—of Lord Krsna; pada-padma—of the lotus feet; gandha —the fragrance;
yei jana—anyone who; paya—gets; brahma-loka—of Brahmaloka; adi—and so
on; sukha—happiness; tarire—to him; nahi bhaya—does not appear valuable.

TRANSLATION

“One who experiences the fragrance of the lotus feet of Lord Krsna does
not even value the standard of happiness available in Brahmaloka, the topmost
planet. And what to speak of heavenly happiness?

TEXT 137
যো দুস্ত্যজান্দারস্থতান্‌ হুহৃদ্রাজ্যং হৃদিস্পৃশঃ |
জহোঁ যুবৈব মলবদুত্তম-শ্লনে কল।লসঃ ॥ ৩৭
yo dustyajan dara-sutan
suhrd-rajyarn hrdi-sprsah
jahau yuvaiva malavad
uttama-sloka-lalasah
SYNONYMS

yah—who (Bharata Maharaja); dustyajan—difficult to give up; dara-sutan—
wife and children; suhrt—friends; rajyam—kingdom; hrdi-sprsah —dear to the
core of the heart; jahau—gave up; yuva—youth; eva—at that time; malavat—
like stool; uttama-sloka-lalasah—being captivated by the transcendental qualities,
pastimes and association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

^“ ‘Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is offered sublime, po-
etic prayers by those trying to attain His favor. Thus He is known as Uttama-
$loka. Being very eager to gain the association of Lord Krsna, King Bharata, al-
though in the prime of youth, gave up his very attractive wife, affectionate
children, most beloved friends and opulent kingdom, exactly as one gives up
stool after excreting it.” ^

PURPORT
This verse is from $rimad-Bhagavatam (5.14.43).


--- Page 266 ---
264 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 138
তবে AIC ज्‌ নিকটে বোলাইলা ।
তার মাথে পদ ধরি' কহিতে লাগিলা৷ ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
tabe raghunathe prabhu nikate bolaila
tanra mathe pada dhari’ kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; raghunathe —Raghunathadasa; prabhu —Lord Nityananda Prabhu;
nikate bolaila—called nearby; tanra mathe—on his head; pada dhari’—keeping
His feet; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Nityananda Prabhu called Raghunatha dasa near Him, placed His
lotus feet upon Raghunatha dasa’s head and began to speak.
TEXT 139
“তুমি যে FAIZ এই পুলিন-ভোজন |
তোমায় Fo করি” গৌর কৈল। আগমন ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
“tumi ye karaila ei pulina-bhojana
tomaya krpa kari’ gaura kaila agamana
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; ye—that; karaili—caused to do; ei—this; pulina-bhojana— picnic
on the bank of the Ganges; tomaya—unto you; krpa kari’—being merciful;
gaura—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila agamana—came.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Raghunatha dasa,” He said, ‘‘since you arranged the feast on the
bank of the Ganges, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came here just to show you His
mercy.
TEXT 140
কৃপা করি” टकन। চিড়া-তুষ্ধ ভোজন |
নৃত্য দেখি” রাজ্র্যে কৈল। প্রসাদ ভক্ষণ ॥ ১৪০ ॥
krpa kari’ kaila cida-dugdha bhojana
nrtya dekhi’ ratrye kaila prasada bhaksana


--- Page 267 ---
Text 142] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 265
SYNONYMS
krpa kari’—by His causeless mercy; kaila—did; cida-dugdha bhojana—eating
of the chipped rice and milk; nrtya dekhi’—after seeing the dancing; ratrye—at
night; kaila prasada bhaksana—ate the prasada.
TRANSLATION
‘By His causeless mercy He ate the chipped rice and milk. Then, after
seeing the dancing of the devotees at night, He took His supper.
TEXT 141
তোমা উদ্ধারিতে গৌর আইলা আপনে |
চুটিল তোমার যত বিস্মাদি-বজ্নে ॥ ১৪১ ॥
toma uddharite gaura aila apane
chutila tomara yata vighnadi-bandhane
SYNONYMS
toma—you; uddhiarite—to deliver; gaura—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Caurahari; aila apane—came personally; chutila—have gone; tomara—your;
yata—all kinds of; vighna-adi-bandhane —impediments for bondage.
TRANSLATION
“Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Gaurahari, came here personally to deliver
you. Now rest assured that all the impediments meant for your bondage are
gone.
TEXT 142
স্বরূপের স্থানে তোম। করিবে সমর্পণে ।
“অন্তরঙ্গ” ङ} বলি” রাখিবে চরণে ॥ ১৪২ ॥
svarapera sthane toma karibe samarpane
‘antarariga’ bhrtya bali’ rakhibe carane
SYNONYMS
svardpera sthane—unto Svarapa Damodara; toma—you; karibe samarpane —
He will give; antarariga—very confidential; bhrtya—servant; bali’—as; rakhibe
carane —will keep under His lotus feet.


--- Page 268 ---
266 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
“$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will accept you and place you under the charge
of His secretary, Svarapa Damodara. You will thus become one of the most
confidential internal servants and will attain the shelter of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 143
নিশ্চিন্ত 43) যাহ আপন-ভবন।
অচিরে নির্বিস্নে পাবে চৈতদ্ত-চরণ 1” ১৪৩ ॥
niscinta hana yaha apana-bhavana
acire nirvighne pabe caitanya-carana”
SYNONYMS
niscinta—without anxiety; hana —being; yaha—go; apana-bhavana—to your
own place; acire—very soon; nirvighne —without impediments; pabe —you will
get; caitanya-carana—the shelter of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Being assured of all this, return to your own home. Very soon, without im-
pediments, you will attain the shelter of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.”’
TEXT 144
সব ভক্তদ্বারে সারে আলীর্বাদ করাইলা ।
তা-সবার চরণ রঘুনাথ বন্দিলা ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
saba bhakta-dvare tanre asirvada karaila
tan-sabara carana raghunatha vandila
SYNONYMS
saba—all; bhakta-dvare—by the devotees; tarnre asirvada karaila—had him
blessed; tan-sabara—of all of them; carana—the lotus feet; raghunatha—
Raghunatha dasa; vandila—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nityananda had Raghunatha dasa blessed by all the devotees, and
Raghunatha dasa offered his respects to their lotus feet.


--- Page 269 ---
Text 147] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 267
TEXT 145
প্রভু-আজ্ঞ! Fp] বৈষ্ণবের আহত! ARH |
রাঘব-সহিতে ages Fie wae ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
prabhu-ajna lana vaisnavera ajna la-ila
raghava-sahite nibhrte yukti karila
SYNONYMS
prabhu-ajia—the order of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; lana—taking; vaisnavera
ajiida—the permission of all the Vaisnavas; la-ild—he took; raghava-sahite —with
Raghava Pandita; nibhrte—in a solitary place; yukti karili—he consulted.
TRANSLATION
After taking leave of Lord Nityananda Prabhu and then all the other
Vaisnavas, $ri Raghunitha dasa consulted secretly with Raghava Pandita.
TEXT 146
যুক্তি করি” শত মুদ্রা, সোণা তোলা-সাতে |
fers দিলা প্রভুর ভাণারীর হাতে ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
yukti kari’ sata mudra, 5০03 tola-sate
nibhrte dila prabhura bhandarira hate
SYNONYMS
yukti kari’—after consultation; sata mudra—one hundred coins; sona—in gold
pieces; tola-sate—about seven tolds (about two and a half ounces); nibhrte —
secretly; dila—delivered; prabhura—of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; bhandarira—of
the treasurer; hate —into the hand.
TRANSLATION
After consulting with Raghava Pandita, he secretly delivered one hundred
gold coins and about seven tolas of gold to the hand of Nityananda Prabhu’s
treasurer.
TEXT 147
তারে নিষেধিল,-_“প্রভুরে এবে না কহিবা।
নিজ-ঘরে যাবেন যবে তবে নিবেদিবা ॥ ১৪৭ ॥


--- Page 270 ---
268 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
tarire nisedhila, — “prabhure ebe na kahiba
nija-ghare yabena yabe tabe nivediba”
SYNONYMS
tanre—him; nisedhila—he forbade; prabhure —unto Lord Nityananda Prabhu;
ebe—now; na kahiba—do not speak; nija-ghare—to His home; yabena—will
return; yabe —when; tabe —then; nivediba—kindly inform Him.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa admonished the treasurer, “Do not speak about this to
Lord Nityananda Prabhu now, but when He returns home, kindly inform Him
about this presentation.”
TEXT 148
তবে রাঘব-পণ্ডিত ভারে ঘরে न1 গেলা |
ঠাকুর দর্শন করাঞা মালা[-চন্দন किलि] ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
tabe raghava-pandita (3776 ghare lana gela
thakura darsana karana mala-candana dila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereupon; raghava-pandita—Raghava Pandita; tare —him; ghare lana
gela—took to his home; thakura darsana karana—after inducing him to see the
Deity; mala-candana—a garland and sandalwood pulp; dila—delivered.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon, Raghava Pandita took Raghunatha dasa to his home. After in-
ducing him to see the Deity, he gave Raghunatha dasa a garland and sandal-
wood pulp.
TEXT 149
অনেক “প্রসাদ” Gal পথে খাইবারে |
তবে পুনঃ রখুনাথ কহে পণ্ডিতেরে ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
aneka ‘prasada’ dila pathe khaibare
tabe punah raghunatha kahe panditere
SYNONYMS
aneka prasada—much prasada; dila—delivered; pathe khaibare—to eat on his
way; tabe —then; punah—again; raghunatha kahe —Raghunatha dasa said; pan-
ditere—to Raghava Pandita.


--- Page 271 ---
Text 152] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 269
TRANSLATION
He gave Raghunatha dasa a large quantity of prasida to eat on his way
home. Then Raghunatha dasa again spoke to Raghava Pandita.
TEXT 150
“প্রভুর সঙ্গে যত ALTE, ভৃত্য, আশ্রিত ऊन |
পুজিতে চাহিয়ে আমি সবার চরণ ॥ ১৫০ ॥
“prabhura sarge yata mahanta, bhrtya, asrita jana
pujite cahiye ami sabara carana
SYNONYMS
prabhura sange—with Lord Nityananda Prabhu; yata—all; mahanta—great
devotees; bhrtya—servants; asrita jana—subservient people; pijite —to worship;
cahiye —want; ami—I; sabara carana—the lotus feet of all of them.
TRANSLATION
“| want to give money,” he said, “just to worship the lotus feet of all the
great devotees, servants and subservants of Lord Nityananda Prabhu.
TEXT 151
বিশ, পঞ্চদশ, বার, দশ, পঞ্চ হয়।
মুদ্রা দেহ” বিচারি” যার যত যোগ্য হয় ॥ ১৫১ ॥
bisa, pafica-dasa, bara, dasa, parica haya
mudra deha’ vicari’ yara yata yogya haya
SYNONYMS
bisa—twenty; paiica-dasa—fifteen; bara—twelve; dasa—ten; panca—five;
haya—are; mudra—coins; deha’—give; vicari’—considering; yara—of whom;
yata—as much; yogya haya—is fit.
TRANSLATION
“As you think fit, give twenty, fifteen, twelve, ten or five coins to each of
them.”
TEXT 152
जव লেখা করিয়। রাঘব-পাশ किन ।
যার নামে যত রাঘব চিঠি লেখাইলা ॥ ১৫২ ॥


--- Page 272 ---
270 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
saba lekha kariya raghava-pasa dila
yanra name yata raghava cithi lekhaila
SYNONYMS
saba—all; lekha kariya—writing; raghava-pasa dila—delivered to Raghava Pan-
dita; yanra name—in whose name; yata—as much; raghava—Raghava Pandita;
cithi—a list; lekhaila—had written.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa drew up an account of the amount to be given and submit-
ted it to Raghava Pandita, who then made up a list showing how much money
was to be paid to each and every devotee.
TEXT 153
একশত মুদ্র৷ আর ८नाने। তোলা-দ্বয় ।
পণ্ডিতের আগে দিল कत्चिञ्न। বিনয় ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
eka-sata mudra ara 5০03 tola-dvaya
panditera age dila kariya vinaya
SYNONYMS
eka-sata mudra—one hundred coins; ara—and; sona—gold; tola-dvaya—two
tolas; panditera age—before Raghava Pandita; dila—presented; kariya vinaya—
with great humility.
TRANSLATION
With great humility, Raghunatha dasa placed one hundred gold coins and
about two tolas of gold before Raghava Pandita for all the other devotees.
TEXT 154
ভার পদধুলি লঞা স্বগৃহে আইলা |
নিত্যানম্ব-ক্প৷ পাঞ। কৃতার্থ মানিল। ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
tanra pada-dhali lana svagrhe aila
nityananda-krpa pana krtartha manila
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; pada-dhali—the dust of the feet; lana—taking; sva-grhe aila—
retuned to his home; nityananda-krpa —the mercy of Lord Nityananda Prabhu;
pana—getting; krtartha manila—he felt greatly obligated.


--- Page 273 ---
Text 157] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 271
TRANSLATION
After taking dust from the feet of Raghava Pandita, Raghunatha dasa
returned to his home, feeling greatly obligated to Lord Nityananda Prabhu be-
cause of having received His merciful benediction.
TEXT 155
সেই হৈতে অভ্যন্তরে না করেন भमन |
বাহিরে দুর্গামণগ্ডপে ate করেন শয়ন ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
sei haite abhyantare na karena gamana
bahire durga-mandape yana karena sayana
SYNONYMS
sei haite—from that day; abhyantare—in the interior rooms; na karena
gamana—did not go; bahire —outside; durga-mandape—to the place where
Durga worship was performed; yana—going; karena sayana—he sleeps.
TRANSLATION
From that day on, he did not go into the interior section of the house. In-
stead, he would sleep on the Durga-mandapa [the place where mother Durga
was worshiped].
TEXT 156
তাহা জাগি” রহে जव রক্ষকগণ ।
পলাইতে করেন नोन উপায় চিন্তন ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
tanha jagi’ rahe saba raksaka-gana
palaite karena nana upaya cintana
SYNONYMS
tanha—there; jagi’—keeping awake; rahe —stay; saba—all; raksaka-gana—the
watchmen; palaite—to go away; karena—does; nana—various; updya—means;
cintana—thinking of.
TRANSLATION
There, however, the watchmen alertly kept guard. Raghunatha dasa was
thinking of various means by which to escape their vigilance.
TEXT 157
হেনকালে গৌড়দেশের जव छन्‌ |
শ্রভুরে দেখিতে নীলাচলে করিলা গমন ॥ sea ॥


--- Page 274 ---
272 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
hena-kale gauda-desera saba bhakta-gana
prabhure dekhite nilacale karila gamana
SYNONYMS
hena-kale —at this time; gauda-desera—of Bengal; saba—all; bhakta-gana—
devotees; prabhure —Lord Sir Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhite—to see; nilacale—
to Jagannatha Puri; karila gamana—went.
TRANSLATION
At that time, all the devotees of Bengal were going to Jagannatha Puri to see
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 158
ভা-সবার সঙ্গে রঘুনাথ যাইতে न পারে।
প্রসিদ্ধ প্রকট সঙ্গ, তবহি" ধরা পড়ে ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
tan-sabara sarge raghunatha yaite na pare
prasiddha prakata 52/72, tabahin dhara pade
SYNONYMS
tan-sabara—all of them; sarige —with; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; yaite na
pare —could not go; prasiddha—famous; prakata—known; sariga—group;
tabahin—immediately; dhara pade —he would be caught.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa could not accompany them, for they were so famous that
he would immediately have been caught.
TEXTS 159-160
এইমত চিন্তিতে দৈবে একদিনে |
বাহিরে দেবীমণ্ডপে করিয়াছেন শয়নে ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
দণ্ড-চারি রাত্রি যবে আছে অবশেষ |
যদুনন্দন-আচার্থ তবে করিল। প্রবেশ ॥ ১৬০ ॥
ei-mata cintite daive eka-dine
bahire devi-mandape kariyachena sayane
danda-cari ratri yabe ache avasesa
yadunandana-acarya tabe karila pravesa


--- Page 275 ---
Text 161] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 273
SYNONYMS

ei-mata—in this way; cintite—while he was thinking; daive—by chance; eka-
dine—one day; bahire—outside the house; devi-mandape—on the Durga plat-
form; kariyachena sayane —was sleeping; danda-cari—four dandas (ninety-six
minutes); ratri—night; yabe—when; ache avasesa—there remained; yadunan-
dana-acarya—the priest of the name Yadunandana Acarya; tabe—then; karila
pravesa—entered.

TRANSLATION

Thus Raghunatha dasa thought deeply about how to escape, and one night
while he was sleeping on the Durga-mandapa, the priest Yadunandana Acarya
entered the house when only four dandas remained until the end of the night.

TEXT 161
বাস্দুদেব-দত্তের তেঁহ হয় “ভঅনুগৃহীত”।
রঘুনাথের “QF (STR হয় “পুরোহিত” ॥ ১৬১ ॥
vasudeva-dattera (2703 haya ‘anugrhita’
raghunathera ‘guru’ tenho haya ‘purohita’
SYNONYMS

vasudeva-dattera—of Vasudeva Datta; tenha—he; haya anugrhita—was given
the mercy; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; guru—the spiritual master;
tenho—he; haya—was; purohita—the priest.

TRANSLATION

Yadunandana Acarya was the priest and spiritual master of Raghunatha
dasa. Although born in a brahmana family, he had accepted the mercy of
Vasudeva Datta.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatt Thakura comments that although the atheists
who have deviated from the order of Sri Advaita Acarya introduce themselves as
followers of Advaita Acarya, they do not accept Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Yadunandana Acérya, one of the most
confidential followers of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu, was the initiated disciple of
Advaita Acarya. He was not polluted by sentimental distinctions classifying
Vaisnavas according to birth. Therefore although Vasudeva Datta had not been
born in a brahmana family, Yadunandana Acarya accepted Vasudeva Datta as his
spiritual master.


--- Page 276 ---
274 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 162
অষদ্বৈত-আচার্যের ভেঁহু “fog অন্তরঙ্গ” |
আচার্য-আজ্ঞাতে মানে-_চৈতন্ত “প্রাণধন” ॥ ১৬২ ॥
advaita-acaryera (91703 ‘Sisya antarariga’
acarya-ajnate mane —caitanya ‘prana-dhana’
SYNONYMS
advaita-acaryera—of Advaita Acarya; teriha—Yadunandana Acarya; $isya—dis-
ciple; antaranga—very confidential; acarya-ajiate—by the order of Advaita
Acarya; mane—he accepted; caitanya prana-dhana—Lord ৩1. Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as his life and soul.
TRANSLATION
Yadunandana Acirya had been officially initiated by Advaita Acarya. Thus
he considered Lord Caitanya his life and soul.
TEXT 163
অঙ্গনে আসিয়া তেঁহে। যবে দাগডাইলা |
রঘুনাথ আসি” তবে দণ্ডবৎ LFA ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
angane 35/%3 tenho yabe dandaila
raghunatha asi’ tabe dandavat kaila
SYNONYMS
angane—in the courtyard; asiya—entering; terho—Yadunandana Acarya;
yabe —when; dandaila—stood up; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; asi’—coming;
tabe —at that time; dandavat kaila—offered his respects, falling down.
TRANSLATION
When Yadunandana Acarya entered the house of Raghunitha dasa and
stood in the courtyard, Raghunatha dasa went there and fell down to offer his
obeisances.
TEXT 164
তার এক শিষ্য ভার ঠাকুরের সেব৷ করে।
সেবা ছাড়িয়াছে, তারে সাধিবার তরে ॥ ১৬৪ ॥


--- Page 277 ---
Text 166] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 275
tanra eka Sisya tanra thakurera seva kare
seva chadiyache, tare sadhibara tare
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; eka—one; sisya—disciple; tarnra—his; thakurera—of the Deity;
seva—service; kare—does; seva chadiyache—he has left that service; tare—him;
sadhibara tare —to induce.
TRANSLATION
One of Yadunandana Aciarya’s disciples had been worshiping the Deity but
had left that service. Yadunandana Acarya wanted Raghunitha dasa to induce
the disciple to take up that service again.
TEXT 165
রঘুনাথে কহে, — “তারে FAR সাধন |
সেবা যেন করে, আর নাহিক ব্রাহ্মণ ॥” ১৬৫ ॥
raghunathe kahe, — “tare karaha sadhana
seva yena kare, ara nahika brahmana”
SYNONYMS
raghunathe kahe —he said to Raghunatha dasa; tare—him; karaha sadhana —in-
duce to accept the service; seva—service; yena—that; kare—he does; ara—
other; nahika—there is no; brahmana—brahmana.
TRANSLATION
Yadunandana Acarya requested Raghunatha dasa, ‘Please induce the
brahmana to resume the service, for there is no other braihmana to do it.”
TEXT 166
এত FZ রঘুনাথে লঞ। एलिन।
রক্ষক সব শেষরাত্রে নিদ্রায় পড়িলা ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
eta kahi’ raghunathe lana calila
raksaka saba Sesa-ratre nidraya padila


--- Page 278 ---
276 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; raghunathe lana —taking Raghunatha dasa; calila—he
went out; raksaka saba—all the watchmen; Ssesa-ratre —at the end of night;
nidraya padila—fell asleep.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Yadunandana Acarya took Raghunatha dasa with him and
went out. By that time all the watchmen were deeply asleep because it was the
end of the night.
TEXT 167
আচার্যের খর ইহার পূর্ব দিশাতে |
কহিতে শুনিতে দু'হে চলে সেই পথে ॥ ১৬৭ ॥
acaryera ghara ihara parva-disate
kahite sunite dunhe cale sei pathe
SYNONYMS
acaryera ghara—the house of Yadunandana Acarya; ihdra—of this; parva-dis-
ate—to the east; kahite—talking; sunite—listening; dunhe—both of them;
cale—go; sei pathe—on that path.
TRANSLATION
East of the house of Raghunitha dasa was the house of Yadunandana Acarya.
Yadunandana Acarya and Raghunatha dasa talked together as they went
toward that house.
TEXT 168
TTY রঘুনাথ কহে গুরুর চরণে |
“আমি সেই विदव्य जोषि পাঠাইমু তোমা স্থানে ॥
ardha-pathe raghunatha kahe gurura carane
“ami sei vipre sadhi’ pathaimu toma sthane
SYNONYMS
ardha-pathe —halfway along the path; raghunatha kahe—Raghunatha dasa
said; gurura carane—unto the lotus feet of his spiritual master; ami —I; sei—that;
vipre —brahmana; sadhi’—inducing; pathaimu—shall send; toma sthane—to your
place.


--- Page 279 ---
Text 170] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 277
TRANSLATION
Halfway along the path, Raghunatha dasa submitted at the lotus feet of his
spiritual master, “I shall go to the home of that brihmana, induce him to
return, and send him to your home.
TEXT 169
তুমি স্থখে ঘরে যাহ- মোরে আজ্ঞা दग्र" |
এই ছলে আজ্ঞা माजिः করিল। নিশ্চয় ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
tumi sukhe ghare yaha——more ajna haya”
ei chale 8/7 magi’ karila niscaya
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; sukhe—in happiness; ghare ydha—go to your place; more—to
me; djAd—order; haya—is; ei chale—on this plea; 8/7 magi’—asking permission;
karila niscaya—decided.
TRANSLATION
“You may go home without anxiety. Following your order, | shall persuade
the brahmana.”” On this plea, after asking permission, he decided to go away.
TEXT 170
“সেবক রক্ষক আর কেহ নাহি সঙ্গে |
পলাইতে আমার ভাল এইত প্রসঙ্গে 1” ১৭০ ॥
“sevaka raksaka ara keha nahi sange
palaite amara bhala eita prasange
SYNONYMS
sevaka—servant; raksaka—watchman; dra—and; keha nahi—there is no one;
sange—along; paldite—to go away; amara—my; bhala—good; eita—this;
prasange —opportunity.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa thought, “This is the greatest opportunity to go away be-
cause this time there are no servants or watchmen with me.”


--- Page 280 ---
278 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 171
এত চিস্তি' পূর্বমুখে করিল। গমন |
Bal চাহে প।ছে,-__নাহি কোন জন ॥ sas ॥
eta cinti’ parva-mukhe karila gamana
ulatiya cahe pache, —nahi kona jana
SYNONYMS
eta cinti’—thinking this; purva-mukhe—toward the east; karila gamana—
began to proceed; ulatiya—turning around; cahe —looks; pache—behind; nahi
kona jana—there was no one.
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way, he quickly proceeded toward the east. Sometimes he
turned around and looked back, but no one was following him.
TEXT 172
জীচৈতন্য-নিত্যানন্দব-চরণ চিস্তিয়া।
পথ ছাড়ি” উপপথে যায়েন Hiei ॥ ১৭২ ॥
$ri-caitanya-nityananda-carana cintiya
patha chadi’ upapathe yayena dhana
SYNONYMS
$ri-caitanya—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityananda—of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu; carana—the lotus feet; cintiya—thinking of; patha chadi’—giving up the
general pathway; upapathe —by the path not generally used; yayena dhana—he
went very swiftly.
TRANSLATION
Thinking of the lotus feet of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Nityananda
Prabhu, he left the general path and proceeded with great haste on the one not
generally used.
TEXT 173
গ্রামে-গ্রামের পথ ছাড়ি যায় বনে वटन्‌ ।
কায়মনোবাকে্যে চিন্তে চৈতন্য-চরণে ॥ ১৭৩ ॥


--- Page 281 ---
Text 175] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 279
grame-gramera patha chadi’ yaya vane vane
kaya-mano-vakye cinte caitanya-carane

SYNONYMS
grame-gramera—from village to village; patha—the general path; chadi’—giv-
ing up; ydya—goes; vane vane—through the jungles; kdya-manah-vakye—with
body, mind and words; cinte—thinks; caitanya carane—of the lotus feet of Sri

Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

TRANSLATION
Giving up the general path from village to village, he passed through the
jungles, thinking with heart and soul about the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya

Mahaprabhu.

TEXT 174
পঞ্চদশ-ক্রোশ-পথ চলি” গেল। একদিনে |
সদন্ধ্যাকালে রহিল।৷ এক গোপের বাথানে ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
paiica-dasa-krosa-patha cali’ gela eka-dine
sandhya-kale rahila eka gopera bathane
SYNONYMS

parica-dasa-krosa—about thirty miles; patha cali’—walking on the path; gela—
went; eka-dine—in one day; sandhya-kale—in the evening; rahila—remained;
eka gopera—of a milkman; bathane—in the cowshed.

TRANSLATION

He walked about thirty miles in one day, and in the evening he took rest in

the cowshed of a milkman.
TEXT 175
উপবাসী দেখি” গোপ দুগ্ধ আমি” দিলা ।
সেই शरक नोन করি” পড়িয়। রহিল ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
upavasi dekhi’ gopa dugdha ani’ dila
sei dugdha pana kari’ padiya rahila
SYNONYMS

upavasi—fasting; dekhi’—seeing; gopa—the milkman; dugdha—milk; ani’'—
bringing; dila—gave; sei dugdha—that milk; pana kari’—drinking; padiya—lying
down; rahila—he remained.


--- Page 282 ---
280 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lili, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
When the milkman saw that Raghunatha dasa was fasting, he gave him some
milk. Raghunitha dasa drank the milk and lay down to rest there for the night.
TEXT 176
এথা তার সেবক রক্ষক তারে न wisi ।
তার গুরুপাশে বার্তা পুছিলেন fami ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
etha {5/2 sevaka raksaka tarire na dekhiya
tanra guru-pase varta puchilena giya
SYNONYMS
etha—here, at his home; tanra—his; sevaka—servant; raksaka—watchman;
tarnre —him; na dekhiya—not seeing; tanra guru-pase —from his spiritual master;
varta—news; puchilena—inquired; giya—going.
TRANSLATION
At the house of Raghunatha dasa, the servant and watchman, not seeing him
there, immediately went to inquire about him from his spiritual master, Yadu-
nandana Acarya.
TEXT 177
তেঁহ কহে, “আজ্ঞা মাগি” গেলা নিজ-ঘর ।”
“পলাইল রখঘুনাথ'- উঠিল কোলাহল ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
tenha kahe, ‘ajna magi’ gela nija-ghara’
‘palaila raghunatha’——uthila kolahala
SYNONYMS
tenha kahe—he said; 2/7 magi’—asking my permission; gela—went; nija
ghara—to his home; palaila raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa has gone away;
uthila—arose; kolahala—a tumultuous sound.
TRANSLATION
Yadunandana Acirya said, ‘“He has already asked my permission and
returned home.” Thus there arose a tumultuous sound, as everyone cried,
‘‘Now Raghunatha has gone away!”


--- Page 283 ---
Text 180] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 281
TEXT 178
ভার পিতা কহে,--“গৌড়ের जव ভক্তগণ |
প্রভু-স্থানে নীলাচলে कत्रिन। গমন ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
tanra pita kahe, — “gaudera saba bhakta-gana
prabhu-sthane nilacale karila gamana
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; pita—father; kahe —said; gaudera—of Bengal; saba—all; bhakta-
gana—the devotees; prabhu-sthane —to the place of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri; karila gamana—have gone.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa’s father said, “Now all the devotees from Bengal have
gone to Jagannatha Puri to see Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 179
সেই-সঙ্গে রঘুনাথ গেল পলাঞ। |
দশ जन যাহ, তারে सान्‌ ধরিয়া ॥” ১৭৯ ॥
sei-sange raghunatha gela palana
dasa jana yaha, tare anaha dhariya”
SYNONYMS
sei-sange —with them; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; gela palana—has fled;
dasa jana—ten men; yaha—go; tare—him; anaha—bring; dhariya—catching.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Raghunatha dasa has fled with them. Ten men should immediately go
catch him and bring him 0301.
TEXT 180
निंवोनटन्त পত্রী দিল বিনয় করিয়া ।
“আমার পুলজ্ঞেরে তুমি দিবা বাছড়িয়।” ॥ ১৮০ ॥
Sivanande patri 0113 vinaya kariya
‘amara putrere tumi diba bahudiya’


--- Page 284 ---
282 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
Sivanande —unto Sivananda Sena; patri—a letter; dila—sent; vinaya kariya—
with great humility; amara putrere—my son; tumi—you; diba—please give;
bahudiya—returning.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa’s father wrote a letter to Sivananda Sena, asking him with
great humility, ‘’Please return my son.”
TEXT 181
ঝাঁাকরা পর্যন্ত গেল সেই দশ জনে |
ঝঁকরাতে পাইল जिञ् বৈষ্ণবের গণে ॥ ১৮১ ॥
jhankara paryanta gela sei dasa jane
jhankarate paila giya vaisnavera gane
SYNONYMS
jhankara paryanta—to the place known as Jhankara; gela—went; sei dasa
jane —those ten men; jhankarate —at Jhankara; paila—caught up to; giya—going;
vaisnavera gane —the group of Vaisnavas.
TRANSLATION
In Jhankara, the ten men caught up with the group of Vaisnavas going to
Nilacala.
TEXT 182
পত্রী দিয়া निवाोनटम्त বার্তা পুছিল ।
শিবানন্দ কহে,-_“তেঁহ এথা না আইল” ॥ ১৮২ ॥
patri diya sivanande varta puchila
sivananda kahe, — ‘tenha etha na aila’
SYNONYMS
patri—letter; diya—delivering; Sivanande—unto Sivananda Sena; varta—
news; puchila—inquired; Sivananda kahe —Sivananda said; ternha—he; etha—
here; na aila—did not come.
TRANSLATION
After delivering the letter, the men inquired from Sivananda Sena about
Raghunatha dasa, but Sivananda Sena replied, “112 did not come here.”


--- Page 285 ---
Text 185] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 283
TEXT 183
বাছড়িয়৷ সেই দশ জন खादेन चत्र ।
তার মাতা-পিতা হইল চিন্তিত অন্তর ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
bahudiya sei dasa jana aila ghara
tanra mata-pita ha-ila cintita antara
SYNONYMS
bahudiya—returning; sei—those; dasa jana—ten men; aila ghara—came back
home; tarira—his; mata-pita—mother and father; ha-ila—became; cintita—full of
anxiety; antara—within themselves.
TRANSLATION
The ten men returned home, and Raghunatha dasa’s father and mother were
filled with anxiety.
TEXT 184
এথা রখুনাথ-দাস প্রভাতে উঠিয়া
পুর্বমুখ ছাড়ি” চলে দক্ষিণ-মুখ হঞ ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
etha raghunatha-dasa prabhate uthiya
parva-mukha chadi’ cale daksina-mukha hana
SYNONYMS
etha —here; raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha dasa; prabhate —early in the morn-
ing; uthiya—rising; padrva-mukha—facing the east; chadi’—giving up; cale—
began to proceed; daksina-mukha—facing south; hana —being.
TRANSLATION
Raghunitha dasa, who had been resting at the milkman’s house, got up
early in the morning. Instead of going to the east, he turned his face south and
proceeded.
TEXT 185
ছত্রতোগ পার হঞা ছাড়িয়া! जन्नान |
কুগ্রাম দিয়া शिश्न করিল প্রয়াণ ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
chatrabhoga para hana chadiya sarana
kugrama diya diya karila prayana


--- Page 286 ---
284 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
chatra-bhoga—the place named Chatrabhoga; para hana —crossing; chadiya—
giving up; sarana—the royal road; kugrama diya diya—going through village
pathways; karila prayana—proceeded.
TRANSLATION
He crossed Chatrabhoga, but instead of going on the general path, he pro-
ceeded on the path that went from village to village.
PURPORT
Chatrabhoga, known now as Chada-khadi, is in the district of twenty-four
parganas in West Bengal. It is situated near the celebrated village Jayanagara-ma-
jilapura. Formerly the Ganges or some of its branches flowed through this region.
Sometimes Chatrabhoga is misunderstood to have been a village on the River
Kansai-nadi in Benapola.
TEXT 186
ভক্ষণ অপেক্ষা নাহি, সমস্ত দিবস গমন |
ক্ষুধা নাহি বাধে, চৈতন্যচরণ-প্রাপ্ড্যে মন ॥ ১৮৬ ॥
bhaksana apeksa nahi, samasta divasa gamana
ksudha nahi badhe, caitanya-carana-praptye mana
SYNONYMS
bhaksana apeksa nahi—did not care for eating; samasta divasa—all day;
gamana—traveling; ksudha—hunger; nahi badhe—did not become an impedi-
ment; caitanya-carana—the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; praptye—on
obtaining; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
Not caring about eating, he traveled all day. Hunger was not an impedi-
ment, for his mind was concentrated upon obtaining shelter at the lotus feet
of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 187
BG চর্বণ, কভু AFH, কভু FH |
যবে যেই মিলে, তাহে রাখে নিজ প্রাণ ॥ ১৮৭ ॥
kabhu carvana, kabhu randhana, kabhu dugdha-pana
yabe yei mile, tahe rakhe nija prana


--- Page 287 ---
Text 189] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 285
SYNONYMS
kabhu carvana—sometimes chewing; kabhu randhana—sometimes cooking;
kabhu dugdha-pana—sometimes drinking milk; yabe —when; yei—whoever;
mile —meets; tahe—in that way; rakhe —keeps; nija prana—his life.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes he chewed fried grains, sometimes he cooked, and sometimes
he drank milk. In this way he kept his life and soul together with whatever was
available wherever he went.
TEXT 188
বার দিনে চলি” গেলা व्वोश्ज्न्टस।खम |
পথে তিনদিন মাত্র করিল৷ ভোজন ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
bara dine cali’ gela $ri-purusottama
pathe tina-dina matra karila bhojana
SYNONYMS
bara dine—for twelve days; cali’—traveling; gela—reached; sri-purusottama—
Jagannatha Puri, or Nilacala, the place of Purusottama; pathe—on the path; tina-
dina—on three days; matra—only; (८111 bhojana—he ate.
TRANSLATION
He reached Jagannatha Puri in twelve days but could only eat for three days
on the way.
TEXT 189
স্বরূপাদি-সহ (शजं य আছেন বসিয়া।
হেনকালে রখুনাথ মিলিল আসিয়া ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
svarapadi-saha gosani achena vasiya
hena-kale raghunatha milila asiya
SYNONYMS
svarapa-adi-saha—in the company of devotees, headed by 5৬909 Damodara;
gosani—Lord ऽव Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dchena vasiya—was sitting; hena-kale —
at this time; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; milila—met; asiya—coming.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord was sitting
with His companions, headed by Svariipa Damodara.


--- Page 288 ---
286 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 190
অঙ্গনেতে দুরে রহি' করেন প্রণিপাত ।
মুকুন্দ-দত্ত কহে, “रे আইল ATA ॥ ১৯০ ॥
anganete dure rahi’ karena pranipata
mukunda-datta kahe, — ‘ei aila raghunatha’
SYNONYMS
anganete—in the courtyard; dire rahi’—keeping himself at a distant place;
karena pranipata—offered his obeisances; mukunda-datta kahe —Mukunda Datta
said; ei—this; aila—has come; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa.
TRANSLATION
Staying at a distant place in the courtyard, he fell down to offer obeisances.
Then Mukunda Datta said, “11216 is Raghunatha.”
TEXT 191
প্রভু কহেন, NBT, তেঁহে। ধরিল। চরণ |
উঠি' প্রভু কৃপায় ভারে टेकन। আলিঙ্গন ॥ ১৯১ ॥
prabhu kahena, —‘aisa’, tenho dharila carana
uthi’ prabhu krpaya tanre kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—the Lord said; aisa—come here; tertho—he; dharila carana—
caught His lotus feet; uthi’—standing up; prabhu—the Lord; krpaya—out of mer-
cy; tanre—him; kaila alingana—embraced.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard these words, He immediately
welcomed Raghunatha dasa. “Come here,” He said. Raghunatha dasa then
clasped the lotus feet of the Lord, but the Lord stood up and embraced him
out of His causeless mercy.
TEXT 192
=H 7 जव ভক্তের চরণ বন্দিল। |
প্রভু-কৃপা দেখি” সবে আলিঙ্গন কৈল৷ ॥ ১৯২ ॥


--- Page 289 ---
Text 193] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 287
svarapadi saba bhaktera carapa vandila
prabhu-krpa dekhi’ sabe alingana kaila
SYNONYMS
svarapa-adi—headed by SvarGipa Damodara; saba bhaktera—of all the devo-
tees; carana vandila—offered prayers to the lotus feet; prabhu-krpa—the mercy
of Lord Caitanya; dekhi’—seeing; sabe —all of them; alingana kaila—embraced.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa offered prayers at the lotus feet of all the devotees, headed
by Svaripa Damodara Gosvami. Seeing the special mercy Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had bestowed upon Raghunatha dasa, they embraced him also.
TEXT 193
প্রভু FT —“FRF वनि जव। হৈতে।
তোমারে কাড়িল বিষয়-বিষ্টা-গর্ত হৈতে 1” ১৯৩ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “krsna-krpa balistha 5303 haite
tomare kadila visaya-vistha-garta haite”
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Lord 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; krsna-krpa—the mercy of
Lord Krsna; balistha—more powerful; saba haite—than anything; tomare —you;
kadila—He has delivered; visaya—of material enjoyment; vistha—of stool; gar-
ta—the ditch; haite—from.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘‘The mercy of Lord Krsna is stronger
than anything else. Therefore the Lord has delivered you from the ditch of ma-
terialistic life, which is like a hole into which people pass stool.”
PURPORT
According to the law of karma, everyone is destined to suffer or enjoy accord-
ing to a certain material standard, but the mercy of Lord Krsna is so powerful that
the Lord can change all the reactions of one’s past karma, or fruitive activities. Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu specifically drew attention to the mercy of Lord Krsna.
That mercy is more powerful than anything else, for it had saved Raghunatha dasa
from the strong bondage of materialistic life, which the Lord compared to a hole
where people pass stool. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave His verdict that those ad-


--- Page 290 ---
288 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
dicted to the materialistic way of life are like worms that are living in stool but
cannot give it up. A grhavrata, one who has decided to live in a comfortable home
although it is actually miserable, is in a condemned position. Only the mercy of
Krsna can save one from such misery. Without Krsna's mercy, one cannot get out
of the filthy entanglement of materialistic life. The poor living entity cannot give
up his materialistic position on his own; only when granted the special mercy of
Krsna can he give it up. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu knew very well that
Raghunatha dasa was already liberated. Nevertheless He emphasized that
Raghunatha dasa’s life of material comfort as a very rich man’s son with a very
beautiful wife and many servants to attend him was like a ditch of stool. The Lord
thus specifically indicated that ordinary men who are very happy with material
comforts and family life are in no better position than worms in stool.
TEXT 194
ATA মনে কহে,-_ “কৃষ্ণ নাহি জানি।
তব রুপা কাড়িল আমা, এই আমি মানি ॥” ১৯৪ ॥
raghunatha mane kahe, — ‘krsna nahi jani
tava krpa kadila ama, — ei ami mani’
SYNONYMS

raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; mane kahe—answered within his mind;
krsna—Lord Krsna; nahi jani—! do not know; tava—Your; krpa—mercy; kadila—
has delivered; ama—me; ei—this; ami mani—| accept.

TRANSLATION

Raghunatha dasa answered within his mind, ‘/I do not know who Krsna is. |

simply know that Your mercy, O my Lord, has saved me from my family life.”
TEXT 195
প্রভু কহেন,-_ “তোমার Petes তুই জনে।
চক্রুবতি-সম্বন্ধে হাম “আজ!” করি” মানে ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
prabhu kahena, — “tomara pita-jyetha dui jane
cakravarti-sambandhe hama ‘aja’ kari’ mane
SYNONYMS

prabhu kahena—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; tomara—your; pita-jyetha—

father and his elder brother; dui jane—both of them; cakravarti-sambandhe —be-


--- Page 291 ---
Text 197] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 289
cause of a relationship with Nilambara Cakravarti; hama—I; dja kari’—as My
grandfathers; mane —consider.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued, ‘Your father and his elder brother are both related as
brothers to My grandfather, Nilambara Cakravarti. Therefore | consider them
My grandfathers.
PURPORT
Nilambara Cakravarti, the grandfather of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, was very in-
timately related to Raghunatha dasa’s father and uncle. Nilambara Cakravarti used
to call them his younger brothers because both of them were very devoted to the
brahmanas and were very respectable gentlemen. Similarly, they used to call him
Dada Cakravarti, addressing him as an elder brother brahmana. Raghunatha dasa,
however, was almost the same age as Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Generally a
grandchild may joke about his grandfather. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
took advantage of the relationship between His grandfather and Raghunatha
03535 father and uncle to speak in a joking way.
TEXT 196
চক্রবর্তীর দুহে शत्र ভ্রাতৃকূপ कौन |
অতএব তারে আমি করি পরিহাস ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
cakravartira duhe haya bhratr-rapa dasa
ataeva tare ami kari parihasa
SYNONYMS
cakravartira—of Nilambara Cakravarti; duhe—both; haya—are; bhratr-rapa
dasa—servants as younger brothers; ataeva—therefore; tare—unto them; ami—
1; kari parihasa—say something jokingly.
TRANSLATION
“Since your father and his elder brother are younger brothers of Nilaimbara
Cakravarti, | may joke about them in this way.
TEXT 197
তোমার বাপ-জে্যেঠ। -বিষয়বিষ্টা-গর্তের Fol
সুখ করি” মানে বিষয়-বিষের মহাপীড়। ॥ ১৯৭ ॥


--- Page 292 ---
290 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
tomara bapa-jyetha — visaya-vistha-gartera kida
sukha kari’ mane visaya-visera maha-pida
SYNONYMS
tomdra—your; bapa—father; jyetha—his elder brother; visaya—of material en-
joyment; vistha—stool; gartera—of the ditch; kida—worms; sukha kari’—as hap-
piness; mane—they consider; visaya—of material enjoyment; visera—of the
poison; maha-pida—the great disease.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Raghunatha dasa, your father and his elder brother are just like
worms in stool in the ditch of material enjoyment, for the great disease of the
poison of material enjoyment is what they consider happiness.
PURPORT
When a man is attached to material enjoyment, he is attached to many misera-
ble conditions, but nevertheless he accepts his condemned position as one of
happiness. Sense enjoyment is so strong for such a person that he cannot give it
up, exactly as a worm in stool cannot give up the stool. From the spiritual point of
view, when a person is too absorbed in material enjoyment, he is exactly like a
worm in stool. Although such a position is utterly miserable to the eyes of liber-
ated souls, the materialistic enjoyer is greatly attached to it.
TEXT 198
যতপি ব্রহ্মণ্য করে ত্রাহ্মণের সহায়।
“শুদ্ধবৈষ্ণব নহে, হয়ে “বৈষ্ণবের প্রায়” ॥ ১৯৮ ॥
yadyadi brahmanya kare brahmanera sahaya
‘Suddha-vaisnava’ nahe, haye ‘vaisnavera praya’
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; brahmanya kare—give charity to the brahmanas;
brahmanera sahaya—great helpers to the brahmanas; $uddha-vaispava—pure
Vaisnavas; nahe—not; haye —they are; vaisnavera praya—almost like Vaisnavas.
TRANSLATION
‘Although your father and uncle are charitable to brahmanas and greatly
help them, they are nevertheless not pure Vaisnavas. However, they are
almost like Vaisnavas.


--- Page 293 ---
Text 199] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 291
PURPORT
As stated by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya, some
people, usually very rich men, dress like Vaisnavas and give charity to brahmanas.
They are also attached to Deity worship, but because of their attachment to ma-
terial enjoyment, they cannot be pure Vaisnavas. Anyabhilasita-Sanyam jAana-
karmady-anavrtam. The pure Vaisnava has no desire for material enjoyment. That
is the basic qualification of a pure Vaisnava. There are men, especially rich men,
who regularly worship the Deity, give charity to brahmanas and are pious in every
respect, but they cannot be pure Vaisnavas. Despite their outward show of
Vaisnavism and charity, their inner desire is to enjoy a higher standard of material
life. Raghunatha dasa’s father, Hiranya dasa, and uncle, Govardhana, were both
very charitable to brahmanas. Indeed, the brahmanas from the Gaudiya district
were practically dependent upon them. Thus they were accepted as very pious
gentlemen. However, they presented themselves as Vaisnavas to the eyes of
people in general, although from a purely spiritual point of view they were ordi-
nary human beings, not pure Vaisnavas. Actual Vaisnavas considered them almost
Vaisnavas, not pure Vaisnavas. In other words, they were kanistha-adhikaris, for
they were ignorant of higher Vaisnava regulative principles. Nevertheless, they
could not be called visayis, or blind materialistic enjoyers.
TEXT 199
তথাপি বিষয়ের স্বভাব-_-করে মহা-অদ্ধ |
সেই কর্ম করায়, যাতে হয় ভব-বন্ধ ॥ >>> ॥
tathapi visayera svabhava— kare maha-andha
sei karma karaya, yate haya bhava-bandha
SYNONYMS
tathapi—still; visayera svabhava—the potency of material enjoyment; kare
maha-andha—makes one completely blind; sei karma kardya—causes one to act
in that way; yate—by which; haya—there is; bhava-bandha—the bondage of
birth and death.
TRANSLATION
“Those who are attached to materialistic life and are blind to spiritual life
must act in such a way that they are bound to repeated birth and death by the
actions and reactions of their activities.
PURPORT
As clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.9), yajiarthat karmano ‘nyatra loko ‘yam
karma-bandhanah: If one does not act as a pure devotee, whatever acts he per-


--- Page 294 ---
292 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
forms will produce reactions of fruitive bondage (karma-bandhanah). In Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is said:
nanarh pramattah kurute vikarma
yad-indriya-pritaya aprpoti
na sadhu manye yata atmano ‘yam
asann api klesada asa dehah
“A materialistic person, madly engaged in activities for sense enjoyment, does not
know that he is entangling himself in repeated birth and death and that his body,
although temporary, is full of miseries.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 5.5.4) A visayi, a per-
son blindly caught in a web of materialistic life, remains in the cycle of birth and
death perpetually. Such a person cannot understand how to execute pure devo-
tional service, and therefore he acts as a karmi, 73/07, yogi or something else, ac-
cording to his desire, but he does not know that the activities of karma, jana and
yoga simply bind one to the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 200
হেন “বিষয়” হৈতে কৃষ্ণ উদ্ধারিলা তোমা” ।
কহন না যায় কৃষ্ণকূপার মহিম। ॥” ২০০ ॥
hena ‘visaya’ haite krspa uddharila toma’
kahana na yaya krsna-krpara mahima”
SYNONYMS
hena visaya—such a fallen condition of material enjoyment; haite—from;
krspa—Lord Krsna; uddharila toma’—has delivered you; kahana na yaya—cannot
be described; krsna-krpara—of the mercy of Lord Krsna; mahima—the glories.
TRANSLATION
“By His own free will, Lord Krsna has delivered you from such a condemned
materialistic life. Therefore the glories of Lord Krsna’s causeless mercy cannot
be expressed.”
PURPORT
In the Brahma-sarmhita (5.54) it is said, karmanpi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bha-
jam. Lord Krsna is so merciful that He can stop the reaction of karma for His devo-
tee. Everyone—from a small insect called indra-gopa up to Indra, the King of
heaven —is bound by the reactions of fruitive activities.


--- Page 295 ---
Text 202] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 293
yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-
bandhanurdapa-phala-bhajanam atanoti
karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajari
govindam adi-purusari tam aham bhajami
Everyone, whether like an insect or the King of heaven, is entangled and bound by
the actions and reactions of his karma. However, when one becomes a pure
devotee, free from material desires and from bondage to karma, jAiana and yoga,
one is freed from material actions and reactions by the causeless mercy of Krsna.
One cannot express sufficient gratitude to Krsna for being freed from the ma-
terialistic way of life.
TEXT 201
রঘুনাথের ক্ষীণতা-মালিল্ত্য দেখিয়া!
স্বরূপেরে কহেন প্রভু কুপার্্র-চিত্ত হঞা 1 ২০১॥
raghunathera ksinata-malinya dekhiya
svarapere kahena prabhu krpardra-citta hana
SYNONYMS
raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; ksinata—thinness; malinya—dirty condi-
tion of the body; dekhiya—seeing; svarapere kahena—said to Svariipa Damodara
Gosvami; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa—out of mercy; ardra—
melted; citta—heart; hana—being.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Raghunatha dasa skinny and dirty because of having traveled for
twelve days and fasted, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His heart melting due
to causeless mercy, spoke to Svaripa Damodara.
TEXT 202
“এই রথুনাথে আমি जं निग (मटन ।
পুত্র-ভৃত্য-রূপে তুমি কর অঙ্গীকারে ॥ २०२ ॥
“ei raghunathe ami sanpinu tomare
putra-bhrtya-rape tumi kara angikare
SYNONYMS
ei raghunathe —this Raghunatha dasa; ami—I; sanpinu tomare—am entrusting
to you; putra—son; bhrtya—servant; ripe —as; tumi—you (Svarapa Damodara
Gosvami); kara angikare—please accept.


--- Page 296 ---
294 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Svariipa,”” He said, “| entrust this Raghunatha dasa to you. Please
accept him as your son or servant.
TEXT 203
তিন “রঘুনাথ-নাম হুয় আমার গণে |
“স্বরূপের AL — আজি হৈতে ইহার নামে ॥”*২০৩ ॥
tina ‘raghunatha’-nama haya amara 8905
‘svardpera raghu’——3ji haite ihara name”
SYNONYMS
tina raghunatha —three Raghunathas; nama—named; haya—are; amara gane —
among My associates; svardpera raghu—the Raghunatha of Svaripa Damodara;
aji haite—from this day; ihara—of this one; name—the name.
TRANSLATION
‘There are now three Raghunathas among My associates. From this day for-
ward, this Raghunatha should be known as the Raghu of Svariipa Damodara.”
PURPORT
Lord ऽते Caitanya Mahaprabhu had three Raghus among His associates — Vaidya
Raghunatha (vide Adi-lila 11.22), Bhatta Raghunatha and Dasa ২৪870738073.
Dasa Raghunatha became celebrated as the Raghunatha of ५५002.
TEXT 204
এত FF রঘুনাথের হস্ত ধরিল। |
স্বরূপের হস্তে তারে সমর্পণ टेकला। ॥ २०8 ॥
eta kahi’ raghunathera hasta dharila
svardpera haste tanre samarpana kaila
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; hasta dharila—
caught the hand; svardpera haste—in the hands of Svariipa Damodara; tarnre—
him; samarpana kaila—entrusted.


--- Page 297 ---
Text 206] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 295
TRANSLATION
Saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu grasped the hand of Raghunatha dasa
and entrusted him to the hands of Svarapa Damodara Gosvami.
TEXT 205
স্বরূপ কহে, AAG যে আজ্ঞা ছৈল”।
এত কহি'” রঘুনাথে পুনঃ আলিঙ্গিল ॥ ২০৫ ॥
svaripa kahe, — ‘mahaprabhura ye ajia haila’
eta kahi’ raghunathe punah alingila
SYNONYMS
svaripa kahe—Svaripa Damodara said; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ye—whatever; ajia—order; haila—there is; eta kahi’—saying this;
raghunathe —Raghunatha dasa; punah—again; alirgila—he embraced.
TRANSLATION
Svaripa Damodara Gosvami accepted Raghunatha dasa, saying, ‘Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whatever You order is accepted.” He then embraced
Raghunatha dasa again.
TEXT 206
WET ভক্তবাঙসল্য কহিতে A পারি।
গোবিম্দেরে কহে রঘুনাথে দয়। করি” ॥ ২০৬ ॥
caitanyera bhakta-vatsalya kahite na pari
govindere kahe raghunathe daya kari’
SYNONYMS
caitanyera—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-vatsalya—affection for
devotees; kahite na pari—| cannot express properly; govindere—to Govinda;
kahe —He said; raghunathe —upon Raghunatha; daya kari’—being very merciful.
TRANSLATION
I cannot properly express the affection of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for His
devotees. Being merciful toward Raghunatha dasa, the Lord spoke as follows
to Govinda.


--- Page 298 ---
296 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 207
“পথে ইহ করিয়াছে বহুত লঙ্ঘন |
কতদিন কর ইহার ভাল সম্ভর্পণ 1” ২০৭ ॥
“pathe inha kariyache bahuta langhana
kata-dina kara ihara bhala santarpana”
SYNONYMS
pathe—on the way; inha—this Raghunatha dasa; kariyache—has done;
bahuta—much; larighana—fasting and difficult endeavor; kata-dina—for some
days; kara—do; ihara—of him; bhala—good; santarpana—attention.
TRANSLATION
“On the way, Raghunitha dasa has fasted and undergone hardships for
many days. Therefore, take good care of him for some days so that he may eat
to his satisfaction.”
TEXT 208
রঘুনাথে কহে- “যাঞ, কর जिक्ूप्रान |
জগন্নাথ দেখি” আসি” করহ ভোজন ॥” ২০৮ ॥
raghunathe kahe — “yana, kara sindhu-snana
jagannatha dekhi’ asi’ karaha bhojana”
SYNONYMS
raghunathe kahe—He said to Raghunatha dasa; yana—going; kara sindhu-
snana—bathe in the sea; jagannatha dekhi’—after seeing Lord Jagannatha; asi’—
after coming; karaha bhojana—take your meal.
TRANSLATION
Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Raghunitha dasa, “Go bathe in the sea.
Then see Lord Jagannitha in the temple and return here to take your meal.”
TEXT 209
এত বলি' প্রভু মধ্যাহু করিতে fee |
রঘুলাথ-দাস जव ভক্তেরে মিলিলা ॥ ২০৯ ॥
eta bali’ prabhu madhyahna karite uthila
raghundatha-dasa saba bhaktere milila


--- Page 299 ---
Text 211] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 297
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—after saying this; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; madhyahna
karite—for performing His midday duties; uthila—got up; raghunatha-dasa—
Raghunatha dasa; saba—all; bhaktere—devotees; milila—met.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got up and went to perform His
midday duties, and Raghunatha met all the devotees present.
TEXT 210
রঘুনাথে প্রভুর FoH দেখি, THe |
বিস্মিত হঞ।৷ করে Sia ভাগ্য-প্রশংলন ॥ ২১০ ॥
raghunathe prabhura krpa dekhi, bhakta-gana
vismita (1275 kare tarra bhagya-prasarnsana
SYNONYMS
raghunathe—unto Raghunatha dasa; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
krpa—mercy; dekhi—seeing; bhakta-gana—all the devotees; vismita—struck
with wonder; haia—being; kare—do; tanra—his; bhagya—fortune; prasarn-
sana—praise.
TRANSLATION
Having seen the causeless mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu upon
Raghunatha dasa, all the devotees, struck with wonder, praised his good for-
tune.
TEXT 211
রঘুলাথ সমুদ্রে यां! प्रान করিল। ।
জগন্নাথ দেখি” পুনঃ গোবিন্দব-পাশ আইল। ॥ ২১১ ॥
raghunatha samudre yana 57373 karila
jagannatha dekhi’ punah govinda-pasa aila
SYNONYMS
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; samudre—to the sea; “ydna—going; snana
karila—took a bath; jagannatha dekhi’—after seeing Lord Jagannatha; punah—
again; govinda-pasa aila—came to Govinda.


--- Page 300 ---
298 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa took his bath in the sea and saw Lord Jagannatha. Then he
returned to Govinda, the personal servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 212
প্রভুর অবশিষ্ট পাত্র গোবিন্দ ভারে fe ।
আনন্দিত Zep] রঘুনাথ প্রসাদ পাইল! ॥ ২১২ ॥
prabhura avasista patra govinda tanre dila
anandita hana raghunatha prasada paila
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; avasista patra—a plate of remnants of
food; govinda—the personal servant of the Lord; tanre—to him; dila—offered;
anandita haa —becoming very happy; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; prasada
paila—accepted the prasada.
TRANSLATION
Govinda offered him a plate with the remnants of food left by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and Raghunitha dasa accepted the prasida with great happi-
ness.
TEXT 213
এইমত রহে (ङ স্বরূপ-চরণে।
গোবিচ্দ প্রসাদ ভারে দিল পঞ্চ দিনে ॥ ২১৩ ॥
ei-mata rahe (21703 svarapa-carane
govinda prasada tanre dila (22768 dine
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; rahe —remained; tenha—he; svarapa-carane—under the
shelter of Svaripa Damodara Gosvami; govinda—the personal servant of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prasida—the remnants of the food of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tanre—unto him; dila—gave; parca dine—for five days.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa stayed under the care of Svariipa Damodara Gosvami, and
Govinda supplied him remnants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s food for five
days.


--- Page 301 ---
Text 216] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghuniatha dasa Gosvami 299
TEXT 214
আর দিন হৈতে “পুষ্প-অঞ্জলি” দেখিয়া |
সিংহদারে খাড়। রহে ভিক্ষার লাগিয়|॥ ২১৪ ॥
ara dina haite ‘puspa-anjali’ dekhiya
simha-dvare khada rahe bhiksara lagiya
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; haite—from; puspa-aijali—the ceremony of offering
flowers to the Lord; dekhiya—after seeing; simha-dvare—at the majn gate;
khada rahe —remains standing; bhiksara lagiya—for begging some alms.
TRANSLATION
Beginning from the sixth day, Raghunatha dasa would stand at the gate
known as Sirhha-dvara to beg alms after the puspa-aijali ceremony, in which
flowers were offered to the Lord.
TEXT 215
জগল্পাথের সেবক যত-_“বিষয়ীর नगः |
সেবা সারি” রাত্র্যে করে গৃহেতে গমন ॥ ২১৫ ॥
jagannathera sevaka yata— ‘visayira gana’
seva sari’ ratrye kare grhete gamana
SYNONYMS
jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; sevaka—servants; yata—all; visayira gana—
generally known as visayi; seva sari’—after finishing their service; ratrye—at
night; kare—do; grhete gamana—returning home.
TRANSLATION
After finishing their prescribed duties, the many servants of Lord Jagan-
natha, who are known as visayis, return home at night.
TEXT 216
সিংহত্বারে ख्य বৈষ্ণবে দেখিয়া ।
পসারির ঠাণ্জিঃ অন্ন দেন কৃূপ। ত” করিয়। ॥ ২১৬ ॥


--- Page 302 ---
300 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
simha-dvare annarthi vaisnave dekhiya
pasdrira thani anna dena krpa ta’ kariya
SYNONYMS
sirhha-dvare—at the 51011118 gate; anna-arthi—in need of some eatables;
vaisnave —Vaisnavas; dekhiya—seeing; pasarira thani—from the shopkeepers;
anna dena—deliver some eatables; krpa ta’ kariyd—out of mercy.
TRANSLATION
If they see a Vaisnava standing at the Sirhha-dvara begging alms, out of
mercy they arrange with the shopkeepers to give him something to eat.
TEXT 217
এইমত সর্বকাল আছে ব্যবহার |
নিষ্কিঞ্চন ভক্ত Yel হয় সিংহদ্বার ॥ ২১৭ ॥
ei-mata sarva-kala 3006 vyavahara
niskificana bhakta khada haya sirnha-dvara
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; sarva-kala—for all time; ache—is; vyavahara—the eti-
quette; niskificana bhakta—a devotee who has no other support; khada haya—
stands; sirnha-dvara—at the gate known as Simha-dvara.
TRANSLATION
Thus it is a custom for all time that a devotee who has no other means of
support stands at the Sirnha-dvara gate to receive alms from the servants.
TEXT 218
সর্ব দিন করেন বৈষ্ণব নাম-সন্ধীর্তন।
স্বচ্ছন্দে করেন জগন্নাথ দরশলন ॥ ২১৮ ॥
sarva-dina karena vaispava nama-sarikirtana
svacchande karena jagannatha darasana
SYNONYMS
sarva-dina—the whole day; karena—performs; vaispava—a Vaisnava; nama-
sanikirtana—chanting of the holy name of the Lord; svacchande—with full
freedom; karena—does; jagannatha darasana—seeing Lord Jagannatha.


--- Page 303 ---
Text 220] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 301
TRANSLATION
A completely dependent Vaisnava thus chants the holy name of the Lord all
day and sees Lord Jagannatha with full freedom.
TEXT 219
কেহ ছত্রে মাগি” খায়, যেবা কিছু পায় ।
কেহ রাত্রে ভিক্ষা লাগি” সিংহদ্বারে রয় ॥ ২১৯ ॥
keha chatre magi’ khaya, yeba kichu paya
keha ratre bhiksa lagi’ sirhha-dvare raya
SYNONYMS
keha—some; chatre —at the almshouse; magi’—begging; khaya—eat; yeba—
whatever; kichu—little; paya—they receive; keha—some; ratre —at night; bhik-
sa lagi’—for begging alms; sirhha- dvare raya—stand at the gate known as Sirhha-
dvara.
TRANSLATION
It is a custom for some Vaisnavas to beg from the charity booths and eat
whatever they obtain, whereas others stand at night at the Sirmhha-dvara gate,
begging alms from the servants.
TEXT 220
মহাপ্রভুর ভক্তগণের বৈরাগ্য প্রধান |
যাহা দেখি” প্রীত হন গৌর-ভগবান্‌ ॥ ২২০ ॥
mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera vairagya pradhana
yaha dekhi’ prita hana gaura-bhagavan
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-ganera—of the devotees;
vairagya—renunciation; pradhana—the basic principle; yaha dekhi’—seeing
which;" prita hana—becomes satisfied; ~gaura-bhagavain—S$ri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Renunciation is the basic principle sustaining the lives of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s devotees. Seeing this renunciation, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is extremely satisfied.


--- Page 304 ---
302 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
PURPORT
Anyone, whether an ordinary materialistic person or a pure devotee, can under-
stand the behavior of ऽत Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s devotees if he studies it
minutely. One will thus find that the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are
not at all attached to any kind of material enjoyment. They have completely given
up sense enjoyment to engage fully in the service of Lord Sri Krsna and dedicate
their lives and souls to serving Krsna without material desires. Because their devo-
tional service is free from material desires, it is unimpeded by material circum-
stances. Although ordinary men have great difficulty understanding this attitude
of the devotees, it is greatly appreciated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 221
প্রভুরে গোবিন্দ কহে, _“রঘুনাথ “প্রসাদ” না লয়।
রাত্র্যে সিংহদ্বারে था) হঞ। মাগি” খায় ॥” ২২১ ॥
prabhure govinda kahe, —“raghunatha ‘prasada’ na laya
ratrye simha-dvare khada hana magi’ khaya”
SYNONYMS
prabhure —unto Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; govinda kahe —Govinda said;
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; prasada na laya—does not take prasada; ratrye—
at night; simha-dvare—at the Sirhha-dvara gate; khada hana —standing; magi'—
begging; khaya—he eats.
TRANSLATION
Govinda said to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, “83811071303 dasa no longer
takes prasada here. Now he stands at the Sirnha-dvara, where he begs some
alms to eat.”
TEXT 222
শুনি' তুষ্ট 9 প্রভু কহিতে लोगिन |
“ভাল टेकल्ल, বৈরাগীর ধর্ম আচরিল ॥ ২২২ ॥
Suni’ tusta hana prabhu kahite lagila
“bhala kaila, vairagira dharma acarila
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; tusta haia—being very satisfied; prabhu—Lord ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kahite lagila—began to say; bhala kaila—he has done well;


--- Page 305 ---
Text 223] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 303
vairagira—of a person in the renounced order; dharma—the principles; acarila—
he has performed.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this, He was greatly satisfied.
‘‘Raghunitha dasa has done well,”” He said. ‘He has acted suitably for a per-
son in the renounced order.
TEXT 223
বৈরাগী করিবে wl নাম-সন্ধীর্তন |
মাগিয়া Atel করে জীবন রক্ষণ ॥ ২২৩ ॥
vairagi karibe sada nama-sankirtana
magiya khana kare jivana raksana
SYNONYMS
vairagi—a person in the renounced order; karibe —will do; sada—always;
nama-sankirtana—chanting of the holy name of the Lord; magiya—by begging;
khanna —eating; kare jivana raksana—he sustains his life.
TRANSLATION
‘A person in the renounced order should always chant the holy name of the
Lord. He should beg some alms to eat, and he should sustain his life in this
way.
PURPORT
As stated in the Hari-bhakti-vilasa at the end of the Twentieth Vilasa
(366, 379, 382):
krtyanyetani tu prayo
grhinarh dhaninarh satam
likhitani na tu tyakta-
parigraha-mahatmanam
prabhate cardha-ratre ca
madhyahne divasa-ksaye
kirtayanti harim ye vai
te taranti bhavarpavam
evam ekantinarm prayah
kirtanar smaranarih prabhoh


--- Page 306 ---
304 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
kurvatarh parama-pritya
krtyam anyan na rocate
A well-to-do householder Vaisnava cannot live like a person in the renounced
order who completely takes shelter of the holy name. Such a householder should
chant the holy name of Krsna in the morning, at midday and in the evening. Then
he will be able to cross beyond nescience. Pure devotees in the renounced order,
however, who fully surrender to the lotus feet of Krsna, should chant the holy
name of the Lord with great love and faith, always thinking of Krsna's lotus feet.
They should have no other occupation than chanting the holy name of the Lord.
In the Bhakti-sandarbha, Srila Jiva Gosvami says:
yadyapi sri-bhagavata-mate paiica-ratradivad-arcana-margasyavasyakatvari nasti,
tad vinapi saranapattyadinam ekatarenapi purusartha-siddher abhihitatvat.
TEXT 224
বৈরাগী হঞ। ८यव। করে नेत्तोटग॑च्क। |
কার্যসিদ্ধি নহে, কৃষ্ণ করেন উপেক্ষা ॥ ২২৪ ॥
vairagi hana yeba kare parapeksa
karya-siddhi nahe, krsna karena upeksa
SYNONYMS
vairagi hana—being in the renounced order; yeba—anyone who; kare —does;
parapeksa—dependence on others; karya-siddhi nahe —he does not become
successful; krspa—Lord Krsna; karena upeksa—neglects.
TRANSLATION
“८4 vairagi [a person in the renounced order] should not depend on others.
‘If he does so, he will be unsuccessful, and he will be neglected by Krsna.
TEXT 225
বৈরাগী zl করে জিহ্বার লালস |
পরমার্থ যায়, আর হয় রসের বশ ॥ ২২৫ ॥
vairagi hana kare jihvara lalasa
paramartha yaya, ara haya rasera vasa


--- Page 307 ---
Text 227] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 305
SYNONYMS
vairagi hafia—being in the renounced order; kare—does; jihvara—of the
tongue; lalasa—lust; parama-artha—the goal of life; yaya—goes; ara—and;
haya—becomes; rasera vasa—dependent on taste.
TRANSLATION
“If a renunciant is eager for his tongue to taste different foods, his spiritual
life will be lost, and he will be subservient to the tastes of his tongue.
TEXT 226
বৈরাগীর कृड7- जम्‌] নাম-সন্ধীর্তন |
শাক-পত্র-কল-মুলে উদর-ভরণ ॥ ২২৬ ॥
vairagira krtya——sada nama-sankirtana
$aka-patra-phala-male udara-bharana
SYNONYMS
vairagira—of a person in the renounced order; krtya—duty; sada—always;
nama-sarikirtana—chanting the holy name of the Lord; $aka—vegetables; patra—
leaves; phala—fruit; male—by roots; udara-bharana—filling the belly.
TRANSLATION
“The duty of a person in the renounced order is to chant the Hare Krsna
mantra always. He should satisfy his belly with whatever vegetables, leaves,
fruits and roots are available.
TEXT 227
জিহ্বার ল।লসে যেই ইতি-উতি ধায় |
শিশ্মোদরপরায়ণ কৃষ্ণ নাহি পায় ॥” ২২৭ ॥
jihvara lalase yei iti-uti dhaya
sisnodara-parayana krsna nahi paya’”
SYNONYMS
jihvara—of the tongue; ldlase —because of greed; yei—anyone who; iti-uti—
here and there; dhaya—goes; sisna—genitals; udara—belly; pardyana—devoted
to; krspna—Lord Krsna; nahi paya—does not get.


--- Page 308 ---
306 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
‘“One who is subservient to the tongue and who thus goes here and there,
devoted to the genitals and the belly, cannot attain Krsna.”
TEXT 228
আর দিন Agate স্বক্মূপ-চরণে |
আপনার FF লাগি' Sel নিবেদনে ॥ ২২৮ ॥
ara dina raghunatha svarapa-carane
apanara krtya lagi’ kaila nivedane
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; svaripa-carane—unto
the lotus feet of Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; dpanara—his; krtya—duty; lagi’'—
for; kaila nivedane —submitted.
TRANSLATION
The next day, Raghunatha dasa inquired at the lotus feet of Svarupa
Damodara about his duty.
TEXT 229
“কি লাগি” ছাড়াইল। ঘর, ন| জানি উদ্দেশ |
কি মোর কর্তব্য, প্রভু কর উপদেশ ॥” ২২৯ ॥
“ki lagi’ chadaila ghara, na jani uddesa
ki mora kartavya, prabhu kara upadesa”
SYNONYMS
ki lagi’—for what reason; chadaila ghara—have | been obliged to give up my
household life; na jani—I do not know; uddesa—the purpose; ki—what; mora
kartavya—my duty; prabhu—my dear Lord; kara upadesa—please give instruc-
tion.
TRANSLATION
‘I do not know why | have given up household life,” he said. “What is my
duty? Kindly give me instructions.”


--- Page 309 ---
Text 232] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 307
TEXT 230
প্রভুর আগে কথা-মাত্র ন| কহে রঘুনাথ ৷
স্ব্ূপ-গোবিল্দ-ত্বারা কহায় নিজ-বাত্‌ ॥ ২৩০ ॥
prabhura age katha-matra na kahe raghunatha
svarapa-govinda-dvara kahaya nija-vat
SYNONYMS
prabhura age—in front of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; katha-matra—any speak-
ing; na kahe—does not say; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; svarapa-govinda-
dvara—through Govinda and Svaripa Damodara Gosvami; kahaya—he informs;
nija-vat—his intention.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa never even spoke a word before the Lord. Instead, he in-
formed the Lord of his desires through Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and
Govinda.
TEXT 231
প্রভুর আগে wwe নিবেদিল৷ আর দিনে ।
Agta নিবেদয় প্রভুর চরণে ॥ ২৩১ ॥
prabhura age svardapa nivedila ara dine
raghunatha nivedaya prabhura carane
SYNONYMS
prabhura age—in front of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; svarapa—Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami; nivedila—submitted; ara dine —on the next day; raghunatha
nivedaya—Raghunatha dasa inquires; prabhura carane —at the lotus feet of Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The next day, Svariipa Damodara Gosvami submitted to Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, ‘‘Raghunatha dasa has this to say at Your lotus feet.
TEXT 232
“কি মোর কর্তব্য, मू না জানি উদ্দেশ ।
আপনি Ege মোরে কর উপদেশ ॥” ২৩২ ॥


--- Page 310 ---
308 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
“ki mora kartavya, mudi na jani uddesa
apani sri-mukhe more kara upadesa”
SYNONYMS
ki—what; mora kartavya—my duty; muri—I; na jani—do not know; uddesa—
the goal of my life; apani—personally; sri-mukhe—through Your transcendental
mouth; more—unto me; kara upadesa—please give instructions.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘1 do not know my duty or the goal of my life. Therefore, please personally
give me instructions from Your transcendental mouth.” ^
TEXT 233
হাসি” মহাপ্রভু রঘুনাথেরে কহিল ।
“তোমার উপদেষ্টা করি' স্বক্ূপেরে जिल ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
1035/ mahaprabhu raghunathere kahila
“tomdra upadesta kari’ svarapere dila
SYNONYMS
hasi’—smiling; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; raghunathere—to
Raghunatha dasa; kahila—said; tomara—your; upadesta—instructor; kari’—as;
svarapere dila—I have appointed Svaripa Damodara Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Smiling, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Raghunatha dasa, “1 have already
appointed Svariipa Damodara Gosvami as your instructor.
TEXT 234
“সাধ্য'-সাধন-তদ্ব শিখ ইহার স্থানে |
আমি তত নাহি जानि, ই"হে৷ যত জানে ॥ ২৩৪ ॥
‘sadhya’-‘sadhana’-tattva $1/003 irhara sthane
ami tata nahi jani, inho yata jane
SYNONYMS
sadhya—duty; sadhana—how to execute it; tattva—truth; sikha—learn; inhara
sthane —from him; ami—I; tata—so much; nahi jani—do not know; inho—he;
yata—as much as; jane —knows.


--- Page 311 ---
Text 237] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 309
TRANSLATION
‘You may learn from him what your duty is and how to discharge it. ॥ do not
know as much as he.
TEXT 235
তথাপি আমার ests el যদি 230)
আমার এই वोटक} তবে করিহ নিশ্চয় ॥ ২৩৫ ॥
tathapi amara ajhaya sraddha yadi haya
amara ei vakye tabe kariha niscaya
SYNONYMS
tathapi—still; amara ajidgya—in My instruction; S$raddha—faith; yadi—if;
haya—there is; amara—My; ei—these; vakye—by words; tabe—then; kariha
niscaya—you can ascertain.
TRANSLATION
‘Nevertheless, if you want to take instructions from Me with faith and love,
you may ascertain your duties from the following words.
TEXT 236
গ্রাম্যকথা না ॐनिटव, গ্রাম্যবার্তা না কহিবে।
ভাল না খাইবে আর ভাল न পরিবে ॥ ২৩৬ ॥
gramya-katha na sunibe, gramya-varta na kahibe
bhala na khaibe ara bhala na paribe
SYNONYMS
gramya-katha—ordinary talks of common men; na Sunibe—never hear;
gramya-varta—ordinary news; na kahibe—do not speak; bhala—well; na
khaibe—do not eat; dra—and; bhala—nicely; na paribe—do not dress.
TRANSLATION
‘Do not talk like people in general or hear what they say. You should not eat
very palatable food, nor should you dress very nicely.
TEXT 237
समानो गोन 20] FRR AF CA |
लट রাধাকৃষ্ণ-সেবা ACA করিবে ॥ ২৩৭ ॥


--- Page 312 ---
310 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
amani manada hana krspa-nama sada 1306
vraje radha-krsna-seva manase karibe
SYNONYMS

amani—not expecting any respect; mana-da—offering respect to others;
hafa—becoming; krsna-nama—the holy name of the Lord; sada—always;
la’be —you should chant; vraje—in Vrndavana; radha-krsna-seva—service to
Radha and Krsna; manase —within the mind; karibe —you should do.

TRANSLATION

“Do not expect honor, but offer all respect to others. Always chant the holy
name of Lord Krsna, and within your mind render service to Radha and Krsna
in Vrndavana.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya that when a man
and woman are married, they beget children and are thus entangled in family life.
Talk concerning such family life is called gramya-katha. A person in the renounced
order never indulges in either hearing or talking about such subjects. He should
not eat palatable dishes, since that is unfit for a person in the renounced order. He
should show all respect to others, but should not expect respect for himself. In
this way, one should chant the holy name of the Lord and think of how to serve
Radha and Krsna in Vrndavana.

TEXT 238
এই ত' সংক্ষেপে আমি दकल" ठनेटलमे |
THREAT $ > ইহার পাইবে বিশেষ ॥ ২৩৮ ॥
ei ta’ sanksepe ami kailun upadesa
svarapera thani ihara paibe visesa
SYNONYMS

ei—this; ta’—certainly; sanksepe—in brief; ami—I; kailun upadesa—have
given instruction; svarapera thani—from Svaripa Damodara; ihara—of this in-
struction; paibe—you will get; visesa—all details.

TRANSLATION

‘‘I have briefly given you My instructions. Now you will get all details about

them from Svariipa Damodara.


--- Page 313 ---
Text 241] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 311
TEXT 239
তৃণাদপি স্থনীচেন তরোরিব मरिकृन। ।
অমানিন। মানদেন কীর্তনীয়ঃ সদ। হরিঃ ॥” ২৩৯ ॥
00030 api sunicena
taror iva sahisnuna
amanina manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih”
SYNONYMS
trnat api—than downtrodden grass; sunicena—being lower; taroh—than a
tree; iva—indeed; sahisnuna—with more tolerance; amanina—without being
puffed up by false pride; manadena—giving respect to all; kirtaniyah—to be
chanted; sada—always; harih—the holy name of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
‘One who thinks himself lower than grass, who is more tolerant than a tree,
and who does not expect personal honor but is always prepared to give
respect to others, can very easily always chant the holy name of the Lord.”
TEXT 240
এত শুনি রঘুনাথ বন্দিল। छत |
মহাপ্রভু কৈলা তারে কৃপ-আলিঙ্গন ॥ ২৪০ ॥
eta suni’ raghunatha vandila carana
mahaprabhu kaila tarre krpa-alingana
SYNONYMS
eta Suni’—hearing this; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; vandila carana—offered
prayers to the lotus feet; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—did;
tanre—him; krpa-alingana—embracing out of mercy.
TRANSLATION
Having heard this, Raghunatha dasa offered prayers at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and the Lord, with great mercy, embraced him.
TEXT 241
পুনঃ সমপিল৷ ভারে স্বরূপের স্থানে |
“অন্তরঙ্গ-সেবা” করে স্ব.রূপের সনে ॥ ২৪১ ॥


--- Page 314 ---
312 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
punah samarpila tarre svarapera sthane
‘antaranga-seva’ kare svarapera sane
SYNONYMS
punah—again; samarpili—handed over; tanre—him; svardpera sthane—to
Svartpa Damodara; antararnga-seva—very confidential service; kare —he renders;
svarGpera sane —with Svaripa Damodara.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again entrusted him to Svariipa Damodara. Thus
Raghunatha dasa rendered very confidential service with Svarapa Damodara
Gosvami.
PURPORT
Antaranga-seva refers to service performed in one’s spiritual body. Svaripa
Damodara Gosvami was formerly Lalitadevi. Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, who was
among his assistants, now also began to serve Radha and Krsna within his mind.
TEXT 242
হেন-কালে আইলা जव গৌড়ের ভক্তগণ |
পুর্ববৎ প্রভু সবায় করিল। মিলন ॥ ২৪২ ॥
hena-kale aila saba gaudera bhakta-gana
parvavat prabhu sabaya karila milana
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; dila—came; saba—all; gaudera bhak ta-gana—devo-
tees from Bengal; parva-vat—as formerly; prabhu—SrT Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
sabaya—every one of them; karila milana—met.
TRANSLATION
At this time, all the devotees from Bengal arrived, and, as previously, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu met them with great feeling.
TEXT 243
जव। লঞ। टेकन। প্রভু গুণ্ডিচা-মার্জল।
সবা লঞা टेकन। প্রভু বস্য-ভোজন ॥ ২৪৩ ॥
saba 1275 kaila prabhu gundica-marjana
saba lana kaila prabhu vanya-bhojana


--- Page 315 ---
Text 245] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 313
SYNONYMS
saba lana—taking all of them; kaili—performed; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; gundica-marjana—washing of the Gundica temple; saba landa—
with all of them; kaila—performed; prabhu—Sri Caitanya; vanya-bhojana—eat-
ing in the garden.
TRANSLATION
As He had previously done, He cleansed the Gundica temple and held a pic-
nic feast in the garden with the devotees.
TEXT 244
রথযাত্রায় সব! Fel করিলা नरन |
দেখি” রঘুনাথের চমৎকার হৈল मन्‌ ॥ ২৪৪ ॥
ratha-yatraya 5363 lana karila nartana
dekhi’ raghunathera camatkara haila mana
SYNONYMS
ratha-yatraya—during the Ratha-yatra performance; saba lana—taking all of
them; karila nartana—danced; dekhi’—seeing; raghunathera—of Raghunatha
dasa; camatkara—struck with wonder; haila—became; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
The Lord again danced with the devotees during the Ratha-yatra festival.
Seeing this, Raghunatha dasa was struck with wonder.
TEXT 245
রঘুনাথ-দাস যবে সবারে মিলিলা।
অ্বৈত-আচার্য তারে বছ FeAl কৈল। ॥ ২৪৫ ॥
raghunatha-dasa yabe sabare milila
advaita-acarya tanre bahu krpa kaila
SYNONYMS
raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha dasa; yabe—when; sabare milila—met all the
devotees; advaita-acarya—Advaita Acarya; tanre—unto him; bahu—much;
krpa—mercy; kaila—did.


--- Page 316 ---
314 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa met all the devotees, Advaita Acarya showed him
great mercy.
TEXT 246
जिवोनन्न-८जन তারে কহেন বিবরণ ।
তোমা লৈতে তোমার পিতা পাঠাইল দশ জন ॥২৪৬
Sivananda-sena tanre kahena vivarana
toma laite tomara pita pathaila dasa jana
SYNONYMS
Sivananda-sena—Sivananda Sena; tarire —unto him; kahena—says; vivarana—
description; toma laite—to take you; tomara pitai—your father; pathaila—sent;
dasa jana—ten men.
TRANSLATION
He also met Sivananda Sena, who informed him, ‘Your father sent ten men
to take you away.
TEXT 247
তোমারে পাঠাইতে পত্রী পাঠাইল মোরে।
ঝঁাকরা৷ হইতে তোমা न नग] গেল ঘরে ॥ ২৪৭ ॥
tomare pathaite patri pathaila more
jhankara ha-ite toma na pana gela ghare
SYNONYMS
tomare—you; pathaite—to send back; patri—letter; pathaila more—sent to
me; jhankara ha-ite—from )hankara; toma—you; na pana—not getting; gela
ghare —returned home.
TRANSLATION
‘‘He wrote me a letter asking me to send you back, but when those ten men
received no information about you, they returned home from Jhankara.””
TEXT 248
চারি মাস রহি” ভক্তগণ (नोट গেলা |
শুনি” রঘুনাথের পিতা मद्र পাঠাইল৷ ॥ ২৪৮ ॥


--- Page 317 ---
Text 250] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 315
cari masa rahi’ bhakta-gana gaude gela
Suni’ raghunathera pita manusya pathaila
SYNONYMS
cari masa—for four months; rahi’—remaining; bhakta-gana—all the devotees;
gaude geld —returned to Bengal; suni’—hearing; raghunathera pita—the father of
Raghunatha dasa; manusya—a man; pathaila—sent.
TRANSLATION
When all the devotees from Bengal returned home after staying at Jagan-
natha Puri for four months, Raghunatha dasa’s father heard about their arrival
and therefore sent aman to Sivananda Sena.
TEXT 249
TI শিবানচ্দ-সেনেরে পুছিল |
“মহাপ্রভুর স্থানে এক “বৈরাগী” দেখিল ॥ ২৪৯ ४
se manusya Sivananda-senere puchila
“mahaprabhura sthane eka ‘vairagi’ dekhila
SYNONYMS
se manusya—that messenger; Sivananda-senere —from Sivananda Sena;
puchila—inquired; mahaprabhura sthane—at the place of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; eka vairagi—a person in the renounced order; dekhila—did you
see.
TRANSLATION
That man inquired from Sivinanda Sena, “Did you see anyone in the
renounced order at the residence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
TEXT 250
গোবধনের পুত্র তেঁহে, নাম — Aga’ ।
নীলাচলে পরিচয় আছে তোমার সাথ ?” ২৫০ ॥
govardhanera putra tenho, 15/72 ‘raghunatha’
1713८216 paricaya 3006 tomara satha?”


--- Page 318 ---
316 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
govardhanera—of 0০৬91078179; putra—the son; terho—he; nama—named;
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; nilacale—in Nilacala; paricaya ache —is there ac-
quaintance; tomara satha—with you.
TRANSLATION
‘That person is Raghunitha dasa, the son of Govardhana Majumadara. Did
you meet him in Nilacala?’’
TEXT 251
भिवोनन्न কহে, -_“ঙেঁহো হয় প্রভুর স্থানে |
পরম বিখ্যাত (Se, কেবা নাহি জানে ॥ ২৫১ ॥
sivananda kahe, ——“tenhohaya prabhura sthane
parama vikhyata tenho, keba nahi jane
SYNONYMS
Sivananda kahe—S$ivananda Sena replied; tenho—he; haya—is; prabhura
sthane—with Lord अ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; parama vikhyata—very famous;
ternho—he; keba—who; nahi jane—does not know.
TRANSLATION
Sivananda Sena replied, “Yes, sir. Raghunatha dasa is with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and is a very famous man. Who does not know him?
TEXT 252
श्क्रदैन् স্থানে তারে করিয়াছেন সমর্পণ |
প্রভুর ভক্তগণের (ST হয় প্রাণসম ॥ ২৫২ ॥
svarapera sthane tare kariyachena samarpana
prabhura bhakta-ganera ternho haya prana-sama
SYNONYMS
svarapera sthane —to Svarapa Damodara; tare —him; kariyachena samarpana—
Lord Caitanya has given charge of; prabhura—of ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhak-
ta-ganera—of all the devotees; tenho—he; haya—is; prana—the life; sama—like.


--- Page 319 ---
Text 254] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 317
TRANSLATION
“Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has placed him under the charge of Svaripa
Damodara. Raghunatha dasa has become just like the life of all the Lord's
devotees.
TEXT 253
রাত্রি-দিন করে ८ङंदङ्‌। নাম-সন্কীর্তন |
ক্ষণমাত্র নাহি ছাড়ে গুভুর চরণ ॥ ২৫৩ ॥
ratri-dina kare tenho nama-sankirtana
ksana-matra nahi chade prabhura carana
SYNONYMS
ratri-dina—all day and night; kare—performs; tennho—he; nama-sankirtana—
chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra; ksana-matra—even for a moment; nahi
chade—does not give up; prabhura carana—the lotus feet of Sr Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
‘‘He chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra all day and night. He never gives
up the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, not even for a moment.
TEXT 254
পরম বৈরাগ্য তার, নাহি ভক্ষ্য-সরিধান।
যৈছে তৈছে আহার कञ्चि" রাখয়ে পরাণ ॥ ২৫৪ ॥
parama vairagya tara, nahi bhaksya-paridhana
yaiche taiche ahara kari’ rakhaye parana
SYNONYMS
parama—supreme; vairagya—renunciation; tara—his; nahi—not; bhaksya—
eating; paridhana—dressing; yaiche taiche—somehow or other; ahara kari’—eat-
ing; rakhaye parana—keeps life.
TRANSLATION
‘He is in the supreme order of renounced life. Indeed, he does not care
about eating or dressing. Somehow or other he eats and maintains his life.


--- Page 320 ---
318 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-l7la, Ch. 6
TEXT 255
দশদণ্ড রাত্রি গেলে Sete দেখিয়। ।
সিংহদ্বারে খাড়া হয় আহার লাগিয়। ॥ ২৫৫ ॥
dasa-danda ratri gele ‘puspanjali’ dekhiya
sirnha-dvare khada haya ahara lagiya
SYNONYMS
dasa-danda—ten dandas (240 minutes); ratri—night; gele—having gone;
pusparnjali—the puspanjali performance; dekhiya —after seeing; sirhha-dvare —at
the Sirnha-dvara gate; khada haya—stands; ahara lagiya—to get some alms for
eating.
TRANSLATION
‘After ten dandas [four hours] of the night have passed and Raghunatha
dasa has seen the performance of puspaijali, he stands at the Sirnha-dvara
gate to beg some alms to eat.
TEXT 256
কেহ যদি দেয়, তবে করয়ে ভক্ষণ |
কভু উপবাস, কভু করয়ে চর্বণ 1” ২৫৬ ॥
keha yadi deya, tabe karaye bhaksana
kabhu upavasa, kabhu karaye carvana”
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; yadi—if; deya—offers; tabe—then; karaye bhaksana—he
eats; kabhu—sometimes; upavasa—fasting; kabhu—sometimes; karaye car-
vana—he chews.
TRANSLATION
‘He eats if someone gives him something to eat. Sometimes he fasts, and
sometimes he chews fried grains.”
TEXT 257
এত শুনি” সেই TD গোবধন-স্থানে |
কহিল fatal সব রঘুনাথ-বিবরণে ॥ ২৫৭ ॥


--- Page 321 ---
Text 259] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 319
eta Suni’ sei manusya govardhana-sthane
kahila giya saba raghunatha-vivarane
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; sei manusya—that messenger; govardhana-sthane—to
Covardhana Majumadara; kahila—spoke; giya—going; saba—everything;
raghunatha-vivarane —the description of Raghunatha dasa.
TRANSLATION
After hearing this, the messenger returned to Govardhana Majumadara and
informed him all about Raghunatha dasa.
TEXT 258
শুনি' তার মাত। পিতা দুঃখিত হুইল ৷
शरूल-8।यि3 দ্রেব্য-মন্দুয্য পাঠাইতে मन কৈল ॥ ২৫৮ ॥
Suni’ tanra mata pita duhkhita ha-ila
putra-thani dravya-manusya pathdite mana kaila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; tanra—his; mata pita—father and mother; duhkhita ha-ila—be-
came very unhappy; putra-thafdi—to their son; dravya-manusya—articles and
men; pathaite—to send; mana kaila—decided.
TRANSLATION
Hearing the description of Raghunitha dasa’s behavior in the renounced
order, his father and mother were very unhappy. Therefore they decided to
send him some men with goods for his comfort.
TEXT 259
চারিশত মুদ্রো, দুই ভূত্য, এক ব্রাহ্মণ |
শিবানন্দের ঠাণি পাঠাইল ততক্ষণ ॥ ২৫৯ ॥
cdri-sata mudrd, dui bhrtya, eka brahmana
Sivanandera thani pathaila tata-ksana


--- Page 322 ---
320 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch.6
SYNONYMS
cari-sata mudra—four hundred coins; dui bhrtya—two servants; eka
brahmana—one brahmana; $ivanandera thafi—to Sivananda Sena; pathaila—
sent; tata-ksapa—immediately.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa’s father immediately sent four hundred coins, two ser-
vants and one brahmana to Sivananda Sena.
TEXT 260
শিবানন্দ कटङ्‌,-- “भि जव যাইতে নারিবা।
আমি যাই যবে, আমার সঙ্গে যাইবা ॥ २७० ॥
sivananda kahe, — (01771 saba yaite nariba
ami yai yabe, amara sange yaiba
SYNONYMS
$ivananda kahe—Sivananda Sena said; tumi—you; saba—all; yaite nariba—
cannot go; ami yai—l| go; yabe—when; amara sarnige—with me; yaiba—you will
go.
TRANSLATION
Sivananda Sena informed them, ‘You cannot go to Jagannitha Puri directly.
When I go there, you may accompany me.
TEXT 261
এবে ঘর যাহ, যবে আমি जव एनियू ।
टव তোমা সবাকারে সঙ্গে नथ যামু॥ ২৬১ ॥
ebe ghara yaha, yabe ami saba calimu
tabe toma sabakare sange lana yamu
SYNONYMS
ebe—now; ghara yaha—go home; yabe—when; ami—we; saba—all;
calimu—will go; tabe—then; toma sabakare—all of you; sarige —with; landa—tak-
ing; yamu—I shall go.
TRANSLATION
‘Now go home. When all of us go, | shall take all of you with me.”


--- Page 323 ---
Text 263] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 321
TEXT 262
এই ত' প্রস্তাবে লীকবিকর্ণপুর ।
রঘুনাথ-মহিম।! গ্রন্থে লিখিলা প্রচুর ॥ ২৬২ ॥
ei ta’ prastave $ri kavi-karnapara
raghunatha-mahima granthe likhila pracura
SYNONYMS
ei ta’ prastave—in this connection; sri kavi-karpapara—the poet named Kavi-
13117320133; raghunatha-mahima—the glories of Raghunatha dasa; granthe —in his
book; likhila—wrote; pracura—much.
TRANSLATION
Describing this incident, the great poet Sri Kavi-karnapdira has written ex-
tensively about the glorious activities of Raghunatha dasa in his book.
TEXT 263
আচাযো ষছুনন্দনঃ FYI: শ্রীবাস্থদেবপ্রিয়-
Beryl वनाथ ইত্যধিগুণঃ প্রাণাধিকে৷ মাদৃশাম্‌ ।
লীচৈতন্যরূপাতিরেকসততস্গিগ্ধঃ স্বরূপাহুগো
বৈরাগ্যৈকনিধির্ন कछ বিদিতো নীলাচলে তিষ্ঠতাম্‌ ivan
acaryo yadunandanah sumadhurah $ri-vasudeva-priyas
tac-chisyo raghunatha ity adhigunah pranadhiko madrsam
$ri-caitanya-krpatireka-satata-snigdhah svarapanugo
vairagyaika-nidhir na kasya vidito nilacale tisthatam
SYNONYMS
acaryah yadunandanah—Yadunandana Acarya; su-madhurah—very well
behaved; sri-vasudeva-priyah—very dear to Sri Vasudeva Datta Thakura; tat-
Sisyah —his disciple; raghunathah —Raghunatha dasa; iti—thus; adhigunah—so
qualified; prana-adhikah —more dear than life; ma-drsam—of all the devotees of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu like me; $ri-caitanya-krpa—by the mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; atireka—excess; satata-snigdhah —always pleasing; svarapa-
anugah —following in the footsteps of Svarapa Damodara; vairagya—of renuncia-
tion; eka-nidhih—the ocean; na—not; kasya—by whom; viditah—known;
nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri; tisthatam—of those who were staying.


--- Page 324 ---
322 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
‘“Raghunatha dasa is a disciple of Yadunandana Acarya, who is very gentle
and is extremely dear to Vasudeva Datta, a resident of Kaficanapalli. Because
of Raghunatha dasa’s transcendental qualities, he is always more dear than life
for all of us devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Since he has been favored
by the abundant mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he is always pleasing.
Vividly providing a superior example for the renounced order, this very dear
follower of Svaripa Damodara Gosvami is the ocean of renunciation. Who
among the residents of Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri] does not know him very
well?
PURPORT
This verse is from $rf Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (10.3) of Kavi-karnapira.
TEXT 264
यः সর্বলোকৈকমনোভিকরুচ্যা
সৌভাগ্যভূঃ কাচিদরবষ্টপচ্যা।
যত্রায়মারোপণতুল্যকালং
SCAT ফলবানতুল্যঃ ॥ ২৬৪ ॥
yah sarva-lokaika-manobhirucya
saubhagya-bhah kacid akrsta-pacya
yatradyam aropana-tulya-kalarh
tat-prema-sakhi phalavan atulyah
SYNONYMS
yah—who; sarva-loka—of all the devotees in Purl; eka—foremost; manah —of
the minds; abhirucya—by the affection; saubhagya-bhah—the ground of good
fortune; kacit—indescribable; akrsta-pacya—perfect without tilling or perfect
without practice; yatra—in which; ayam—this; aropana-tulya-kalam—at the
same time as the sowing of the seed; tat-prema-sakhi—a tree of the love of Sif
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; phalavan—fruitful; atulyah—the matchless.
TRANSLATION
‘Because he is very pleasing to all the devotees, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
easily became like the fertile earth of good fortune in which it was suitable for
the seed of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be sown. At the same time that the
seed was sown, it grew into a matchless tree of the love of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and produced fruit.”


--- Page 325 ---
Text 267] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 323
PURPORT
This is the next verse from Sri Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (10.4).
TEXT 265
भिवानन्न যৈেছে সেই মনুষ্য কহিলা।
কর্ণপূর সেইরূপে শ্লোক বর্ণিল ॥ ২৬৫ ॥
Sivananda yaiche sei manusye kahila
13/03/0013 sei-rape $loka varnila
SYNONYMS
Sivananda—Sivananda Sena; yaiche—as; sei—unto the; manusye—
messenger; kahila—said; karpapdra—the great poet Kavi-karnapara; sei ripe —in
that way; sloka varnila—composed verses.
TRANSLATION
In these verses, the great poet Kavi-karnapira gives the same information
that Sivananda Sena conveyed to the messenger from Raghunatha dasa’s
father.
TEXT 266
বর্ষান্তরে শিবানন্দ চলে নীলাচলে |
রখঘুনাথের সেবক, বিপ্র ভার সঙ্গে চলে ॥ ২৬৬ ॥
varsantare sivananda cale nilacale
raghunathera sevaka, vipra tanra sange cale
SYNONYMS
varsa-antare —the next year; Sivananda—Sivananda Sena; cale nilacale—was
going to Jagannatha Purl; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; sevaka—the ser-
vants; vipra—and the brahmana; tanra sange—with him; cale—go.
TRANSLATION
The next year, when Sivananda Sena was going to Jagannatha Puri as usual,
the servants and the brahmana, who was a cook, went with him.
TEXT 267
সেই বিপ্র gj, চারি-শত মুদ্র। লঞ্ |
নালাচলে রঘুনাথে মিলিল। আসিয়া ॥ ২৬৭ ॥


--- Page 326 ---
324 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
sei vipra bhrtya, cari-sata mudra lana
nilacale raghunathe milila asiya
SYNONYMS
sei vipra—that brahmana; bhrtya—the servants; cari-sata mudra—four
hundred coins; lafAa—bringing; nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri; raghunathe —with
Raghunatha dasa; milila—met; dsiyda—coming.
TRANSLATION
The servants and brahmana brought four hundred coins to Jagannatha Puri,
and there they met Raghunatha dasa.
TEXT 268
রঘুনাথ-দাস অঙ্গীকার न। FF |
দ্রেব্য লঞা BREA তাহাই রহিল ॥ ২৬৮ ॥
raghunatha-dasa angikara na karila
dravya lana dui-jana tahani rahila
SYNONYMS
raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha dasa; angikara na karila—did not accept; dravya
1278 —taking the wealth; dui-jana—two persons; tahani rahila—remained there.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa did not accept the money and men sent by his father.
Therefore a servant and the brahmana stayed there with the money.
TEXT 269
তবে ALAA করি' অনেক যতন |
মাসে দুইদিন टेकनल। প্রভুর fama ॥ ২৬৯ ॥
tabe raghunatha kari’ aneka yatana
mdse dui-dina kaila prabhura nimantrana
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; kari’ aneka yatana—with
great attention; mdse —every month; dui-dina—two days; kaili—he made;
prabhura nimantrana—invitation to Lord 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 327 ---
Text 272] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 325
TRANSLATION
At that time, Raghunitha dasa invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his house
with great attention for two days every month.
TEXT 270
দুই নিমন্ত্রণে লাগে কৌড়ি অষ্টপণ |
ত্রাহ্মণ-ভূত্য-ঠা এ করেন এতেক গ্রহণ ॥ ২৭০ ॥
dui nimantrane lage kaudi asta-pana
brahmana-bhrtya-thani karena eteka grahana
SYNONYMS
dui nimantrane—these two invitations; lage—cost; kaudi asta-pana—640
kaudis; brahmana-bhrtya-thani—from the brahmana and the servant; karena—
does; eteka—so much; grahana—accepting.
TRANSLATION
The cost for. these two occasions was 640 kaudis. Therefore he would take
that much from the servant and the brahmana.
TEXT 271
এইমত নিমন্ত্রণ वर्ष দুই কৈল। |
পাছে agate নিমন্ত্রণ ছাড়ি” দিল। ॥ ২৭১ ॥
ei-mata nimantrana varsa dui kaila
pache raghunatha nimantrana chadi’ dila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; nimantrana—invitation; varsa dui —for two years; kaila—
continued; pache —at the end; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; nimantrana—in-
vitation; chadi’ dila—gave up.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa continued to invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in this way
for two years, but at the end of the second year he stopped.
TEXT 272
মাস-দুই যবে রঘুনাথ ना করে নিমন্ত্রণ |
স্বরূপে পুছিলা তবে শচীর নন্দন ॥ ২৭২ ॥


--- Page 328 ---
326 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
madsa-dui yabe raghunatha na kare nimantrana
svarape puchila tabe sacira nandana
SYNONYMS
masa-dui—for two months; yabe —when; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; na
kare nimantrana—does not invite; svardpe puchila—inquired from Svartpa
Damodara; tabe—at that time; $acira nandana—the son of mother $aci, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa neglected to invite Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
for two consecutive months, the Lord, the son of Saci, questioned Svariapa
Damodara.
TEXT 273
“রঘু কেনে আমায় निगलने ছাড়ি” দিল ?”
স্বরূপ কহে,-_“মনে কিছু বিচার করিল ॥ ২৭৩ ॥
‘raghu kene amaya nimantrana chadi’ dila?’
svaripa kahe, — “mane kichu vicara karila
SYNONYMS
raghu—Raghunatha dasa; kene—why; dmaya—to Me; nimantrapa—invita-
tion; chad’ dila—has stopped; svardpa kahe—Svaripa Damodara replied;
mane —within his mind; kichu—something; vicara karila—he has thought.
TRANSLATION
The Lord asked, ‘Why has Raghunatha dasa stopped inviting Me?’ Svaripa
Damodara replied, ‘He must have reconsidered something in his mind.
TEXT 274
বিষয়ীর खव! नयग করি নিমন্ত্রণ |
প্রসন্ন না হয় ইহায় জানি প্রভুর মন ॥ ২৭৪ ॥
visayira dravya 1275 kari nimantrana
prasanna na haya ihdya jani prabhura mana
SYNONYMS
visayira dravya—things supplied by materialistic men; laia—accepting; kari
nimantrana—| invite; prasanna—satisfied; na haya—is not; ihaya—in this con-


--- Page 329 ---
Text 276] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 327
nection; jani—I can understand; prabhura mana—the mind of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
“५ 41 invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by accepting goods from materialistic
people. | know that the Lord’s mind is not satisfied by this.
TEXT 275
মোর চিত্ত দ্রেব্য লইতে न হয় निर्बल ।
এই femme দেখি,-_'প্রতিষ্ঠা'-মাত্র ফল ॥ ২৭৫ ॥
mora citta dravya la-ite na haya nirmala
ei nimantrane dekhi, — ‘pratistha’-matra phala
SYNONYMS
mora citta—my consciousness; dravya la-ite—to accept the goods; na haya—is
not; nirmala—pure; ei nimantrane—by this invitation; dekhi—I see; pratistha—
reputation; matra—only; phala—the result.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘My consciousness is impure because | accept all these goods from
people who are interested only in pounds, shillings and pence. Therefore by
this kind of invitation | only get some material reputation.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks that people who are under the
bodily conception of life are called materialists. If we accept the offerings of such
people, place them before the Lord and invite Vaisnavas to partake of the
prasada, that attempt will gain us only a material reputation, not the actual benefit
of service to a pure Vaisnava. One should therefore try to serve the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead by fully surrendering at His lotus feet. If one engages for the
service of the Lord whatever money one has honestly earned, that is spiritual ser-
vice to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the spiritual master and the
Vaisnavas.
TEXT 276
উপরোধে প্রভু মোর মানেন নিমন্ত্রণ |
না মানিলে ged হইবেক মূর্খ জন ॥ ২৭৬ ॥


--- Page 330 ---
328 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
uparodhe prabhu mora manena nimantrana
na manile duhkhi ha-ibeka markha jana
SYNONYMS
uparodhe —by my request; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mora—
my; manena—accepts; nimantrana—invitation; na manile—if He does not ac-
cept; duhkhi—unhappy; ha-ibeka—will become; mirkha jana—foolish person.
TRANSLATION
‘At my request Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepts the invitations because
He knows that a foolish person like me would be unhappy if He did not accept
them.’
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that people who are advanced in
learning but attached to material enjoyment, who are puffed up by material
possessions, by birth in an elevated aristocratic family or by education, may offer
showbottle devotional service to the Deity and also offer prasada to Vaisnavas.
Because of their ignorance, however, they cannot understand that since their
minds are materially polluted, neither the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Krsna, nor the Vaisnavas accept their offerings. If one accepts money from such
materialistic persons to offer food to the Deity and Vaisnavas, a pure Vaisnava
does not accept it. This causes unhappiness for the materialists because they are
fully absorbed in the bodily conception of life. Therefore they sometimes turn
against the Vaisnavas.
TEXT 277
এত বিচারিয়৷ aad wife’ দিল” |
শুনি” মহাপ্রভু হাসি” বলিতে লাগিল ॥ २११ ॥
eta vicariya nimantrana chadi’ dila”
Suni’ mahaprabhu hasi’ balite lagila
SYNONYMS
eta vicariya—considering this; nimantrapa—invitation; chadi’ dila—he has
stopped; suni’—hearing; mahaprabhu —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hasi’—smiling;
balite lagila—began to say.
TRANSLATION
‘Considering all these points,” Svariipa Damodara concluded, “he has
stopped inviting You.” Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled and
spoke as follows.


--- Page 331 ---
Text 279] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 329
TEXT 278
«বিষয়ীর खन्न খাইলে মলিন হয় बन]
মলিন মন হৈলে নহে কৃষ্ণের স্মরণ ॥ ২৭৮ ॥
“visayira anna khaile malina haya mana
malina mana haile nahe krspera smarana
SYNONYMS
visayira—of materialistic persons; anna—food; khaile—if one eats; malina—
contaminated; haya mana—the mind becomes; malina—contaminated; mana
haile—when the mind becomes; nahe—is not; krsnera—of Lord Krsna;
smarana —remembrance.
TRANSLATION
“When one eats food offered by a materialistic man, one’s mind becomes
contaminated, and when the mind is contaminated, one is unable to think of
Krsna properly.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura suggests that people who are mate-
rialistically inclined and sahajiyas, or so-called Vaisnavas who take everything very
casually, are both visayi, materialists. Eating food offered by them causes con-
tamination, and as a result of such contamination, even a serious devotee be-
comes like a materialistic man. There are six kinds of association —giving charity,
accepting charity, accepting food, offering food, talking confidentially and inquir-
ing confidentially. One should very carefully avoid associating with both the saha-
jiyas, who are sometimes known as Vaisnavas, and the non-Vaisnavas, or
avaispavas. Their association changes the transcendental devotional service of
Lord Krsna into sense gratification, and when sense gratification enters the mind
of a devotee, he is contaminated. The materialistic person who aspires after sense
gratification cannot properly think of Krsna.
TEXT 279
বিষয়ীর खन्न হয় “রাজস?” নিমন্ত্রণ ।
দাতা, ভোক্ত1- তু'হার মলিন হয় মন ॥ ২৭৯ ॥
visayira anna haya ‘rajasa’ nimantrana
data, bhokta —dunhara malina haya mana
SYNONYMS
visayira—offered by materialistic men; anna—food; haya—is; rdjasa—in the
mode of passion; nimantrana—invitation; data—the person who offers; bhokta—


--- Page 332 ---
330 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
the person who accepts such an offering; dunhara—of both of them; malina—
contaminated; haya mana—the mind becomes.
TRANSLATION
‘““When one accepts an invitation from a person contaminated by the ma-
terial mode of passion, the person who offers the food and the person who ac-
cepts it are both mentally contaminated.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says that there are three varieties of invitations —
those in the mode of goodness, those in passion and those in ignorance. An in-
vitation accepted from a pure devotee is in the mode of goodness, an invitation
accepted from a person who is pious but materially attached is in the mode of
passion, and an invitation accepted from a person who is materially very sinful is
in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 280
ইহার সন্কোচে আমি এত দিন निन ।
ভাল হৈল- জানিয়৷ আপনি ছাড়িদিল ॥”২৮০ ॥
inhara sankoce ami eta dina nila
bhala haila—janiya apani chadi dila”
SYNONYMS
inhara sankoce —because of his eagerness; ami —I; eta dina—for so many days;
nila—\ accepted; bhala haila—it is very good; janiya—knowing; apani—auto-
matically; chadi dila—he has given up.
TRANSLATION
“Because of Raghunatha dasa’s eagerness, | accepted his invitation for
many days. It is very good that Raghunatha dasa, knowing this, has now auto-
matically given up this practice.”
TEXT 281
কত দিনে রঘুনাথ সিংহদ্বার ছাড়িলা |
ছত্রে যাই” मागिभ्न খাইতে আরম্ভ করিলা ॥ ২৮১ ॥
kata dine raghunatha sirhha-dvara chadila
chatre yai’ magiya khaite arambha karila


--- Page 333 ---
Text 283] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 331
SYNONYMS
kata dine—after some days; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; sirhha-dvara
chadila—gave up standing at the gate known as Sirnha-dvara; chatre yai’—going
to an alms booth; magiya—begging; khaite—to eat; arambha karila—he began.
TRANSLATION
After some days, Raghunatha dasa gave up standing near the Sirnha-dvara
gate and instead began eating by begging alms from a booth for free distribu-
tion of food.
TEXT 282
গোবিন্দ-পাশ fer প্রভু পুছেন স্বূপেরে |
“রঘু few! লাগি” ঠাড় কেনে নহে সিংহদ্বারে” ?২৮২॥
govinda-pasa suni’ prabhu puchena svarapere
‘raghu bhiksa lagi’ thada kene nahe sirhha-dvare’?
SYNONYMS
govinda-pasa—from Govinda;  suni’—hearing; = prabhu—S$ri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; puchena svardpere—inquired from Svaripa Damodara Gosvami;
raghu —Raghunatha dasa; bhiksa lagi’—for begging; thada kene nahe —why does
he not stand; simha-dvare—at the Sirnha-dvara gate.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this news from Govinda, He inquired
from 9৬ 31003 Damodara, “Why does Raghunatha dasa no longer stand at the
Sirmha-dvara gate to beg alms?”
TEXT 283
স্বরূপ कटः “legacy দুঃখ অনুভবিয়া।
ছত্রে মাগি” খায় মধ্যাহকালে গিয়া ২৮৩ ॥
svarapa kahe, — “sirhha-dvare duhkha anubhaviya
chatre magi’ khaya madhyahna-kale giya”
SYNONYMS
svarapa kahe —Svarapa Damodara replied; sirmha-dvare—at the Sirmha-dvara
gate; duhkha anubhaviya—feeling unhappy; chatre—at the charity booth;
magi’—begging; khaya—he eats; madhyahna-kale—at midday; giya—going.


--- Page 334 ---
332 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara replied, ‘‘Raghunatha dasa felt unhappy standing at the
Sirmha-dvara. Therefore he is now going at midday to beg alms from the
charity booth.”
TEXT 284
প্রভু कटङ्‌, “छान বকৈল, ছাড়িল সিংহদ্বার |
সিংহদ্বারে ভিক্ষা-বৃত্তি_ বেশ্যার আচার ॥ ২৮৪ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “bhala kaila, chadila simha-dvara
simha-dvare bhiksa-vrtti— vesydra acara
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; bhala kaila—he has done well;
chadila simha-dvara—he has given up standing at the Sirhha-dvara; simha-dvare
bhiksa-vrtti—to beg alms standing at the Sirmha-dvara; vesyara acara—the
behavior of a prostitute.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this news, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “He has done very well
by no longer standing at the Simha-dvara gate. Such begging of alms re-
sembles the behavior of a prostitute.
TEXT 285
তথাহি--কিমর্থময়মাগচ্ছতি, অয়ং ता छछि, अट्नन দত্তময়-
মপরঃ। সমেত্যয়ৎ দাস্যতি,মনেনাপি न দত্তমন্যঃ সমেম্কতি,
সদাস্যতি ইত্যাদি॥ ২৮৫ ॥
kim artham ayam agacchati, ayam 03530, anena dattam ayam
aparah. samety 2)/2/7) ddsyati, anendpi na dattam
anyah samesyati, sa dasyati ity adi.
SYNONYMS
kim artham—why; ayam —this person; agacchati—is coming; ayam—this per-
son; dasyati—will give; anena—by this person; dattam—given; ayam—this;
aparah—other; sameti—comes near; ayam—this person; dasyati—will give;
anena—by this person; api—also; na—not; dattam—given; anyah—another;
samesyati—will come near; sah—he; dasyati—will give; iti—thus; adi—and so
on.


--- Page 335 ---
Text 287] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 333
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Here is a person coming near. He will give me something. This person
gave me something last night. Now another person is coming near. He may
give me something. The person who just passed did not give me anything, but
another person will come, and he will give me something.’ Thus a person in
the renounced order gives up his neutrality and depends on the charity of this
person or that. Thinking in this way, he adopts the occupation of a prostitute.
TEXT 286
ছত্রে যাই যথা-লাভ উদর-ভরণ।
खच কথা নাহি, স্থখে কৃষ্ণনন্কীর্তন ॥”২৮৬ ॥
chatre yai yatha-labha udara-bharana
anya katha nahi, sukhe krsna-sankirtana”
SYNONYMS
chatre yai—going to the booth for free food distribution; yatha-labha—with
whatever is obtained; udara-bharana—filling the belly; anya—other; katha—talk;
nahi—there is not; sukhe—happily; krsna-sankirtana—chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra.
TRANSLATION
‘If one goes to the booth where free food is distributed and fills his belly
with whatever he obtains, there is no chance of further unwanted talk, and one
can very peacefully chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.”
TEXT 287
এত वनि, কারে পুনঃ প্রসাদ कत्रिन्‌। ।
“গোবর্ধনের भिना, 'গুঞ্জা-মাল।” তারে দিলা ॥২৮৭॥
eta bali’ tanre punah prasada karila
‘govardhanera sila’, ‘gunja-mala’ tanre dila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; tanre—unto him; punah—again; prasada karila—gave
something in mercy; govardhanera Sili—a stone from Govardhana Hill; guija-
mala—a garland of small conchshells; tanre dila—delivered to him.


--- Page 336 ---
334 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again bestowed His mercy upon
Raghunatha dasa by giving him a piece of stone from Govardhana Hill and a
garland of small conchshells.
TEXT 288
শঙ্করানন্দ-সরস্বতী বৃন্দাবন হৈতে আইলা |
তেঁহ সেই শিলা-গুঞ্জামাল। লঞ। গেলা ॥ ২৮৮ ॥
sankarananda-sarasvati vrndavana haite ila
tenha sei sila-gunja-mala lana gela
SYNONYMS
Sankarananda-sarasvati—one of the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
vrndavana haite —from Vrndavana; aila—came; tenha—he; sei—that; sila-gunja-
mala—stone and the garland of small conchshells; lana —taking; gela—went.
TRANSLATION
Previously, when Sankarananda Sarasvati had returned from Vrndavana, he
had brought the piece of stone from Govardhana Hill and also the garland of
conchshells.
TEXT 289
Arey গাথা গুঞ্জামালা, গোবর্ধনশিলা।
তুই বস্ত মহাপ্রভুর আগে আমি” দিলা! ॥ ২৮৯ ॥
parsve gantha 80/3-/773/3, govardhana-sila
dui vastu mahaprabhura age ani’ dila
SYNONYMS
parsve—on one side; gantha—strung together; gunja-mala—the garland of
small conchshells; govardhana-sila —the stone from Govardhana; dui vastu—two
things; mahaprabhura age—in front of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ani’ dila —pre-
sented.
TRANSLATION
He presented Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu these two items —the garland of
conchshells and the stone from Govardhana Hill.


--- Page 337 ---
Text 292] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 335
TEXT 290
তুই অপুর্ব-বপ্ত পাঞ। প্রভু তুষ্ট হৈলা |
স্মরণের কালে গলে পরে গুঞ্জামাল। ॥ ২৯০ ॥
dui aparva-vastu pana prabhu tusta haila
smaranera kale gaie pare gunja-mala
SYNONYMS
dui—two; apirva-vastu —uncommon things; pana—getting; prabhu —Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tusta haila—became very happy; smaranera kale—at the
time of remembering (when He was chanting Hare Krsna); gale —on the neck;
pare —wears; gunija-mala—the garland of small conchshells.
TRANSLATION
Upon receiving these two uncommon items, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was
extremely happy. While chanting, He would put the garland around His neck.
TEXT 291
গোবর্ধন-শিল। প্রভু হুদয়ে-নেত্রে ধরে।
কভু নাদায় ঘ্রাণ লয়, কভু শিরে করে ॥ ২৯১ ॥
govardhana-sila prabhu hrdaye-netre dhare
kabhu nasaya ghrana laya, kabhu Sire kare
SYNONYMS
govardhana-sili—the stone from Govardhana Hill; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hrdaye—on the heart; netre—on the eyes; dhare—puts; kabhu—
sometimes; nasdya—with the nose; ghrana laya—smells; kabhu—sometimes;
Sire kare—He puts on His head.
TRANSLATION
The Lord would put the stone to His heart or sometimes to His eyes. Some-
times He would smell it with His nose and sometimes place it on His head.
TEXT 292
নেত্রজলে সেই শিলা ভিজে formed |
শিলারে কহেন প্রভু- “কৃষ্ণ-কলেবর” ॥ ২৯২ ॥


--- Page 338 ---
336 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
netra-jale sei sila bhije nirantara
Silare kahena prabhu— ‘krsna-kalevara’
SYNONYMS
netra-jale—by the tears of His eyes; sei—that; Sila—stone; bhije—remains
wet; nirantara—always; silare—the stone; kahena—says; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; krsna-kalevara—the body of Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
The stone from Govardhana was always moist with tears from His eyes. ऽन
Caitanya Mahaprabhu would say, “This stone is directly the body of Lord
Krsna.”
TEXT 293
এইমত তিনবৎসর শিলা-মাল৷ ধরিলা।
তুষ্ট Ze! শিল-মাল৷ রঘুনাথে দিলা ॥ ২৯৩ ॥
ei-mata tina-vatsara $//3-773/3 dharila
tusta hana Sila-mala raghunathe dila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; tina-vatsara—for three years; sila-mala—the stone and
the garland of conchshells; dharilai—He kept; tusta 1275 -- ५५116) He became very
happy; sila-mala—the stone and the garland; raghunathe—to Raghunatha dasa;
dila—He delivered.
TRANSLATION
For three years He kept the stone and garland. Then, greatly satisfied by the
behavior of Raghunitha dasa, the Lord delivered both of them to him.
TEXT 294
প্রভু कटङ- ५4 दे শিলা কৃষ্ণের বিগ্রহ ।
ইহার সেবা কর তুমি করিয়। আগ্রহ ॥ ২৯৪ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “ei sila krsnera vigraha
inhara seva kara tumi kariya agraha
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; ei Sili—this stone; krsnera
vigraha—the form of Lord Krsna; inhara—of this; seva—worship; kara—do;
tumi—you; kariya agraha—with great eagemess.


--- Page 339 ---
Text 295] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 337
TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed Raghunatha dasa, “This stone is the

transcendental form of Lord Krsna. Worship the stone with great eagerness.”
PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes in his Anubhdsya that in the opin-
ion of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the govardhana-sila, the stone from Govardhana
Hill, was directly the form of Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda. The Lord used the
stone for three years, and then in the heart of Raghunatha dasa the Lord
awakened devotional service to the stone. The Lord then gave the stone to
Raghunatha dasa, accepting him as one of His most confidential servants.
However, some envious people conclude that because Raghunatha dasa had not
taken birth in the family of a brahmana, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not give him
the right to worship the Deity directly, but instead gave him a stone from
Covardhana. This kind of thought is naraki, or hellish. As stated in the Padma
Purana, arcye ৮5030 Siladhir gurusu nara-matir vaisnave jati-buddhih...yasya va
naraki sah: “One who considers the arca-marti (the worshipable Deity of Lord
Visnu) to be stone, the spiritual master to be an ordinary human being, or a
Vaishnava to belong to a particular creed is possessed of hellish intelligence.” If one
thinks that the worshipable salagrama-sila is a mere stone, that the spirituai
master is an ordinary human being or that a pure Vaisnava preaching the bhakti
cult all over the world is a member of a particular caste or material division of
society, he is considered a naraki, a candidate for hellish life. When Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu instructed that the govardhana-sila, the stone taken from
Covardhana, is nondifferent from the body of 511 Krsna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, He indirectly advised such foolish persons that one should not be
envious of a Vaisnava who belongs to a different caste or sect. One should accept
a Vaisnava as transcendental. In this way one can be saved; otherwise, one is
surely awaiting a hellish life.

TEXT 295
এই শিলার কর তুমি সাস্তিক शरम ।
অচিরাও পাবে তুমি কৃষ্ণঙ্রেমধন ॥ ২৯৫ ॥
ei silara kara tumi sattvika pajana
acirat pabe tumi krsna-prema-dhana
SYNONYMS

ei Silara—of this stone; kara—do; tumi—you; sattvika pajana—worshiping like
a perfect brahmana, or in the mode of goodness; acirat—very soon; pabe tumi—
you will get; krsna-prema—ecstatic love of Krsna; dhana—wealth.


--- Page 340 ---
338 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, “Worship this stone in the mode of
goodness like a perfect brahmana, for by such worship you will surely attain
ecstatic love of Krsna without delay.
TEXT 296
এক Fl जन আর তুলসী-মঞ্জরী |
সাস্বিক-সেব। এই- শুদ্ধভাবে TF ॥ २>७॥
eka kunja jala ara tulasi-manjari
sattvika-seva ei—— suddha-bhave kari
SYNONYMS
eka—one; kunja—jug; jala—water; ara—and; tulasi-manjari—flowers of the
tulasi tree; sattvika-seva—worship in goodness; ei—this; suddha-bhave —in com-
plete purity; kari—performing.
TRANSLATION
“For such worship, one needs a jug of water and a few flowers from a tulasi
tree. This is worship in complete goodness when performed in complete
purity.
TEXT 297
দুইদিকে ध्रदेनेल মধ্যে কোমল AAT |
এইমত TRAV দিবে শ্রদ্ধা BA ॥ ২৯৭ ॥
dui-dike dui-patra madhye komala manjari
ei-mata asta-manjari dibe sraddha kari’ 7
SYNONYMS
dui-dike—on two sides; dui-patra—two tulasi leaves; madhye—within;
komala manjari—very soft tulasi flower; ei-mata—in this way; asta-manjari—
eight tulasi flowers; dibe—you should offer; sraddha kari’—with faith and love.
TRANSLATION
‘With faith and love, you should offer eight soft tulasi flowers, each with
two tulasi leaves, one on each side of each flower.”


--- Page 341 ---
Text 300] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 339
TEXT 298
izes fetal দিয়৷ এই tres! দিলা ।
আনন্দে রঘুনাথ সেবা করিতে লাগিল। ॥ ২৯৮ ॥
$ri-haste Sila diya ei ajia dila
anande raghunatha seva karite lagila
SYNONYMS
sSri-haste—by His own transcendental hand; sila —the stone from Govardhana
Hill; diya—delivering; ei ajia—this order; dila—He gave; danande—in great hap-
piness; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; seva karite lagila—began to worship.
TRANSLATION
After thus advising him how to worship, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu per-
sonally offered Raghunitha dasa the govardhana-sila with His transcendental
hand. As advised by the Lord, Raghunatha dasa worshiped the $ila in great
transcendental jubilation.
TEXT 299
क-विरुखि g8am, পি'ড়৷ একখানি |
স্বরূপ দিলেন कख] আনিবারে পানি ॥ ২৯৯ ॥
eka-vitasti dui-vastra, 21703 eka-khani
svarapa dilena kunja anibare pani
SYNONYMS
eka-vitasti—about six inches long; dui-vastra—two cloths; pinda eka-khani—
one wooden platform; 52/00 dilena—Svaripa Damodara Gosvami delivered;
kunja—a jug; anibare pani—for bringing water.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara gave Raghunatha dasa two cloths, each about six inches
long, a wooden platform and a jug in which to keep water.
TEXT 300
এইমত ब्रघूनांयं করেন शून |
পূজা-কালে দেখে শিলায় “ত্তজেন্দ্রনন্দন? ॥ ৩০০ ॥


--- Page 342 ---
340 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
ei-mata raghunatha karena pajana
paja-kale dekhe Silaya ‘vrajendra-nandana’
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; karena pa-
jana—worships; paja-kale —while worshiping; dekhe—he sees; silaya—in the
stone from Govardhana; vrajendra-nandana—the son of Nanda Maharaja.
TRANSLATION
Thus Raghunatha dasa began worshiping the stone from Govardhana, and
as he worshiped he saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, the son
of Nanda Maharaja, directly in the stone.
TEXT 301
“প্রভুর স্বহস্ত-দত্ত গোবরধধন-শিলা |
এই চিন্তি' রঘুনাথ প্রেমে ভাসি” গেলা ॥ ৩০১ ॥
‘prabhura svahasta-datta 8০৮৭/০03/73-$//3
ei cinti’ raghunatha preme bhasi’ gela
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sva-hasta—own hand; datta—handed
over by; govardhana-Silai—the stone from Govardhana Hill; ei cinti’—thinking
this; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; preme—in ecstatic love; bhasi’ gela—be-
came overflooded.
TRANSLATION
Thinking of how he had received the govardhana-sila directly from the
hands of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Raghunatha dasa was always overflooded
with ecstatic love.
TEXT 302
জল-তুলসীর সেবায় SF যত স্থখোদয়।
যষোড়শোপচার-পুূজায় তত FL FAN ৩০২ ॥
jala-tulasira sevaya tanra yata sukhodaya
sodasopacara-pajdya tata sukha naya


--- Page 343 ---
Text 3041 Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 341
SYNONYMS
jala-tulasira sevaya—by worshiping with water and tulasi; tanra—his; yata—as
much as; sukha-udaya—rise of transcendental happiness; sodasa-upacara-pa-
jaya—by worshiping with sixteen kinds of paraphernalia; tata—so much; sukha—
happiness; naya—is not.
TRANSLATION
The amount of transcendental bliss that Raghunatha dasa enjoyed simply by
offering water and tulasi is impossible to achieve even if one worships the
Deity with sixteen kinds of paraphernalia.
TEXT 303
এইমত কত দিন করেন পুজন |
তবে স্বরূপ-গোসাঞ্জি তারে কহিল বচন ॥ ৩০৩ ॥
ei-mata kata dina karena pajana
tabe svarapa-gosani tanre kahila vacana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; kata dina—for some days; karena pajana—he
worshiped; tabe—at that time; svardpa-gosani—Svaripa Damodara Gosvami;
tanre—to him; kahila vacana—said some words.
TRANSLATION
After Raghunatha dasa had thus worshiped the govardhana-$ila for some
time, Svariipa Damodara one day spoke to him as follows.
TEXT 304
«“অষ্ট-কৌডির খাজা-সম্দেশ কর সমর্পণ |
শ্রদ্ধা করি” দ্বিলে, সেই खश्रदडन्न সম ॥” ৩০৪ ॥
“asta-kaudira khaja-sandesa kara samarpana
$raddha kari’ dile, sei amrtera sama
SYNONYMS
asta-kaudira—costing eight kaudis; khaja-sandesa—khaja and sandesa sweet-
meats; kara samarpana—offer; sraddha kari’—with love and faith; dile—if you
offer; sei—that; amrtera sama—just like nectar.


--- Page 344 ---
342 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
“Offer the Govardhana stone eight kaudis worth of the first-class sweet-
meats known as khaja and sandesa. If you offer them with faith and love, they
will be just like nectar.”
TEXT 305
তবে অষ্ট-কৌড়ির थोक] করে সমর্পণ |
স্বরূপ-আভ্ঞায় NETH SZ] করে সমাধান ॥ ৩০৫ ॥
tabe asta-kaudira khaja kare samarpana
svarapa-ajiidya govinda taha kare samadhana
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; asta-kaudira—costing eight kaudis; khaja—the sweetmeat named
khaja; kare samarpana—offers; svartipa-ajidya—by the order of Svarapa
Damodara; govinda—the personal servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tahd—
that; kare samadhana—arranges.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa then began offering the costly sweetmeats known as kha-
ja, which Govinda, following the order of Svariipa Damodara, would supply.
TEXT 306
রখুনাথ সেই निलो-गाल) aca পাইলা ।
(भोजां यंत्र অভিপ্রায় এই ভাবনা করিল ॥ ৩০৬ ॥
raghunatha sei sila-mala yabe paila
gosanira abhipraya ei bhavana karila
SYNONYMS
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; sei sila—that stone; mala —garland;
yabe —when; paila—he got; gosanira—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; abhipraya—
intention; ei—this; bhavana karila—he thought.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa received from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the stone
and the garland of conchshells, he could understand the Lord’s intention.
Thus he thought as follows.


--- Page 345 ---
Text 309] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 343
TEXT 307
“শিলা দিয়া (भोजा जमरल) “গোবধনে”।
শওুঞপ্জামালা দিয় fee “রাধিক।-চরণে” ॥” ৩০৭ ॥
“sila diya gosani samarpila ‘govardhane’
gunja-mala diya dila ‘radhika-carane’
SYNONYMS
sila diya—by offering this stone; gosani—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; samar-
pila—offered; govardhane —a place near Govardhana Hill; guija-mala diya—by
offering the garland of small conchshells; dila—offered; radhika-carane—shelter
at the lotus feet of Srimati Radharani.
TRANSLATION
By offering me the govardhana-$ila, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has offered
me a place near Govardhana Hill, and by offering me the garland of
conch shells, He has offered me shelter at the lotus feet of Srimati Radharani.”
TEXT 308
আনন্দে রঘুনাথের বাহু विन्नम्‌ ।
কায়মনে সেবিলেন গৌরাঙ্গ-চরণ ॥ ৩০৮.॥
anande raghunathera bahya vismarana
kaya-mane sevilena gaurarnga-carana
SYNONYMS
anande —in transcendental bliss; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; bahya
vismarapa—forgetting everything external; kaya-mane—by mind and body;
sevilena—served; gauranga-carana—the lotus feet of $f Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa’s transcendental bliss was boundless. Forgetting every-
thing external, he served the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with his
body and mind.
TEXT 309
অনন্ত গুণ রঘুনাথের কে করিবে লেখা ?
রঘুনাথের নিয়ম,- যেন পাষাণের রেখা ॥ ৩০৯ ॥


--- Page 346 ---
344 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
ananta guna raghunathera ke karibe lekha?
raghunathera niyama, ——yena pasanera rekha
SYNONYMS

ananta  gunpa—unlimited transcendental attributes;  raghunathera—of
Raghunatha dasa; ke—who; karibe lekha—can write; raghunathera—of
Raghunatha dasa; niyama—the strict regulative principles; yena—like; pasanera
rekha—lines on a stone.

TRANSLATION

Who could list the unlimited transcendental attributes of Raghunatha dasa?

His strict regulative principles were exactly like lines on a stone.
PURPORT

The words pasanera rekha are very significant. Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
followed the regulative principles so strictly and rigidly that they were compared
to the lines on a stone. As such lines cannot be erased at any time, so the regula-
tive principles observed by Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami could not be changed
under any circumstances.

TEXT 310
সাড়ে সাত প্রহর যায় কীর্তন-স্মরণে।
আ।হার-লিদ্ব। চারি দণ্ড সেহু নহে কোন দিনে ॥৩১০
sade sata prahara yaya kirtana-smarane
ahara-nidra cari danda seha nahe kona dine
SYNONYMS

sade sata prahara—7.5 praharas (one prahara equals three hours); yaya—is
spent; kirtana-smarane —in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and remember-
ing the lotus feet of Krsna; ahara-nidra—eating and sleeping; cari danda—four
dandas (one danda equals twenty-four minutes); seha—that; nahe—is not; kona
dine—some days.

TRANSLATION

Raghunatha dasa spent more than twenty-two hours out of every twenty-
four chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and remembering the lotus feet of
the Lord. He ate and slept for less than an hour and a half, and on some days
that also was impossible.


--- Page 347 ---
Text 312] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 345
TEXT 311
বৈরাগ্যের কথা SIF ख T- |
আজন্ম नो দিল জিহ্বায় রসের স্পর্শন ॥ ৩১১ ॥
vairagyera katha tanra adbhuta-kathana
djanma na dila jihvaya rasera sparsana
SYNONYMS
vairagyera—of the renunciation; katha—talks; tanra—of him; adbhuta-
kathana—wonderful topics; &-janma—from birth; na dila—did not, allow;
jihvaya—to the tongue; rasera sparsana—tasting.
TRANSLATION
Topics concerning his renunciation are wonderful. Throughout his life he
never allowed his tongue sense gratification.
TEXT 312
few কানি কাথা বিনা না পরে वजन |
সাবধানে প্রভুর टेकल। আজ্ঞার পালন ॥ ৩১২ ॥
chinda kani kantha vina na pare vasana
savadhane prabhura kaila ajiara palana
SYNONYMS
chinda kani—a small torn cloth; kantha—a patchwork cotton wrapper; vina —
except; na pare—does not wear; vasana—clothing; savadhane —with great care;
prabhura—of ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaild—performed; &jfara palana—execu-
tion of the order.
TRANSLATION
He never touched anything to wear except a small torn cloth and a patch-
work wrapper. Thus he very rigidly executed the order of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
The principle of very rigidly carrying out the order of the spiritual master must
be observed. The spiritual master gives different orders to different people. For ex-
ample, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Jiva Gosvami, Rapa Gosvami and


--- Page 348 ---
346 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
Sanatana Gosvami to preach, and He ordered Raghunatha dasa Gosvami to
strictly follow the rules and regulations of the renounced order. All six Gosvamis
strictly followed the instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is the principle
for progress in devotional service. After receiving an order from the spiritual
master, one must strictly try to execute the order. That is the way of success.
TEXT 313
প্রাণ-রক্ষা লাগি” (FA করেন Swe] |
তাহা খাঞ। আপনাকে কহে নির্বেদ-বচন ॥ ৩১৩ ॥
prana-raksa lagi’ yeba karena bhaksana
taha khana apanake kahe nirveda-vacana
SYNONYMS
prana-raksa lagi’—to maintain life; ১০০3 —whatever; karena bhaksana—he ate;
taha khana—eating that; dpanake—to himself; kahe —said; nirveda-vacana—
words of reproach.
TRANSLATION
Whatever he ate was only to keep his body and soul together, and when he
ate he would reproach himself thus.
TEXT 314
আত্মানৎ চেদ্বিজানীয়াৎ পরং জ্ঞানধৃতাশয়ঃ |
কিমিচ্ছন্‌ कछ বা হেতোর্দেহং পুষ্ণাতি লম্পটঃ ॥ ৩১৪ ॥
atmanarn ced vijaniyat
param jAana-dhatasayah
kim icchan kasya va hetor
deham pusnati lampatah
SYNONYMS
atmanam—the soul; cet—if; vijaniyat—one understands; param—supreme;
jAana—by knowledge; dhata—thrown off; asayah —material desires; kim—what;
icchan —desiring; kasya—what; va—or; hetoh—for reason; deham—the material
body; pusnati—maintains; lampatah —debauchee.
TRANSLATION
‘If one’s heart has been cleansed by perfect knowledge and one has under-
stood Krsna, the Supreme Brahman, he then gains everything. Why should


--- Page 349 ---
Text 316] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 347
such a person act like a debauchee by trying very carefully to maintain his ma-
terial body?”
PURPORT
This verse (Bhag. 7.15.40) was spoken by Narada to Yudhisthira Maharaja
regarding a householder’s liberation from material bondage. On the spiritual plat-
form, one does not unnecessarily care for the body. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura
has said, deha-smrti nahi yara, sarhsara bandhana kahan tara. One who is
spiritually situated does not think that he is the body. Therefore he can transcen-
dentally execute severe penances in the renounced order of life. The best ex-
ample of such renunciation is Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
TEXT 315
প্রসাদান্স AE যত না বিকায়।
দুই-তিন দিন হৈলে ভাত সড়ি' যায় ॥ ৩১৫ ॥
prasadanna pasarira yata na vikaya
dui-tina dina haile bhata sadi’ yaya
SYNONYMS
prasada-anna—food of jagannatha; pasarira—of the shopkeepers; yata—as
much as; na vikaya—is not sold; dui-tina dina—two and three days; haile —after;
bhata—the rice; sadi’ ydya—becomes decomposed.
TRANSLATION
Lord Jagannitha’s prasiada is sold by shopkeepers, and that which is not
sold decomposes after two or three days.
TEXT 316
সিংহদ্বারে গাভী-আগে সেই ভাত ডারে।
সড়া-গন্ধে তৈলঙ্গী-গাই খাইতে না৷ পারে ॥ ৩১৬ ॥
simha-dvare gabhi-age sei bhata dare
sada-gandhe tailangi-gai khaite na pare
SYNONYMS
simha-dvare —at the gate known as Sirnha-dvara; gabhi-age—in front of the
cows; sei bhata—that food; dare—they throw; sada-gandhe —because of a rot-
ten smell; tailangi-gai—the cows from Tailanga; khaite na pare—cannot eat.


--- Page 350 ---
348 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
All the decomposed food is thrown before the cows from Tailanga at the
Sirmha-dvara gate. Because of its rotten odor, even the cows cannot eat it.
TEXT 317
সেই ভাত Agate রাজ্রে ঘরে SF |
ভাত পাখালিয়| ফেলে ঘরে দিয়া ag পানি ॥৩১৭॥
sei bhata raghunatha ratre ghare ani’
bhata pakhaliya phele ghare diya bahu pani
SYNONYMS
sei bhata—that rejected rice; raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; ratre—at night;
ghare ani’—bringing home; bhata—the rice; pakhaliya—washing; phele—
throws; ghare—at home; diya—putting; bahu pani—much water.
TRANSLATION
At night Raghunatha dasa would collect that decomposed rice, bring it
home and wash it with ample water.
TEXT 318
ভিতরের দৃঢ় যেই মাজি ভাত পায়।
লবণ দিয়া রঘুনাথ সেই खन्न খায় ॥ ৩১৮ ॥
bhitarera 01003 yei maji bhata paya
lavana diya raghunatha sei anna khaya
SYNONYMS
bhitarera—within; drdha—the harder portion; yei—which; maji—the core;
bhata—rice; paya—he gets; lavana diya—with a little salt; raghunatha—
Raghunatha dasa Cosvami; sei anna—that rice; khaya—eats.
TRANSLATION
Then he ate the hard inner portion of the rice with salt.
TEXT 319
একদিন স্বপ্নূপ তাহ। করিতে দেখিল। ।
হাসিয়া তাহার কিছু মাগিয়। খাইলা৷ ॥ ৩১৯ ॥


--- Page 351 ---
Text 321] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 349
eka-dina svarapa taha karite dekhila
hasiya tahara kichu magiya khaila
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; svardpa—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; taha—that;
karite—doing; dekhila—saw; hasiya—smiling; tahara—of that; kichu—some;
magiya khaila—he begged and ate.
TRANSLATION
One day Svariipa Damodara saw the activities of Raghunatha dasa. Thus he
smiled and asked for a small portion of that food and ate it.
TEXT 320
স্বক্পপ কহে,--“এঁছে NYS খাও নিতি-নিতি।
আমা-সবায় নাহি দেহ”১-_কি তোমার প্রকৃতি ?”৩২০॥
svarapa kahe, — “aiche amrta khao niti-niti
ama-sabaya nahi deha’, — ki tomara prakrti?”
SYNONYMS
svardpa kahe—Svarapa Damodara said; aiche—such; amrta—nectar; khao—
you eat; niti-niti—daily; ama-sabaya—to us; nahi deha’—you do not offer; ki—
what; tomara—your; prakrti—nature.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara said, You eat such nectar every day, but you never offer
it to us. Where is your character?’’
TEXT 321
গোষবিদ্দের মুখে প্রভু সে বার্তা শুনিলা।
আর দিন আসি” প্রভু কহিতে नागिन।॥ ৩২১ ॥
govindera mukhe prabhu se varta sunila
ara dina asi’ prabhu kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
govindera mukhe—from the mouth of Govinda; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; se varta—that news; sunila—heard; ara dina—the next day; asi’—
coming; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahite lagila—began to say.


--- Page 352 ---
350 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard news of this from the mouth of
Govinda, He went there the next day and spoke as follows.
TEXT 322
कङ्‌ IB থাও ACT, মোরে না দেহ” কেনে ?”
এত বলি” এক AA করিল ভক্ষণে ॥ ৩২২ ॥
kanha vastu khao sabe, more na deha’ kene?’
eta bali’ eka grasa karila bhaksane
SYNONYMS
kanha—what; vastu—things; khdo—you eat; sabe—all; more—to Me; na
deha’ kene—why do you not give; eta bali’—saying this; eka grasa—one morsel;
karila bhak sane —ate.
TRANSLATION
‘What nice things are you eating? Why don’t you give anything to Me?"
Saying this, He forcibly took a morsel and began to eat.
TEXT 323
আর গ্রাস লৈতে স্বন্মূপ হ।তেতে «fel |
তেব যোগ্য নহে” বলি” বলে FFP निन। ॥ ৩২৩ ॥
ara grasa laite 5৮৪/003 hatete dharila
‘tava yogya nahe’ bali’ bale kadi’ nila
SYNONYMS
ara—another; grasa—morsel; laite—taking; svardpa—Svaripa Damodara;
hatete—the hand; dharila—caught; tava—for You; yogya—fit; nahe—is not;
bali’—saying; bale —by force; kadi’—snatching; nila—he took.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was taking another morsel of food, Svariipa
Damodara caught Him by the hand and said, ““It is not fit for You.” Thus he
forcibly took the food away.


--- Page 353 ---
Text 326] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunitha dasa Gosvami 351
TEXT 324
প্রভু বলে, -“নিতি-নিতি नान প্রসাদ খাই |
এঁছে স্বাদ আর কোন প্রস।দে না পাই ॥ ৩২৪ ॥”
prabhu bale, — “niti-niti nana prasada khai
aiche svada ara kona prasade na pai”
SYNONYMS
prabhu bale —Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; niti-niti—day after day; nana
prasada—varieties of prasada; khai—| eat; aiche svada—such a nice taste; dra—
other; kona—any; prasade —in the remnants of Lord Jagannatha’s food; na pai—I|
do not get.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “Of course, every day | eat varieties of
prasada, but | have never tasted such nice prasiada as that which Raghunitha is
eating.”
TEXT 325
এইমত মহাপ্রভু ন।না লীল| TCA |
রঘুনাথের বৈরাগ্য দেখি” লন্তোষ অন্তরে ॥ ৩২৫ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu nana lila kare
raghunathera vairdgya dekhi’ santosa antare
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nana lila—
many pastimes; kare—performs; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa; vairagya—
renunciation; dekhi’—by seeing; santosa antare —satisfied within.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed many pastimes at Jagannitha
Puri. Seeing the severe penances performed by Raghunitha dasa in the
renounced order, the Lord was greatly satisfied.
TEXT 326
আপন-উদ্ধার এই THAT न |
“গৌরাজজ্তবকল্পবৃক্ষে” করিয়াছেন প্রকাশ ॥ ৩২৬ ॥


--- Page 354 ---
352 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
apana-uddhara ei raghunatha-dasa
‘gauranga-stava-kalpa-vrkse’ kariyachena prakasa

SYNONYMS
apana-uddhara—his personal deliverance; ei  raghunatha-dasa—this
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; gauranga-stava-kalpa-vrkse—in his poem known as
Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa; kariyachena prakasa—has manifested.
TRANSLATION
In his own poem known as the Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa, Raghunatha
dasa has described his personal deliverance.
TEXT 327
মহাসম্পদ্দাবাদপি পতিতমুদ্ধত্য ক্বপয়া
স্বরূপে यः স্বীয়ে কুজনমপি মাং TY মুদিতঃ ৷
উরো গুঞ্জাহারং প্রিয়মপি ए গোবর্ধনশিলাং
দদৌ মে গৌরাঙ্গে৷ হৃদয় উদমলন্মাৎ মদয়তি ॥ ৩২৭ ॥
maha-sampad-davad api patitam uddhrtya krpaya
svarape yah sviye kujanam api marh nyasya muditah
uro-gunja-hararm priyam api ca govardhana-silarm
dadau me gaurango hrdaya udayan mar madayati
SYNONYMS
maha-sampat—of profuse material opulence; davat—from a forest fire; api—
although; patitam—fallen; uddhrtya—delivering; krpayda—by mercy; svaripe—
unto Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; yah—He who (Lord 5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu);
sviye—His personal associate; ku-janam—low person; api—although; mam—
me; nyasya—having delivered; muditah—pleased; urah—of the chest; gunja-
haram—the garland of conchshells; priyam—dear; api—although; ca—and;
govardhana-silam—a stone from Govardhana Hill; dadau—delivered; me—to
me; gaurangah—Lord Gauranga; hrdaye—in my heart; udayan—by manifesting;
mam—me; madayati—maddens.
TRANSLATION
“Although | am a fallen soul, the lowest of men, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
delivered me from the blazing forest fire of great material opulence by His
mercy. He handed me over in great pleasure to Svariipa Damodara, His per-


--- Page 355 ---
Text 329] Lord Caitanya Meets Raghunatha dasa Gosvami 353
sonal associate. The Lord also gave me the garland of small conchshells that
He wore on His chest and a stone from Govardhana Hill, although they were
very dear to Him. That same Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu awakens within
my heart and makes me mad after Him.”
PURPORT
This verse is from Sri Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa (11), written by Raghunatha
dasa Gosvami.
TEXT 328
এই ত'” কহিল্দু রঘুনাথের मिनन |
ইহ যেই শুনে পায় LESTER ॥ ৩২৮ ॥
ei ta’ 13110) raghunathera milana
iha yei Sune paya caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
ei—this; ta’—certainly; kahilun—!| have described; raghunathera milana—the
meeting of Raghunatha dasa; iha—this; yei—anyone who; sune—hears; paya—
gets; caitanya-carana—the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Thus | have described the meeting of Raghunatha dasa with $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Anyone who hears about this incident attains the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 329
ল্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ ।
চেতন্যচরিতামৃত কহে कुर्क ज्‌ ॥ ৩২৯ ॥
ও/1-170/03-13800/73003-02305 yara asa,
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade —at the lotus feet; yara—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritimrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.


--- Page 356 ---
354 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of $ri Ripa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-lila,
Sixth Chapter, describing Lord Caitanya’s meeting with Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.


--- Page 357 ---
References

The statements of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta are all confirmed by standard Vedic
authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this book on the
pages listed. Numerals in bold type refer the reader to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
translations. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya (Bhaktivinoda Thakura), 1-2, 117, 126, 158, 203-204, 215,

291,310
Anubhasya (Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati), 232, 337
Bhagavad-gita, 85,86,173,176,194, 291
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 108, 164-165
Bhakti-ratnakara (Narahari Cakravarti), 108, 110
Bhakti-sandarbha (Jiva Gosvami), 35-36, 304
Bhavartha-dipika (Sridhara Svami), 183
Brahma-samhita, 292-293
Brhad-bhagavatamrta (Sanatana Gosvami), 36, 106
Garuda Purana, 96
Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa (Raghunatha dasa Gosvami), 352-353
Hari-bhakti-vilasa (Sanatana Gosvami), 107, 108, 303-304
Kalyana-kalpataru (Bhaktivinoda Thakura), 82
Karma Purana, 181
Namastaka (Rapa Gosvami), 36
Padma Purana, 92, 175, 337
Siksastaka (Caitanya Mahaprabhu), 37
355


--- Page 358 ---
356 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

Sri Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (Kavi-Karnapara),

$rimad-Bhagavatam, 27, 33, 34, 35, 37, 84, 94, 122, 138, 176, 179, 182, 186, 190,
263, 292, 346-347.


--- Page 359 ---
~¬.
Glossary
A

Acidrya—one who teaches by example.

Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva—Lord Caitanya’s “simultaneously one and different”
doctrine, which establishes the inconceivable simultaneous existence of the
Absolute Truth as both personal and impersonal.

Ahangrahopasaka-mayavadi—a person engaged in fruitive activities or a person in-
terested only in sense gratification.

Ajiia—a description of Krsna indicating that nothing is unknown to Him.

Anamra—one who offers obeisances to no one.

Antaraniga-seva—service performed in one’s spiritual body.

Anurasa—imitation transcendental mellows.

Aparasa—opposing transcendental mellows.

Arca-murti—worshipable Deity of Lord Visnu.

Asramas —the four spiritual orders of life —brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and
sannyasa.

Astanga-yoga—the mystic yoga system to control the senses.

A-tattva-jia—one who has no knowledge of the Absolute Truth or who worships his
own body as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

B
Baddha-jiia—a conditioned soul who distinguishes between the Lord's body and
soul.
Bhagavan—one who possesses all opulences in full.
Balisa—innocent, as a young boy.
Bandhu-ham—the killer of maya.
Brahmaloka —topmost planet in this universe.
Brahman —the all-pervading impersonal aspect of Krsna.
Brahma-bhita—stage of realization at which one becomes joyful knowing he is not
the body.
Brahmanas —the intelligent class of men.
C

Candala—dog-eaters.

Catuhsama —mixture of sandalwood pulp, camphor, aguru, and musk.
D

Daksina—an offering made by the disciple to the spiritual master at the time of initia-
tion.

357


--- Page 360 ---
358 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Deva-dasis—maharis, professional dancing and singing girls trained to dramatize
Vaisnava ideology.
Dola-yatra ceremony —swing festival for the Deities.
Durga-mandapa—the place in a house where mother Durga is worshiped.
G
Cosvami—one who controls his sense gratification and serves Caitanya.
Govardhana-sila—a stone from Govardhana hill in Vindavana which is worshipable
as Krsna Himself.
GCramya-katha —talk concerning family life.
GCramya-kavi—one who writes only about the relationship between man and
woman.
Crham andhakapam—family affection.
Crhastha—a householder who follows the rules of saintly life.
Grhavrata—one who is attached to living in a confortable home although it is ac-
tually miserable.
Crhavratas—those determined to continue following the materialistic way of life.
Guru —spiritual master.
Impersonal monism—philosophy that everything is one, and that the Absolute Truth
is not a person.
Indra—the King of heaven.
J
Jagad-guru—the spiritual master of the entire world.
Jrana—knowledge.
JAani—a transcendentalist interested in speculative philosophy.
K
Kanistha-adhikari—lowest class of devotee.
Karma —fruitive work, for which one must accept good or bad reactions.
Karma-bandanah —bondage to the reactions of fruitive activities.
Karmi—a fruitive worker.
Khaja—a kind of light sweetmeat.
Krsna-katha—topics of Krsna.


--- Page 361 ---
Glossary 359
M
Maha-mantra—the great chanting of deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Martya—a description of Krsna indicating that because of His affection for His devo-
tees, He appears like an ordinary human being.
Maya —illusion; Krsna's external energy.
N
Naraki—candidate for hellish life.
P
Pandita—one greatly learned in the Vedanta-satras.
Pandita-mani—word indicating that Krsna is honored even by learned scholars.
Paramaharisa—topmost swanlike devotee.
Paramatma—Supersoul; Krsna as He is present within every heart and every atom.
Prabhu-datta desa—place of residence given by the spiritual master or Lord Krsna.
Prahara—three hours.
Prakrta-sahajiya—materialistic so-called devotees who take everything very lightly.
Prasada—the mercy of the Lord; or foodstuffs offered to Him.
Puranas —the eighteen very old books which are histories of this and other planets.
Purusa-adhama—the Personality of Godhead, under whom all other persons remain.
Puspa-aijali—the ceremony of offering flowers to the Lord.
R
Rasa—mellow.
Rasa-lila—Krsna's pastime of dancing with the gopis.
Ratha-yatra festival —Lord Jagannatha’s car festival.
5
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the form of eternality, bliss and knowledge —characteristic
of Krsna.
Sahajiyas — See: Prakrta-sahajiyas.
Sajatiyasaya-snigdha—pleasing to the same class of people.
Salagrama-sila—a special stone worshipable as Lord Visnu.
Sandesa—a delicate sweetmeat made with curd and sugar.


--- Page 362 ---
360 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Sannyasi—one in the renounced order of life.
Sarasvati—goddess of learning.
Sariri—the owner of the body.
Sastra—revealed scripture.
Sirnha-dvara—the main gate of the Jagannatha temple.
Sadra—the working or servant class of men.
Svapaca—lowborn person.
Svarat—independent quality of the Supreme Lord.
T
Tulasi—a great devotee in the form of a plant. This plant is very dear to the Lord, and
its leaves are always offered to His lotus feet.
চা
Upala-bhoga—morning refreshments offered to the Deity.
Uparasa—submellows.
Uttama-$loka—name of Krsna which means “one who is praised by sublime
prayers.”
Vv
Vacala—a person who can speak according to Vedic authority.
Vairagi—a person in the renounced order of life.
Vaisnava-aparadha—an offense to the devotee of Krsna.
Varnas—the social orders—brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and sadra.
Visayis —blind materialistic enjoyers.
Vindavana—the site of Krsna's transcendental village pastimes, exhibited when He
was present on earth about 5,000 years ago.
Y
Yadva-tadva kavi—one who writes poetry without proper knowledge.
Yoga—process of linking with the Supreme Lord.
Yogi—one who practices faithfully a system of yoga.


--- Page 363 ---
Bengali Pronunciation Guide
BENGALI DIACRITICAL EQUIVALENTS AND PRONUNCIATION
Vowels
wa: खां टे; निः Bu উদ श
bl 1 < ঞ ai ও ০ ॐ au
71 m (anusvdra) ® 17) ( candra-bindu) 9 h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutterals: +* ka 9 kha 5 ga q gha 8 na
Palatals: Deca ® cha GF ja A jha «<P 72
Cerebrals: ট ta উঠ tha छ da ® dha || na
Dentals: छ ta থ tha क्ति da # dha न्‌ na
Labials: भं pa E: 3 pha वु ba ® bha | ma
Semivowels: ya Ara Ha q va
Sibilants: uf sa सुऽ जञ Rha
Vowel Symbols
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
=
Ta fi चः bat! = <r ( ॐ; Ge Tai ८1० ¢ Yau
For example: Qlka कि (30 F ku कक ka कृत्व
क्रु \ কে = kai क्‌ ko == kau
361


--- Page 364 ---
362 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
The letter ৫ is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virama (৯১ indicates that there is no final vowel. Ed k
The letters above should be pronounced as follows:
a —like the ০ in hot; sometimes like the © in go; d —like the d in dawn.

final ৫ is usually silent. dh —like the dh in good-house.
a —like the ৫ in far. n —like the 7 in gnaw.
i, 1 —like the ee in meet. t—as in ralk but with the tongue against the
u, 0 —like the ८८ in rule. the teeth.
চ —like the ri in rim. th—as in hoz-Zouse but with the tongue against
‰ —like the ree in reed. the teeth.
e —like the ai in pain; rarely like e in bet. d—as in dawn but with the tongue against the
ai —like the of in boil. teeth.
© —like the ০ in go. dh—as in good-house but with the tongue
au —like the ow in owl. against the teeth.
र) —(anusvara) like the ng in song. n—as in nor but with the tongue against the
h —(visarga) a final 7 sound like in Ah. teeth.
7 —(candra-bindu) a nasal n sound p —like the p in pine.

like in the French word bon. ph —like the @ in philosopher.

RR মে চা b —like the b in bird.
kh —like the kh in Eckhart. bh —like the bk in rub-rard.
द —like theg in got. m —like the 72 in mother.
gh ke the gh কে big frouse. y —like the; in jaw. §
n.—likethe n in bank. y —like the y lin year. §
© —like the ch in chalk. 7 —like the 7 in run.
ch —like the chk in much-haste. 1 —like the 7 in Jaw.
j —like thej in joy. v —like the 8 in bird or like the w in dwarf.
jh —like the geh in college-hall. इ, s —like the sh in shop.
7 —like the 71 in bunch. s like thes in sun.
চ —like the ८ in ralk. h—like the 4 in home.
th —like the 107 in hor-house.

This is a general guide to Bengali pronunciation. The Bengali transliterations in this
book accurately show the original Bengali spelling of the text. One should note, however,
that in Bengali, as in English, spelling is not always a true indication of how a word is pro-
nounced. Tape recordings of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
chanting the original Bengali verses are available from the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, 3959 Landmark St., Culver City, California 90230.


--- Page 365 ---
নে ০
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete alphabetical listing of the first and third line of each four-line
verse and both lines of each two-line verse in $/1 Caitanya-caritamrta. In the first column the trans-
literation is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the chapter-verse references
and page number for each verse are to be found.
A Amara ei vakye tabe kariha niscaya 6.235 309
“amara pita, jyetha haya tomara dui bhai 625 215
‘admdra putrere tumi diba bahudliya’ 6.180 281
‘dcdra’, ‘pracara’, —ndmera karaha ‘dui’ 4103 51 amdra upadesta tumi—pramanika arya 4.160 76
acarya-gjidte mane —caitanya ‘prana- 6.162 274  ama-sabaadhame ye kariyiche angikara 4182 88
icaryera ghara ihara parva-disite 6.167 276
acaryo yadunandanah sumadhurah $/1- 6.262 321  ama-saba-sangekrsna-katha, bhagavata Sune 4.33 16
acirat pabe tabe krspera carana 4.65 ও] ama-sabdya nahi deha’, —ki tomara 6.320 349
ami ३/2 rapa—tdra jyestha-sahodara 4.32 16
acirat pabe tumi krsna-prema-dhana 6.295 337 ami—bhagi, amare kichu dibare yuydya 6.32 218
acire nirvighne pabe caitanya-carana” 6.143 266  amiha rayera sthine suni krsna-katha 5.52 141
३0०५ tumi $/० yadi toméra mana mane 5100 166
“adhama, p&mara mui hina jividhama! 6.128 259 “ami sei vipre sidhi’ pathdimu toma sthine = 6.168 276
adharma anydya yata, —amdra kula-dharma 4.28 14 ami sukha pai ei pulina-bhojana-range” 6.75 237
ami ta’ bhiksuka vipra, tumi—mora posta 561 145
advaita-acarya tanre bahu krpa kaila 6.245 313 ami ta’ —sannyasi, drhara ‘sama-drsti’ 4179 86
advaita-acaryera tenha ‘Sisya antaranga’ 6162 274 “ami ta’ sannydsi, dpandre virakta kari’ mani 5.35 133
advaita, nityananda, srivasa, vakresvara 4.108 54
aiche 5৮303 ra kona prasade na pai” 6324 351 ami tata nahi jani, inho yata jane 6.234 308
aisvarya-made matta indra, 5.137 190 ami tomara palya, tumi dmara palaka 6.27 216
ami yaiche pitara, taiche tomdra balaka 6.27 216
aidvarya-svabhiava 80073 kare prakatana 5.83 155 ami yai yabe, 57753 sange yaiba 6.260 320
3janma na dila jihvaya rasera sparsana 6.311 345  amrta ha-ite paka (३73 adhika madhura 6.116 254
ji chadaimu toma’ kari’ eka 50037 630 218
jiha nahila more atmiyata-jAana! 4164 78  amrta nindaye aiche vividha vyadjana 6110 251
&ji lag panachi, dandimu tomare 6.50 226 anande krsna-madhurye vihare sadaya 5.47 139
anande raghunatha seva karite lagila 6298 339
dja deha’—ratha dekhi’ yana vrndavana 4155 = 74 = anandita hana raghunatha prasida pail 6.212 298
त 013, — hari bali’ karaha bhojana’ 6.86 241  anandita raghunatha prabhura ‘Sesa’ pana 6.99 247
ja dils, — “$ighra tumi yaha vindavane 4234 113
37 hana sraddhaya paila prabhura 5.161 200  anantagunaraghunathera ke karibe lekha? = 6.309 344
374 kara, ky karo tomara kinkara” 530 131  aneka ‘prasida’ dil pathe khaibare 6149 268
aneka yatna kainu, tite kabhu siddha naya 6.129 259
(2/0 kara, ye lagi’ sgamana haila’ 5.55 142 37973 ki katha, tumi—prabhura upadesta! 5.61 145
akarsiya (3013 mithe prabhu dharili carana = 6.48 = 225  angane siya tenho yabe dandaila 6.163 274
alingiya kaila tara kandarpa-sama anga 4190 91  anganete dare rahi karena pranipata 6.190 286
ama-donha-sange tenha rahe nirantara 4.32 16
ama-dunhira gaurave kichuphiri‘gelamana 436 == 17  angeras lage, duhkha paya santana 4.134 64
‘antaranga’ bhrtya bali’ rakhibe carane 6.142 265
amakeha bujhaite tumi dhara sakti 4168 79  ‘antaranga-sevd’kare svaropera sane 6241 312
amani manada hana krspa-nama sada 1386 6.237 310 anya katha nahi, suk he krspa-sankirtana” 6.286 333
amanind manadena 6.239 311 dpand pavitra (६211610) tomdra darasane” 5.31 131
ama pariksite ihan 0113 pathana 4195 94  apandra ‘asaubhagya’ Fi haila jana 4162 77
mara ei deha prabhura karye ni lagila 4.98 48 = apanara gana-saha khaila bantiya 699 247
363


--- Page 366 ---
364 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
3pandra guna nahi dpane kahaya” 578 153 atmanariced vijaniyat 6.314 346
apandre haya mora amanya-samana 4185 89  atma-smrti nahi, kahan janiba dina-sesa 5.65 147
apanara katha para-munde dena ani’ 5.77 152 avatara-kafya prabhura—nama-pracare 4.100 50
apanara krtya lagi’ kaila nivedane 6.228 306  ‘avidya-nasaka—bandhu-han’- 5.145 193
apana-uddhara ei raghunatha-disa 6.326 352 dya, dya, aji tora karimu dangana” 6.47 225
ayogya mui nivedana karite kari bhaya 6.132 261
apane care deha, na kare pracara 4.102 51
pane na jane, putalikiba nace gaya! 4.85 43
pane prasna kari’ pache karena siddhanta == 5.64 = 146 B
pane sri-mukhe prabhu varne 5.160 200
30371 pradyumna-misra-saha haya “57০03 5.85 157 (0242 0303 loka vasila mandali-racane 6.60 230
bada bada mrt-kundika anaila panca sate 6.56 229
pani $ri-mukhe more kara upadesa” 6.232 308  bahiranga-jiidne tomare na kari stavana 4170 80
aparadha-bhaye (61703 milite na ila 4148 71 bahire devi-mandape kariyachena sayane = 6159 272
aparadha haya mora, nahika nistara 4139 67 bahire durga-mandape yana karena sayana 6.155 271
‘aprakrta’ deha bhaktera ‘cid-ananda-maya’ = 4.191 92
aprakrta-deha tomara ‘prakrta’kabhunaya = 4173 = 81  bahire na prakasaya bhakta-duhkha-bhaye = 6.4 == 205
bahudliya sei dasa jana aila ghara 6.183 283
aprakrta-dehe {30903 carana bhajaya 4193 93 “bahu-ksana 313 more keha na kahila 529 131
ara ardheka ghanavrta-dugdhete chanila 6.58 229  bahu-sammana kari’ misre vidya dila 5.67 148
ara dina asi’ prabhu kahite lagila 6.321 349 balabhadra-bhatta-sthane saba lik hi’ nila 4.210 101
ara dina haite ‘puspa-anjali’ dekhiya 6.214 299
ara dina jagadananda sanatanere milila 4.135 65 balatkare dhari, prabhu kaila alingana 4.149 71
balatkare prabhu tarre alingana kaila 4.21 11
&a dina mahaprabhu milibare aila 4145 = 70  ‘balisa’—tathapi $isu-praya’ 5140 191
ara dina misra aila prabhu-vidyamane 5.33 132 ‘bandhe sabare’—tate avidya 5.145 193
ara dina raghunatha svarapa-carane 6.228 306  banga-desieka vipra prabhura carite 5.91 161
ara eka kariyacha parama 5121 178
ara eka katha raya kahila amare 5.72 150 ‘bapa-jyethdre ana’, nahe paiba yatana 6.21 213
bara bara nisedhena, tabu kare alingana 4.134 64
ara eka ‘svabhava’ gaurera una, bhakta-gapa 5.83 = 155 bara dine cali gela $ri-purusottama 6188 285
ara gramantara haite samagri anila 6.55 228 bara laksa deya rajaya, sadhe bisa laksa 6.19 212
ara grasa laite svarapa hatete dharila 6.323 350  bhadrabhadra-vastu-jaana nahika ‘prakrte’ = 4.174 = 83
ara tina kundlikaya avasesa chila 695 245
ara yata grantha kaila, (30316 karegapana ~~ 4.222 107  bhagavan-acarya keha,—'$una eka-bara 5109 170
bhagavan-acarya-sane tara paricaya 5.92 162
ara yata loka saba cotara-talane 6.66 233 ‘bhagavata-sandarbha’-nama kailagrantha- = 4.229 111
ardha-pathe raghunatha kahe gurura carane = 6.168 = 276  bhagavata-siddhantera tahan paiya para 4.229 111
ardheka chanila dadhi, cini, kala diya 657 229  bhagye (00802 krsna-katha sunite hayamana 5.8 = 120
“are markha, dpandra kaili sarva-nasa! 5117 174
sana diya mahaprabhure tahan vasaila 6.84 240  bhai-bhaiye tomara kalaha kara sarvadai 6.25 215
bhajanera madhye srestha nava-vidha bhakti 4.70 34
aécarya, —taruni-sparse nirvikara mana 5.41 136  bhaksana apeksa nahi, samasta divasa 6186 284
asite lagila loka asankhya-ganana 6.54 228  bhaksya-dravya loka saba grima haitedne = 6.52 = 227
“asta-kaudira khaja-sandesa kara 6.304 341 bhakta-anurodhe tahan bhiksa ye karila 4.116 57
ataeva prabhu kichu age nahi sune 5.98 165
ataeva tare ami kari parihasa 6.196 289 bhakta-bhakti-krsnaprema-tattvera nidhara = 4.79 40
bhakta-bhakti-krsna-tattva jani yaha haite 4.219 106
ataeva tare ami kariya bhartsana 4.169 80 bhakta-citte bhakta-grhe sada avasthana 6.124 257
atattva-jiia ‘tattva’ varpe, tara ei 5120 177 bhakta-gana dkantha bhariya karila bhojana ~~ 6.119 255
atikala dekhi’ misra kichu na kahila 5.32 132 bhakta-gane dila 8103, malya-candana 6121 256


--- Page 367 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 365
bhakta-guna prakasite prabhu bhila jane 5.82 155 caitanya-caritra ei —iksu-danda-sama 4238 115
bhakta saba 1156475 nityananda-raya 6.102 248 caitanya-gosani— sariri maha-dhira 5114 173
bhaktirh parari bhagavatipratilabhyakamarn 5.48 == 139  caitanya-krpate seha nahi bhdya mane 6.135 262
‘bhakti’, ‘prema’, “tattva’ kahe raye kari’ 5.85 157  caitanyera bhakta-ganera nitya 5.132 187
bhakti-siddhanta, sastra-acarya-nirnaya 4.97 48  caitanyera bhakta-vatsalya kahite na pari 6.206 295
bhakti-siddhanta-sindhu nahi paya para 5.103 167  cakravartira duhe haya bhratr-rapa dasa 6176 289
‘bhakti’ ৮173 krsne kabhu nahe ‘premodaya’ = 4.58 27 cakravarti-sambandhe hama ‘aja’ kari’ 6.195 288
bhala chila, raghunathe drdha tara bhakti” 4.27 13 calite na para, kemane karila sahana?” 4.124 60
bhala haila—janiya pani chadi dila” 6.280 330 candanaaniya prabhura sarvarge lepila 6.96 245
bhala hala, tomara 1087 haila agamane 4.48 22 candana-pankete dmara (73/02 haya ‘sama’ 4.179 = 86
“bhala kaila, vairagira dharma acarila 6.222 302  canpa-kala cini, ghrta, karpara tate dila 6.58 229
bhala, manda—kichu ami puchite na jani 5.62 145 cari kundi droya cida rakhila dahine 6.83 240
bhala na khaibe ara bhala na paribe 6.236 309 cari kundira avasesa raghunathe dila 6.94 244
bharata-bhamite janmi’ ei deha vyartha haila 4.98 48 = cari-laksa grantha tenho vistara karila 4231 112
bhata pakhaliya phele ghare diya bahu pani 6.317 348 cari masa rahi’ bhakta-gana gaude geld 6.248 315
bhava-prakatana-lasya raya ye sikhaya 5.24 128  cari-sata mudra, dui bhrtya, eka brahmapa = 6.259 319
bhiksa-avasesa-patra govinda tare dila 4121 59 carvana karite haya rasa-asvadana 4.238 115
bhiksa kari’ mahaprabhu kariyichena visrime 4.120 = 58  chadibara mana haile 0303 phati’ yaya’ 4.42 20
bhitarera drdha yei maji bhita paya 6.318 348  chatrabhoga para hana chadiya sarana 6.185 283
bhitare vairagya, bahire kare sarva-karma 6.15 210  chatre magi’ khaya madhyahna-kale giya” == 6.283 331
bhojana kari’ dui bhai kaild acamana 6.120 255 chatre yai’ magiya khaite arambha karila 6.281 330
bhojana kari’ nity dnanda dcamana kaila 6.94 244 chatre yai yatha-labha udara-bharana 6.286 333
bhojanera lagi’ pandita nivedana kaila 6106 249  chindakani kanthavina na pare vasana 6.312 345
bhojane vasila prabhu nija-gana laa 6.107 250  chutila tomara yata vighnadi-bandhane 6141 265
bhojane vasite raghunathe kahe sarva-jana 6.118 255 ০0103, dadhi, dugdha, sandesa, ara cini, kala 6.53 227
‘cida-dadhi-mahotsava’-name khyati yara 6.100 247
bibhatsa sparsite na kara ghrpa-lese 4.154 73 cida, dadhi, sandesa, kala anila vecite 6.91 243
bida khaoyaila, kaila ८213018 vandana 6.121 256
bisa-jana tina-thafi parivesanakare 670 234
bisa, pafica-dasa, bara, dasa, pafica haya 6.151 269 D
brahmadi-devera e saba na haya gocara 5.75 151
dadhi, cida bhaksana karaha mora gape” 6.51 226
brahmaloka-adi-sukha tanre nahi bhaya’ 6.136 263  dadhi-cida dugdha-cida, duite bhijaila 6.67 233
brahmana-bhrtya-thani karena eteka grahana 6.270 325  dadira bandhane tarire rakhiba ke-mate? 6.40 222
buddhi-nasa haila, kevala nahika 5.138 190  dadi vahi’ asru pade, kandite lagila 6.29 217
bujhite na pari tomara krpdra (3/3/783” 4190 91  dainyarpave nimagno ‘hari 5.1 117
‘dana-keli-kaumudi’ adi laksa-grantha kaila = 4.226 109
C danda-cari ratri yabe ache avasesa 6160 272
dandana ranga dekhe vaisnava sakale 6.81 239
cabutara-upare yataprabhura nija-gane 6.60 230 dandavat hana sei padila kata-dire 6.46 224
caitanya-candrera ‘batula’ ke rakhite pare?” 6.41 222 dandavat kari’ kichu kare nivedane 5.4 119
(17111 6.41 222
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa 4239 115  darana na pana misra sevake puchila 5.12 122
caitanya-caritamyta kahe krspadasa 5164 202  daréanarahu dare, ‘prakrtira’ nama yadi Suni 5.35 = 133
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa 6.329 353 dasa-darxda ratri gele ‘puspanjali’ dekhiya 6.255 318
caitanya-caritamrta nitya kara pana 5.89 160 dasa jana yaha, tare dnaha dhariya” 6.179 281


--- Page 368 ---
366 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
data, bhoktd—dunhara malina haya 6.279 329 dui jana 1278 prabhu vasila pindate 4.150 72
deha-dehi-bheda isvare kaile 5121 178 dui-jana vasi’ krspa-katha-gosthi kaila 4.136 65
deha-patad avan snehat 4.1 2 dui nimantrane lage (८/८ asta-pana 6.270 325
deha-tyagadi tamo-dharma—pataka-karana 4.60 28 dui paye phoska haila, tabu geld prabhu- 4120 58
deha-tyagadi yata, saba—tamo-dharma 4.57 26 001 ta’isvare tora nahika visvasa 5117 174
deha-tyage krsna na pai, paiye bhajane 4.56 26. dui-thani aparadhe paibi durgati! 5120 177
dekhi camatkara haila sanatanera mana 4.106 53 dui tina dina acarya agraha karila 5110 171
dekhi’” haridasa mane haild camatkara 4.202 98 dui-tina dina haile bhata sadi’ yaya 6.315 347
dekhi’ nityananda-prabhu anandita haila 6.85 241 dui vastu mahaprabhura age ani’ dila 6.289 334
dekhi’ prabhura prabhava raghunatha 645 224  dunhe alingiya prabhu gela nijalaya 4205 99
dekhi’ raghavera mane ananda badila 6.108 250 darahaite danda-paranama kare sanatana 4.147 70
dekhi’ raghunathera camatkara haila mana 6.244 313 dara haite pita tarre anila dhariya 6.36 220
dekhiya ta’ mata-pitara anandita mana 615 210  durdaive sevaka yadiyayaanya sthane 4.47 22
dhananjaya, jagadisa, paramesvara-dasa 6.62 231 durvasara thai tenho pafachena vara 6.116 254
dharmadharma vicara kiba na para karite? 4.77 39 ‘dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jiiana, saba 4.176 84
dvitiya vatsare paldite mana kaila 6.35 220
dharmah svanusthitah purisari 5.10 121
dhuti pari’ prabhu yadi pindate vasila 6.59 230
dhyane tabe prabhu mahaprabhure anila 6.77 238 E
diksa-kale bhakta kare atma-samarpana 4.192 92
diksa-mantra deha’ krspa-bhajana karimu’ 4.37 18 ebe ghara yaha, yabe ami saba calimu 6.261 320
eho bhagya tomara aiche karile 5154 197
dina-dayalu-guna tomira tahite pracara” 4182 88  eiaparadhe mora habe sarva-nase 5154 73
‘dina’ dekhi’ krpa kari’ kabhiba apani’ 5.62 145 ei ‘bahya pratarana’ nahi mani ami 4.181 87
dine-dine prabhu-sange ananda badila 4.114 56 ‘ei bhala, ei manda’, —ei saba ‘bhrama’ 4.176 84
dine prabhu nana-sange haya anya mana 6.7 207
dinere adhika daya kare bhagavan 4.68 32 ei chale अनव magi’ karila niscaya 6.169 277
ei cinti’ raghunitha preme bhasi’ gela 6.301 340
divya prasida paya nitya jagannatha-mandire 4.53 25 ei dui jandra saubhagya kahana na yaya 6.11 209
dola-yatra-adi prabhura sangete dekhila 4114 56 ei ghare raha ihan haridasa-sane 4.48 22
dola-yitra dekhi’ prabhu tare vidiya dila ~~ 4.207 100 ei lagi’ toma tyaga karite na yuyaya 4180 ৪7
dravya laf dui-jana tahani rahila 6.268 324
duhkha pana svardpa kahe sakrodha vacana 5.116 174 ei lila-bhangi tomara keha nahi jane” 4.204 98
ei maryada prabhu kariyache niyame 5.98 165
duhkha-$anti haya ara sad-gati paiye 4.10 6 ei-mata asta-manjari dibe sraddha kari’ “ 6.297 338
dui aparva-vastu pana prabhu tusta haila 6.290 335 ei-mata bara-bara kahi dui-jana 4.36 17
dui-bhai-age prasada aniya dharila 6.109 251 ei-mata cintite daive eka-dine 6.159 272
dui bhaiera avasista patra dila tanre 6.122 256
dui bhai mili’ vendavane vasakaila 4.217 104 ei-mata dui-jana nana-katha-range 4.104 52
ei-mata gauracandra bhakta-gana-sarge 6.3 205
dui bhaire raghava ani’ parivese 6114 253  ei-mata kata dina karena pajana 6.303 341
dui bhai tabe cida khaite lagila 6.84 240 ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana वतिवे 5.90 161
dui bhai (373 khan santosa apara 6.117 254 ei-mata mahaprabhu nana lila kare 6.325 351
“dui deva-kanya haya parama-sundari 5.13 123
ei-mata nimantrapa varsa dui kaila 6.271 325
dui-dike dui-patra madhye komala manjari = 6.297 338 ei-mata nitaibule sakala mandale 6.81 239
dui dui mrt-kundika sabara age dila 6.65 232 ei-mata raghunatha karena pajana 6.300 340
dui holnaya cida bhijaya ganga-tire giya 6.68 234  ei-mataraghunathera vatsareka gela 635 220
dui-janara viccheda-dasa na yaya varnane 4.208 100  ei-matarahe tenha svardpa-carane 6.213 298


--- Page 369 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 367
ei-matasanatanarahe prabhu-sthane 4.51 24 eta bali” mahaprabhu uthiya calila 4.50 23
ei-mata sanitana rahe prabhu-sthine 4.206 99 eta bali’ prabhu madhyahna karite uthild 6.209 296
ei-mata sarva-kala 3006 vyavahara 6.217 300 eta bali’ prabhu tarre dlingana kaila 4133 64
ei-mata $isupala karila nindana 5146 194 eta bali’ punah tanre kaila alingana 4201 97
ei-matatina-vatsara sild-mala dharild 6.293 336 eta bali’ tare punah prasada karila 6.287 333
ei-mata vihare gaura 1373 bhakta-gana 612 209 eta cinti’ parva-mukhe karila gamana 6171 278
ei-mate bare bare palaya, dhari’ ane 6.37 220 etadrsa tumi inhdre kariydcha angikara 4.91 45
ei-mate sandtana vrndavane aila 4213 103 eta kahi’ raghunathe lana calila 6.166 275
ei-mate sevaka-prabhu 0706 ghara gela 4135 65 eta kahi’ raghunathe punah alingila 6.205 295
ei nimantrane dekhi, — ‘pratistha’-matra 6.275 327 eta kahi’ raghunathera hasta dharila 6.204 294
“ei raghundthe dmi sanpinu tomare 6.202 293 eta kabhi’ ratri-kale karena cintana 4.38 18
ei-saba guna tara prakasa karite 5.81 154 eta kabhi tare 1275 nibhrte vasila 5.59 144
ei $ilara kara tumi sattvika pajana 6.295 337  etasaba karma ami ye-dehe karimu 4.83 42
ei sloka kariydcha pana santosa 5.134 188 eta saubhagya ihn na haya kahara” 4.91 45
ei ta’ kahilun nitydnandera vihara 6.100 247 eta suni’ mahaprabhu sarosa-antare 4.157 75
ei ta’ kahiluh pradyumna-misra- 5159 199 eta suni’ pradyumna-misra calila turite 5.54 142
ei ta’ kahilur punah’ sandtana-sargame 5.237 114 eta Suni’ raghunatha vandila carana 6.240 311
ei ta’ kahilun raghunathera milana 6.238 353 eta suni’ sandtanera haila camatkara 4.72 37
ei ta’ niscaya kari’ nilicale ila 413 8 eta suni’ sei manusya govardhana-sthane 6.257 319
ei ta’ prastave 517 kavi-karpapara 6.262 321 eta Suni’ sei mlecchera mana ardra haila 6.29 217
ei ta’ sank sepe ami kailun upadesa 6.238 310 eta vicariyd nimantrana chadi’ dila” 6.277 328
eitina-guru, draraghunatha dasa 4.236 114 etha raghunatha-dasa prabhate uthiya 6.184 283
eka-dina asi’ prabhu durthdre milila 4.54 25 etha tanra sevaka rak saka tarre na dekhiya 6.176 280
eka-dina pradyumna-misra prabhura carane 5.4 119 e-vatsara tumi han raha dma-sane 4.200 97
eka-dina svardpa taha karite dekhila 6.319 349
eka kunja jala ara tulasi-manjari 6.296 338 G
eka-lild-pravahe vahe sata sata 5162 201
ekanta asraya kara caitanya-carane 5131 185  gadhanuragera viyoga nd yaya sahana 4.62 29
eka rdmanandera haya ei adhikara 5.42 136 ganga-tire vrksa-male pindara upare 6.44 224
eka-sata mudra dra 5০04 toli-dvaya 6.153 270 ganga-tire 'yamuna-pulina’ jana kaild 6.90 243
gatre kandlu haila, rasa pade khajuyaite 4.5 4
eka-thafi tapta-dugdhe cid bhijana 6.57 229  gaude ye artha chila, taha anaila 4.215 103
eka-vatsararapa-gosaiira gauge vilamba 4.214 103 gaura-bhakta-ganera krpa ke kahite 5.158 199
eka vipra prabhu lagi’ ८103 bhijaya tate 656 229
eka vipra prabhura nataka kariyiche uttama = 5.99 166  gaura-jangama-ripe (६211 avatara 5151 196
eka-vitasti dui-vastra, pinda eka-khani 6.299 339 gaura-lila, bhakti-bhakta-rasa-tattva 5.163 201
‘gauranga-stava-kalpa-vrkse’ kariyichena 6.326 352
eke deva-dasi, dra sundarl taruni 5.38 134 gaura-pada-padma yarra haya purdna-dhana 5.106 169
eke dugdha-cida, dre dadhi-cida kaila 6.65 232 gaura-sukha-dana-hetu taiche rdma-raya 6.9 208
ekeka janare dui dui holna dila 6.67 233
eke nica-jati adhama, ara kandu-rasa gaya 4.20 10 ghare giya misra kaila snana, bhojana 5.68 148
ghrna-buddhi kari yadi, nija-dharma yaya” 4.180 87
e saba bandhite narileka yarra mana 6.39 221  ghrna kari’ alirgana na karitima yabe 4196 95
€ farire sadhimu ami bahu prayojana 4.78 40. ghrna nahi janme, dra maha-sukha paya 4186 89
eta bali’ dunhe nija-karye uthi’ gela 4145 = 70 = gita, $loka, grantha, kavitva—yei kari’ 376 5.95 163
eta bali’ eka grasa karila bhaksane 6322 350  gitera 80003 artha abhinaya karaila 5.22 127


--- Page 370 ---
368 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta
gopa-jati ami bahu gopa-gana sange 6.75 237  hena-kale 2115 saba gaudera bhakta-gana 6.242 312
‘gopala-campa’ nama grantha sara kaila 4230 111 hena-kale aila tatha raghava pandita 671 235
gosani kahena, — “ei-mata murdari-gupta 4.45 21 hena-kale gauda-desera saba bhakta-gana 6.157 272
gosanira abhipraya ei bhavana karila 6.306 342 hena-kale mulukera eka mleccha adhikari 6.17 21
govardhana-$ild prabhu hrdaye-netre dhare = 6.291 = 335  hena-kale prabhu ‘upala-bhoga’ dekhiya 4.16 9
govardhanera putra tenho, nama 6.250 315  hena-kale raghunatha milila asiya 6.189 285
‘govardhanera 5112५ ‘guija-mala’ tare dila 6.287 333 hena ‘rasa’ pana more karaila tumi 5.76 152
govinda-dvardya dunhe prasada pathaila 4.50 23 hena ५3/53 ghrna chadi’ kaila angikara 4.29 14
govinda-pasa suni’ prabhu puchena 6.282 331  hena ‘visaya’ haite krsna uddharila toma’ 6.200 292
govinda prasada tanre dila parca dine 6.213 298  hiranya-dasa muluka nila ‘makrari’ kariya 6.18 212
govindera mukhe prabhu se varta sunila 6.321 349  hiranya-dasa palaila, raghunathere bandhila = 6.10 213
govindere kahe raghunathe daya kari’ 6.206 295  “hita lagi’ dinu muni, haila viparita 4.151 72
grame-gramera patha chadi’ yaya vane vane 6.173 = 279  hita-nimitta dilana ami, haila viparite 4140 67
gramya-katha na sunibe, gramya-varta na 6.236 309  “hladinya samvidaslistah 5127 183
gramya-kavira kavitva unite haya ‘dubkha’ = 5.107 169  hrd-roga-kama tara tat-kale haya ksaya 5.46 737
grase-grase kari’ vipra saba bhakte dila 695 245
‘grhastha’ hana nahe raya sad-vargera vase = 5.80 = 153
guhya argera haya taha darsana-sparsana 539 135
guAja-mala diya dila ‘radhika-carane’ 6.307 343 iha-loka, para-loka— dui haya nasa 4.131 63
“ihar ailan prabhure dekhi’ duhkha khandaite 4.137 66
ihan haite gaude geld, haila dina dasa 4.26 13
H “ihara visaya-sukha—indra-sukha-sama == 6.134 262
10306 samsaya yara, sei yaya nasa 6125 258
harhsa-madhye baka yaiche kichu 5129 184
*hari-bhakti-vilasa’-grantha kaila vaisnava- 4.221 107 iha va-i maha-bhagya ami paba kotha?" 5.58 144
haridasa-dvara nama-mahatmya-prakasa 5.86 158 ihayei Sune paya caitanya-carana 6328 353
haridasa kahe, — “mithya abhimana kari 4.89 45 = indra bale, — “muni krsnera 5139 190
haridasa kahe, —’prabhu asibena ekhana’ 4.15 8 “indra-sama aisvarya, 5071 apsara-sama 6.39 221
haridasa kahe, -- “01380, ye kahila tumi 4.181 87 inhara sankoce ami eta dina nila 6.280 330
haridasa kake, — ‘sanatana kare namaskara’ 4.18 10 inhara sevakara tumi kariya agraha 6.294 336
haridasa kahe, -- “0077115৮373 daya-maya 4.188 90 inha-sabara carana vandon, yarnra muni 4236 114
haridasa kaila prabhura carana vandana 4.146 70 ista-gosthi, krsna-katha kahe kata-ksane 4.52 24
haridase kahe prabhu, -- “50473, haridasa 4.87 44 ISvarera nahi kabhu deha-dehi- 5122 179
haridase kaila prabhu prema-alingana 4.146 70
haridase milite ila bhakta-gana lana 4.16 9 ॥
haridasera kaila (21703 carana vandana 4.14 8
‘hari’ dhvani kari’ uthi’ kaila dcamana 6.119 255  jagadinanda-pandite ami yukti puchila 4156 74
‘hari’ ‘hari’ bali’ vaispava karaye bhojana 6.87 242  “jagadananda priya samara nahe tomahaite = 4.166 78
jagadanande kruddha 0275 kare tiraskare 4.157 75
“hari” ‘hari’-dhvani uthi’ bharila bhuvana 6.86 241  jagadianande piyao dtmiyata-sudha-rasa 4163 77
hasi’ mahaprabhu ara eka grasa lana 6.80 239
17351 mahaprabhu raghunathera kahila 6.233 308  “jagadinandera saubhagya 3/1 se janila 4161 76
hasite lagila dekhi’ han vismita 671 235  jagannatha dekhi’ asi’ karaha bhojana 6.208 296
hasiya hasiya prabhu karaye carvana 6.97 246  jagannatha dekhi’ punahgovinda-pasa aila 6.211 297
hasiya tahara kichu magiya khaila 6.319 349  jagannathahana krspera ‘atma- 5.148 195


--- Page 371 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 369
jagannatha ratha-yatraya ha-ibena bahira 4.11 7 kabhu upavasa, kabhu carvana kariya 4.4 4
jagannathe gele tanra darsana na paimu 4.7 5  kabhu upavasa, kabhu karaye carvana” 6.256 318
jagannatheha na dekhiye,—e duhkha 4139 67  kadite na paron matha, pana bada vyatha 4.40 19
jagannithera age durihe prakata dekhaya 5.24 128  kahana na yaya krspa-krpara mahima” 6.200 292
jagannathera cakra dekhi’ karena prandme = 4.51 24. kahan jaga—kalikara batuya navina! 4167 79
Jjagannathera darsane khandaya 5.152 196 kahan 'ksudra’ jiva ‘duhkhi’ 5.126 182
jagannathera sevaka phere kirya-anurodhe = 4.9 6 1803) ‘parpanandaisvarya’ krsna 5126 182
jagannathera sevaka yata— ‘visayira gana’ 6.215 299  kahan tumi— pramanika, $astre pravina! 4167 79
jagate nahi jagadananda-sama bhagyavan 4162 77  kahibara katha nahe, yaha ascarya-kathana == 5.37 = 134
jahau yuvaiva malavad 6137 263  kahila — “caitanya & 05861 kariyachena 6.123 257
Jjahyam asan vrata-krsar chata-janmabhih 4.63 29  kabhila giya saba raghunatha-vivarane 6.257 319
jala-tulasira sevaya tara yata sukhodaya 6.302 340  kahite lagild kichu manera harise 557 143
jale nami’ dadhi-cida karaye bhaksana 6.69 234  kahite sunite durhe cale sei pathe 6167 276
jani’ haridasa tarre kaila alingana 414 8  kaiche nice, keba nacaya, seha nahijane” 4.86 43
janma-data pita nare ‘prarabdha’ khandlsite == 6.40 = 222 == “kalikara batuya jaga aiche garvi haila 4158 75
Jjanme-janme sevor raghunathera carana 4.41 19 kali punah tina bhai ha-iba eka-thani 6.26 216
janme janme tomara paya vikailana ami’ 5.76 152  kandu gela, anga haila suvarnera sama 4201 97
jarasandha kahe, — “krsna 5143 192  kandu kari’ pariksa karile sanatane 4.204 98
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vinda = 4.2 ও kandu-kleda mahaprabhura sri-ange lagila == 4.21 11
jayadvaita-candra, jaya gaura-bhakta-vinda == 6.2 204  kanha vastu khao sabe, more na deha’ 6.322 350
jayadvaitakrpa-sindhu jaya bhakta-gana 5.3 118
karpapara sei-rape $loka varnila 6.265 323
jaya jaya krpa-maya nityananda dhanya 5.2 118 karya-siddhi nahe, krsna karena upeksa 6.224 304
jaya jaya $aci-suta $ri-krspa-caitanya 5.2 118  kasisvara, govindadi yata bhakta-gana 4110 54
jaya jaya $ri-caitanya jaya nityananda 4.2 3 kastha-pasana-sparée haya yaiche bhava 519 126
jaya jaya $ri-caitanya, jaya nityananda 6.2 204 kasthera putali yena kuhake nacaya 4.85 43
jaya svarapa, gadadhara, rapa, sanatana 5.3 118
kata-dina kara ihara bhala santarpana’ 6.207 296
jhankara ha-ite toma na pana gela ghare 6.247 314 kata dine raghunitha sirhha-dvara chadila 6.281 330
jhankara paryanta gela sei dasa jane 6181 282 kata kata bhavavesa prakasa karila 6.85 241
jhankarate paila giya vaisnavera gane 6.181 282 kata thani bujhanacha vyavahara-bhakti 4168 79
jharikhanda-vanapathe aila ekela caliya 4.4 4 = kata upahara ane, hena nahi jani 6.115 253
jharikhandera jalera dose, upavasa haite 4.5 4
kautuka dekhite ila yata yata jana 6.93 244
jihvara lalase yei iti-uti dhaya 6.227 305  kautuki nityananda sahaje dayamaya 6.49 226
Jiva-gosani gauda haite mathura calila 4.232 112 kavi kahe, — “jaganndtha—sundara-sarira 5114 173
jAdna-vijidna-trptatma 4178 85  kaya-mane sevilena gauranga-carana 6308 343
jyaistha-mase prabhu tarre parik sa karila 4115 56  kaya-mano-vakye cinte caitanya-carane 6173 273
jyaistha-mase prabhu yamesvara-tota ila 4116 57
ke bujhite pare gambhira caitanyera khela? = 5.87 = 159
keha chatre magi’ khaya, yeba kichu paya 6.219 301
K keha ratre bhiksa lagi’ simha-dvare 6.219 301
keha upare, keha tale, keha ganga-tire 6.70 234
kabhu carvana, kabhu randhana, kabhu 6.187 284
kabhu gupta, kabhu vyakta, svatantra 6.124 257  keha yadi deya, tabe karaye bhaksana 6.256 318
kabhu kalaha, kabhu priti— inhara niscaya 6.26 216 kemane chadimu raghunathere carana 4.38 18
kabhu nasaya ghrana laya, kabhu Sire kare 6.291 335 ki karile hita haya nari nirdharite” 4.140 67


--- Page 372 ---
370 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
ki kariya beddya, —iha keha nahi jane 6.82 240  krspe gli dite kare nama uccarana 5155 198
‘ki katha sunite caha?’ misrere puchila 5.59 144 krsnerasvarapa-lilavarniba 5133 187
“ki lagi’ chadila ghara, na jani uddesa 6.229 306 ‘krtdrtha ha-ildna’ bali’ misra nacite lagila 5.67 148
kim artham ayam agacchati, aya dasyati, 6.285 332 ksana-matra nahi 00306 prabhura carana 6.253 317
107 bhadrari kim abhadrari va 4175 83 ksudha nahi badhe, caitanya-carana-praptye 6.186 284
kim icchan kasya va hetor 6.314 346  kubuddhi chadiya kara $ravana-kirtana 4.65 31
“ki mora kartavya, mudi na jani uddesa 6.232 308 kugrama diya diya karila prayana 6.185 283
ki mora kartavya, prabhu kara upadesa” 6.229 306  kulina, pandita, dhanira bada abhimana 4.68 32
kintu ihan daru-brahma 5.148 195  kusala-varta mahdprabhu puchena sanitane = 4.24 12
kintu $astra-drstye eka kari anumana 5.44 137 kutumba-brahmana-devalaye banti’ dila 4.215 103
kutumbera “sthiti’-artha vibhaga kari’ dila 4.214 103
kirtaniya sevaka sange dra bahu-jana 6.43 223
kona bhagye pafiachory tomara durlabha 5.5 119
kona kona vipra upare sthana na pana 6.68 234 L
kon jane ksudra jiva kanha tanra mana? 5.26 129
kon kon karya tumi kara kon dvare 4.90 45 = lalakera lalye nahe dosa-parijidna 4184 88
“lalysmedhya’ lalakera candana-sama bhiya 4.187 90
koti-deha ksaneke tabe chadite pariye 4.55 25  lavana diya raghunitha sei anna khaya 6.318 348
krpa-gunaira yah kugrhandha-kapad 6.1 204 loke puchi’ haridasa-sthane uttarila 4.13 8
krpa kari’ kail cigda-dugdha bhojana 6140 264  lupta-tirtha-uddhara, dra vairagya-siksana 4.80 40
krpa kari’ more ja deha’ dui-jana 4.41 19
krsna-bhajana kara tumi dma-dunhiara sange = 4.35 17 M
krsna-bhajane nahi jati-kuladi-vicara 4.67 32
krsna-bhakta, krsnaprema-seva-pravartana ~~ 4.80 40  ‘madana-gopala-govindera seva-prakasana 4.222 107
krsna-bhakti-rase duphe parama pradhana == 4.49 23 madhyahna-bhiksa-kale sanatane 6013112 4117 57
krsna-bhakti-rasera yahan paiye vistara 4223 108  ‘madhyahna’karite uthi’karila gamana 4.92 46
krsna-caitanya-guna-katha haridasa-sane 4.206 99 madhyahne samudra-valu hafdche agni-sama 4.118 57
madhye madhye prabhu (3)/€ dena darasana 6.113 252
krsna eka-tattva-rapa— dui rapa 5149 195 ‘
krsna-katha dsvadaya rahi’ eka-sarge 4104 52 magiya khanakare jivana raksana 6.223 303
krsna-kathamrtarpave more dubaila 5.70 149 mahanubhavera ei sahaja ‘svabhava’ haya 5.78 153
krsna-katha-rasamrta-sindhu uthalila 5.63 146 mahaprabhu 313 dekhi’ nitai uthila 6.78 238
krsna-katha Sunibare mora iccha haya 56 120 mahaprabhu 3156 yei nrtya dekhibare 6105 249
rmahaprabhu ani’ kardya pulina-bhojana 6.89 242
‘krsna-katha-vakta kari’ na janiha more 5.72 150
krsna-kathdya ruci tomdra— bada 5.9 121 mahdprabhu asi’ sei dsane vasila 6.108 250
krsna-lila, gaura-lila se kare varnana 5.106 169 mahdaprabhu dekhite tarnra utkanthitamana 4.15 8
krsna-lila-rasa-prema yaha haite jani 4.220 106  mahaprabhu kaila tanre krpa-alingana 6240 311
krsna-lila-rasa tahan paiye sakala 4.225 109 mahdprabhu krpa kari’ tarre $ikhaila 6.13 209
krsna-lild varnite na jane sei chara! 5.105 168 mahaprabhu milibare sei {0201 gela 4.148 71
krsparh martyam upasritya 5137 189 mahaprabhura age, dra dekhi’ jagannatha 4.12 ডল
krsna-pada-padma-gandha yei jana paya 6.136 263  mahaprabhura dsana dahine patiya 6.107 250
krsna-praptyera upaya kona nahi ‘bhakti’ 4.56 26 = mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera durgama 5.21 127
‘krsna-prema’, 'krsna’ dite dhare maha-sakti 4.70 34 mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera vairagya 6.220 301
krsna-rasa dsvadana kara, laha krspa-nama” 4.49 23 mahaprabhura bhakta-gane sabre miliya 4.211 101
krsna-rasa-sloka-gite karena santvana 6.8 207 mahdaprabhura darsana paya kona 6.82 240
krsna-thani aparadha-danda paitdma tabe 4.196 95 mahdprabhura gane tumi—maha-bhagyavan! 4.99 49


--- Page 373 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 371
mahaprabhura lagi’ bhoga prthak badaya 6.112 252 mora iccha haya—pana caitanya-carana 6.128 259
mahéprabhura mukhe dena kari’ parihasa == 6.79 = 238 mora kandu-rasa lage prabhura sarire 4.138 66
“mahaprabhura sthane eka ‘vairagi’ dekhila = 6.249 315 ‘mora mathe pada dhari’ karaha prasada 6.133 261
mahaprabhure sunaite sabara haila mana 594 162 mora mukhe kahaya kath, kare paracira 5.74 151
mahaprabhu tarra nrtya karena darasana 6.103 248 mora muk he katha kahena dpane 5.73 150
mahaprabhu yahakhaite 3156 bara bara 6111 251 mora nama la-iha, —‘teho pathaila more 5.53 142
maha-sampad-davad api patitamuddhrtya == 6.327 352 more ‘caitanya’ deha’ 8০531 hafia sadaya 6132 261
mahesa, gauridasa, hoda-krspadasa 6.62 231 more jiydile tomara kiba habe labha?” 4.75 38
‘mahotsava’-nama $uni’ brahmana-sajjana 6.54 228 “more na chuniha, prabhu, 08600) tomara 4.20 10
more piyao gaurava-stuti-nimba-nisinda-rasa 4.163 = 77
mahotsava suni’pasari nana-grama haite 691 243
mala-candana-tambala sesa ye achila 6.98 246 more tumi chunile mora aparadha haya 4.152 73
malina mana haile nahe krsnera smarana 6.278 329  mudra deha’ vicari’ yara yata yogya haya 6.151 269
mana phiri’ yaya, tabe na pare marite 6.22 214  mukhe netre abhinaya kare prakatana 5.23 128
mandali-bandhe vasila, tara na hayaganane = 6.66 = 233  mukhe tarje garje, marite sabhaya antara 6.23 214
mukunda-datta kahe, — ei aila 6.190 286
mandira-nikate Suni tarra vasa-sthiti 4.8 5 murari, kamalakara, sadasiva, purandara 6.61 231
mandira-nikate yaite mora nahi sakti 48 5
‘manusya’ nahe raya, krsna-bhakti-rasa-maya 5.71 149
manya kari’ prabhu sabare upare vasaila 6.64 232 N
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacane ‘hitartha- 4.69 33
nd manile duhkhi ha-ibeka markha jana 6.276 328
mirite dnaye yadi dek he raghunathe 6.22 214  nand-bhargite guna prakasi’ nija-labha mane 5.82 = 155
markata-vairagya chadi’ haila ‘visayi-priya’ = 6.14 = 210  nana-bhavodgara tare karaya Siksana 5.40 135
martyo yada tyakta-samasta-karma 4194 93 nana-prakdra pitha payasa, divyasalyanna == 6.110 251
maryada-langhana ami na paron sahite 4.166 78 nana-sastra ani’ lupta-tirtha uddharila 4.218 105
maryada-langhane lokakare upahasa 4.131 63
na sadhayati marh yogo 4.59 27
maryada-palana haya sadhura bhasana 4130 63 na svadhydyas tapas ১৪8০ 4.59 27
maryadarakhile, tusta kaile mora mana 4132 64 73030 pararh parama yad bhavatah 5.124 181
mase dui-dinakaila prabhura nimantrana 6.269 324 nataka kari’ lana aila prabhuke sunaite 5.91 161
masa-dui yabe raghunatha na kare 6.272 326  ‘natakalarkara’~jAana nahika yahara 5.104 168
matara ajfdya ami vasi nilacale 4.82 42
netra-jale sei $ila bhije nirantara 6292 336
matara yaiche balakera ‘amedhya’ lige gaya 4.186 89 nibhrte dila prabhura bhandarira hate 6.146 267
‘mathura haite prabhu ila’, —varta yabe paila 6.16 = 211 = nibhrte durhare nija-ghare pathaila 5.25 129
mathura haite sanatana nilacala aila 43 3 nica adhama, pamara mupi pimara-svabhava 4.75 38
mathurara vaisnava-sabera kusala puchila 4.25 13 ‘nica-jati, deha mora —atyanta asara 4.6 4
misra kahe, —‘mahaprabhu pathila more 556 = 143
nica-jati nahe krspa-bhajane ayogya 4.66 31
misra kahe, — “prabhu, more krtarthakarili = 5.70 149 nica-sadra-dvara karena dharmera prakasa 5.84 156
misrakahe, —“toma dekhite hailaagamane = 5.31 == 131 = nija-dehe ye kdrya na parena karite 4.95 a7
misrera agamana riye sevaka kahila 527 130  nija-ghare yabena yabe tabe nivediba” 6147 268
misrere namaskara kare sammana kariya 5.28 130 nija-nataka-gitera sikhaya nartane 5.14 123
misrere pathaila tahan sravana karite 5.81 154
nija-priya-sthina mora—mathura-vindavana 4.81 41
mleccha bale, — “2/1 haite tumi—mora 6.30 218 “nikate na ३152, cord, bhaga’ dare dare 6.50 226
mleccha-sahita vasa kaila—saba $intahaila = 6.34 219  nilacala haite rapa gaude yabe gela 43 3
mora abhagya, tumi—svatantrabhagavan!” 4164 78  nilacale mahaprabhu haila avirbhute 5115 173
moracittadravyala-ite na haya nirmala 6.275 327 nilacale nana lila kare nana-rarige 6.3 205


--- Page 374 ---
372 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
nilacale paricaya ache tomara sitha?* 6250 315  pandita kahe,— “tomara vasa-yogya 4141 67
nilacale raghunathe milila asiya 6.267 324 12930010913 age dilakariya vinaya 6.153 270
nilacale viharaye bhakti pracariya 5.90 161 ‘panditera manya-patra—haya 5142 192
niraparadhe nama laile pdya prema-dhana = 4.71 35  panditere sanatana duhkhanivedila 4136 ০5
nirveda ha-ila pathe, karena vicara 46 4 panihati-grame paila prabhura darasana 6.43 223
nirvighne caitanya pana—kara asirvada” 6.133 261 paramartha yaya, dra haya rasera vasa 6.225 304
nirvikdra deha-mana—kastha-pasana-sama! = 5.41 136  parama vairagya tara, nahi bhaksya- 6.254 317
nirvinpa sanatana (26115 kahite 4.150 72 paramavikhyata tenho, keba nahi jane 6251 316
ni-sakdi nana-mata prasada anila 6.72 235 pareradravyainho cahena karite vinasa 4.87 44
niscinta hana sighra ila vrndavana 4216 104 parera dravya tumi kene caha vinasite? 477 39
niscinta 0373 yaha dpana-bhavana 6.143 266 parera sthapya dravya keha na khaya, vildaya 4.88 44
nisedhiha inhare, —yena na kare anyaya” 4.88 44 = parisada-deha ei, na haya durgandha 4197 95
nisedhite prabhu alingana karena more 4.138 66 parsve gantha gunja-mala, govardhana-sila 6.289 334
niskificana bhakta (00803 haya sirhha-dvara 6.217 300 pasarirathanianna denakrpa ta’ kariya 6.216 300
nityananda-gosanira pasa calila ara dine 6.42 223 pasyami visva-sfjam ekam avisvam 5.124 181
nityananda-krpa pana krtartha manila 6.154 270  patha chadi’ upapathe yayena dhana 6172 278
nityananda mahaprabhu—krpélu, udara 6.88 242  “patheinhakariyiche bahuta langhana 6.207 296
nityananda-prabhava-kipa janibe kon jana? = 6.89 242  pathe tina-dina matrakarila bhojana 6188 285
nityananda-prabhu-thani aaa magila 4232 112 = patri diya Sivanande varta puchila 6182 282
nityanandera nrtya, —yena tanhara nartane == 6.104 249  paye vranahanache taha na janilun 4125 6া
nitya-siddha sei, praya-siddha tarra kaya 550 140  pindara tale ५5113 haridisa sanatana 4.23 12
nivedana kare kichu vinita (272 5.28 130 pita, mata—dui more rakhaye bandhiya 6.130 260
no ced vayarh virahajagny-upayukta-dehd = 4.64 30  prabhu-3jna lana vaisnavera अतव la-ila 6.145 267
notpadayed yadi ratirn 510 121  prabhu alingila haridasere uthana 417 9
nrtya dekhi’ ratrye kaila prasada bhaksana 6.140 264 prabhu 251 prati-dina milena dui-jane 4.52 24
nrtya-gite sunipuna, vayase kisori 5.13 123 prabhu bale, —“niti-niti nana prasada khai === 6324 351
nrtya kari’ prabhu yabe visrama karila 6.106 249 prabhu bolaila, tanra ananda badila 4117 57
nrtyera madhur keba varpibare pare 6.105 249 ‘prabhu bolanache’, —ei dnandita mane 4119 58
nyasya svarape vidadhe ‘ntarangar 6.1 204 prabhu boldya bara bara karite alingana 4.147 70
prabhu bolaya, tenho nikate na kare gamana 6.48 = 225
P prabhu dekhi’ dunhe pade dandavat hana ~~ 417 9
prabhu hasi’ kahe, — “$una, haridasa, sanatana 4.183 88
piche asi’ rapa-gosani tanhare milila 4213 103 prabhukahe,—“bhala kaila, chadila 6.284 332
piche bhage sanatana kahite lagila 4.19 10  prabhukahe, —“e-dravya dine kariye 674 236
péche mahprabhure tabe karaimu $ravane = 5.100 166  prabhu kahe,— “ei 5113 krsnera vigraha 6.294 336
pache raghunatha nimantrapa chadi’ dila 6.271 325 prabhu kahe, —“ihan rapa chila dasa- 4.26 13
paka kari’ raghava yabe bhoga lagaya 6.112 252
‘palailaraghunitha’—uthila kolahala 6.177 280  prabhu kahe,—’kon pathe 2113, sanitana?’ = 4.122 59
prabhu kahe, — ‘krspa-katha ha-ila sravane’? 5.69 148
palaite amara bhala eita prasarge 6.170 77 prabhu kahe, — ‘krsna-katha sunila raya- 5.33 132
palaite karena nana upaya cintana 6.156 271 prabhu kahe, —“krsna-krpa balistha saba 6.193 287
palaka 7373 palyere (30109 na yuyaya 6.28 217  prabhu kahena,— isa’, tenho dharila 6191 286
parica-dasa-krosa-patha cali’ gela eka-dine ~~ 6.174 279  prabhu kahena — “krsna-katha ami nahi jani 5.7 17120
pandita kahe, —‘inha pache karibe bhojana’ = 6.118 255  prabhu kahena, — “tomara pita-jyetha 6195 288


--- Page 375 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 373

prabhu kahe, —“ramananda vinayera khani 5.77 = 152 = prasanna na haya ihdya jani prabhura 6.274 326
prabhu kahe, —*“sanatana, nd maniha 4.199 96 prasiddha prakata sarga, tabahiry dhard pade 6.158 272
prabhukahe, —“tapta-valukate kemane 4123 60 prastave kahilury kavira nataka- 5.161 200
prabhu kahe, — “tomara deha mora nija- 4.76 39 = pratah-kale ama-durhaya kaila nivedana 4.39 19
prabhukahe,—“vaisnava-deha ‘prakrta’ 4191 92 prate nityananda prabhu garga-snanakariyd 6.126 258
prabhu-krpa dekhi’ sabe alifigana kaila 6.192 287  prathama divase pailun catuhsama-gandha” 4.197 95
prabhu 1208 vasila pingra upare bhakta- 4.23 12 prathame nataka tenho tare 512 5.93 162
prabhu-pasa calibare udyogakarild 6.16 211 prathame sundaya sei svarapera sthane 5.95 163
prabhu pritye tanra mathe dharila carana 4233 112 prati-dina mahaprabhu karena bhojana 6113 252
prabhura age katha-matra na kahe raghundtha 6.230 307  prati-dina raghunathe karaye bhartsana 6.21 213
prabhura 886 svardpa nivedila ara dine 6231 307  prati-dina riya aiche kardya sadhana 5.26 129
prabhura 105 /02646/0€ toma’ dui bhaye 4142 68  pratyaha kara tina-laksa nama-sankirtana 4.101 50
prabhura 3] 7\/3 kaila krsna-kathara 5.159 199 prema vina krsna-prapti anya haite naya 4.58 27
“prabhura 3jidyakrsna-kathasunite 3//3 etha 5.58 144 preme krsna mile, seha na pare marite 4.61 28
prabhura ‘antaranga’ bali‘ yarre loke gaya 611 209  premi bhakta viyoge cihe deha chadite 4.61 28
prabhura asaya jani yahara sravane 4237 114 prthivite ke janibe e-lila tarhara?’ 5.74 151
prabhura avasista patra govinda tanre dila 6.212 298 priti kari’ raghunathe kabhite lagila 6.31 218
prabhura bhakta-ganera tenho haya prana-  6.252 = 316 = priti-svabhave kahite kona bhavodaya 4.171 দা
prabhura carana dhari’ kahena tarnhare 4.73 37 puaja-kale dekhe sildya ‘vrajendra-nandana’ 6.300 340
prabhura carana vande ullasita-mane 5.69 148 Ppdjite cahiye ami sabara carana 6.150 269
prabhura darsana sada karite narimu 4.7 5 pulina-bhojana sabara ha-ila smarana 6.87 242
prabhura guna kahe durhe haa prema- 4205 = 99 = punah samarpila (8/९ svardpera sthane 6.241 312
“prabhurasarige yata mahanta, bhrtya, 5511 6.150 269 puri, bharati, svarapa, pandita-gadadhara 4.109 54
prabhura $iksate tenho nija-ghare yaya 614 210  parpananda-cit-svarapa jagannatha-raya 1118 175
‘prabhura svahasta-datta govardhana-sila 6.301 340  parpa-sad-aisvarya caitanya 5.119 175
prabhura ye 5/7, durthe saba nirvahila 4217 104 parva-mukha chadi’ cale daksina-mukha 6.184 283
prabhure age diya bhakta-gane banti dila 6.72 235  parvavat kaild sabe ratha-yatra darasana 4.105 52
prabhure dekhite nilacale karila gamana 6.157 272  parvavat prabhu sabaya karila milana 6242 312
prabhure govinda kahe, — “raghundtha 6.221 302  parve ami pariksilun tara ei rita 4.45 21
prabhure kahena, — “ei bhangi ye tomara 4202 98  parve $antipure raghunitha yabe ila 6.13 209
prabhure kahe, — “toma lagi’ bhoga lagaila ~~ 6.73 = 236  parve vaisakha-mase sanatana yabe ila 4.115 56
prabhure na bhdya mora marana-vicara 4.72 37 parve yaiche radhara lalita sahdya-pradhdna 6.10 208
prabhu-sthane nilicale karild gamana 6178 281  puspa-mal vipra ani’ prabhu-gale dila 696 245
prabhuvisramakaila, yadi dina-sesa haila 6.101 247 “putra ‘batula’ ha-ila, ihdya rakhaha 6.38 221
pracarakarena keha, na karena scara 4102 51 putra-bhrtya-rdpe tumi kara angikare 6.202 293

putra-thafi dravya-manusya pathaite mana = 6.258 319
pradyumna misrere yaiche kaila upadesa 5.79 153
‘prakrta’ haile ha tomara vapu nari upeksite = 4.174 83
prakrti-darsane sthira haya kon jana?’ 5.36 133 R
prakti-jadam asesari cetayann avirasit 5112 172

radha-krsna-lild-rasa (3037 paiye para 4224 109
prana-raksa lagi’ yeba karena bhaksana 6313 346  raganuga-marge jani riyera bhajana 5.51 141
prasadanna 0353/1/3 yata na vikaya 6.315 347  raghava ani’ paraila malya-candana 6120 255
(21253012 paAa sanatana prabhu-pase ila 4121 59 raghava dvividha cig tate bhijaila 6.76 237


--- Page 376 ---
374 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta
raghava-mandire tabe kirtana drambhila 6.101 247 ramayana niravadhi sune, kare gana 4.31 15
raghava-pandita-dvara kaild nivedana 6.127 258 ‘rasabhasa’ haya yadi ‘siddhanta-virodha’ 5.97 164
raghava-sahite nibhrte yukti karila 6.145 267 ‘rasa’, ‘rasabhasa’ yara nahika vicara 5103 167
raghava-thakurera prasada amrtera sara 6.111 251 ratha-agre prabhu taiche karila nartana 4.106 53
raghavera ghare randhe radha-thakurani 6.115 253 ratha-yatra dekhi’ tahan karaha gamana 4141 67
raghavera krpa raghunathera upare 6.122 256 ratha-yatraya saba lana karila nartana 6.244 313
raghave vasana dui kundi deoyaila 6.76 237 rathe deha chadimu,—ei parama- 412 7
‘raghu bhiksa lagi’ thada kene nahe sirha- 6.282 331 rathe jagannathadekhi’karaha gamana” 4743 68
‘raghu kene maya nimantrana chadi’ 6.273 326 ratre uthi’ ekela calila palana 6.36 220
rétri-dina kare tenho nama-sankirtana 6.253 317
13870473003 asi’ kaila carapa vandana 6.127 258
raghunitha asi’ tabe dandavat kaila 6.163 274 ratri-dine raghunathera ‘nama’ ara ‘dhyana’ 4.31 15
raghundtha asi’ tabe jyethare milsila 6.34 219 ratri-kale bade prabhura viraha-vedana 6.7 207
raghunatha-dasa angikara na karila 6.268 324  ratrye sithha-dvare khadahanamagi'khdya” 6.221 302
raghunatha-dasa saba bhaktere milila 6.209 296  ritrye tomara ghare prasada karimu bhaksana 6.74 = 236
riya-pasa gela, raya pranati karila 555 142
raghunatha-dasa yabe sabare milila 6.245 313
raghunatha-mahima granthe likhila pracura ~~ 6.262 321 rayera sevaka tarre vasaila dsane 511 122
raghunatha mane kahe, — 'krsna nahi jani 6.194 288  rayera vrttanta sevakakahite lagila 5.12 122
raghunatha-milana ebe suna, bhakta-gana 6.12 209 rapa-gosani kaila ‘rasamrta-sindhu’ sara 4.223 108
13870473003 nivedaya prabhura carane 6.231 307 rapa-sanatana-sambandhe kaila alingana 4.233 112
rapa yaiche dui nataka kariyache arambhe 5.108 170
raghundtha samudre yafa snana karila 6211 297
raghunatha sei $ila-mala yabe paila 6.306 342 s
raghunatha-upasana kare drdha-citte 4.30 15
raghunathe kahe kichuhafia sadaya 6.49 226
13800473006 kahe, — “tare karaha sadhana 6.165 275 saba bhakta-dvire tarre asirvada kardila 6.144 266
saba bhakta-gane prabhu milils sanatane ~~ 4.22 11
raghunathe kahe — “4/3, kara sindhu- 6.208 296 saba-desera saba-loka nare asibara 5152 196
raghunathe prabhura krpa dekhi, bhakta-gana 6.210 297 52602 dravya nana caudike dharild 6.53 227
raghunathera bhagye eta kaila angikara 6.88 242 saba 1275 kaila prabhu gundica-marjana 6.243 312
raghunathera ‘guru’ tenho haya ‘purohita’ 6161 273
raghunithera ksinata-malinya dekhiya 6.201 293 saba lana kaila prabhu vanya-bhojana 6.243 312
saba lana svarapa gosani sunite vasila 5.111 171
raghunathera niyama, — yena pasanera 6.309 344 = saba lekha kariya raghava-pasa dila 6152 270
raghunithera pada-padma chadana ni yaya 4.42 20 saba-loke nistarild jangama- 5153 197
‘raghunithera pada-padme veciyachon 4.40 19 saba manah-katha gosadi kari’ nirvahana 4216 104
raghunithera sevaka, vipra tarra sange cale = 6.266 323
raghunathera vairagya dekhi’santosa antare = 6.325 351 sabara age kare namera mahima kathana 4.101 50
sabara kusala santana janaila 4.25 13
raja-ghare kaiphiyat diya ujire anila 6.20 213 saba ratri krandana kari’ kaila jagarana 4.39 19
raksaka saba sesa-ratre nidraya padila 6.166 275 sabara sarana laila dante trpa 1373 1.156 198
radmadasa, sundarananda, dasa-gadadhara 6.61 231 saba-sane sandtanera karaila milana 4.110 54
rdmananda nibhrte sei dui-jana lana 5.16 124
ramananda-pasa yai’karaha sravana 58 120 saba-sange prabhu miliil sanatane 4107 53
sabe asirvada kara —pauka caitanya-carane 6.135 262
rdmananda rdya-katha kahile na haya 5.71 149 sabei prasamse nataka’parama uttama’ 5.94 162
ramananda-rayera ei kahilu guna-lesa 5.79 153 sabe nityananda dekhe, na dekhe anya-jana 6.103 248
rdmananda rayera katha suna, sarva-jana 5.37 134 sabe rdmananda jane, tarre mukhe suni 5.7 120
ramanandera krsna-katha, svardpera gana 6.6 206  saga-gandhe tailargi-gdi khaite na pare 6316 347


--- Page 377 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 375
sade sata prahara ydya kirtana-smarane 6.310 344 “sarvajiia, krpalu tumi I$vara svatantra 4.74 38
sad-gune, panditye, sabara priya——sanatana 4112 = 55  sarvajia mahaprabhu nisedhila more 4.73 37
sadhaka na paya tate krspera carana 4.60 28  sarvatra 'vyapaka’ prabhura 53053 sarvatra visa 6.125 258
‘sadhu, drgha-bhakti tomara’—kahi’ 4.43 20 sarva tydji’ tenho pache 3//3 vrndavana 4.228 110
‘sadhya’-'sadhana’-tattva sikha inhdra sthane 6.234 308 $astra kari’ kata-kala ‘bhakti’ pracarila 4.235 113
sahaje jadla-jagatera cetana karaite 5115 173 $৪03 dui-cri holna tanha andila 6.55 228
sahaje nica-jati mui, dusta, ‘papasaya’ 4152 73 sata-kundi vipra tarra 48০05 dharila 659 230
sahite na pare prabhu, mane haya krodha 597 164  sat-kula-vipra nahe bhajanera yogya 4.66 31
sakala kundira, holndra cidira ekaekagrasa 6.79 238 ‘sat sandarbhe’ krspa-prema-tattva prakasile 4.231 112
sakala-lokera 0103 parpa yabe ha-ila 6.77 238 sattvika-seva ei— suddha-bhave kari 6.296 338
sakala marigala tahe khande saba klesa’ 4.44 21
‘satyakahegosani, dunhdra 5.128 184
sakala 58112517 lokera karite 5.151 196  saundarya, madhurya, prema-vilasa 4.34 16
sakala vaisnava yabe gauda-dese geld 4113 55 savadhane prabhura kaila ajidra palana 6.312 345
sakala vaisnave piche parivesana kaila 6109 251 sei anupama-bhai sisu-kala haite 430 15
$aka-patra-phala-male udara-bharana 6.226 305 sei bhakta dhanya, ye na chade prabhura 4.46 21
sariisara-tarana-hetu yei iccha- 5150 195
sei bhata raghunitha ratre ghare ani’ 6.317 348
sanatana bhagi’ pache karena gamana 4.149 71 sei bhavavista yei seve ahar-nisi 5.49 140
“sandtana, deha-tyage krsna yadi paiye 455 25 sei 003, dadhi, kala karila bhak sana 6.93 244
sandtana-dvara bhakti-siddhanta-vilasa 5.86 158 sei deha kare tara cid-ananda-maya 4193 93
santana grantha kaila ‘bhagavatamrte’ 4.219 106 sei dugdha pana kari’ padiya rahild 6175 279
sanatana kahe, — “bhala kails upadesa 4.144 69
sei durthe laa raya nibhrta udyane 514 123
sandtana kahe, — “dubkha bahuta na (2३11५५0१ 4.125 61 sei haite abhyantare na karena gamana 6155 271
sanatana kahe, — “nica-varse mora janma 4.28 14 sei haya ‘purusadhama’ 5144 193
sandtana kahe, — “toma-sama keba ache 4.99 49 sei jharikhandera pani tumi khaoyaila 4.203 98
sandtana (८३118 sabara carana vandane 4.22 11 sei-kale krspa tare kare dtma-sama 4.192 92
sanatana mahdprabhura carape rahild 4113 55
sei karma kardya, yate haya bhava-bandha 6.199 291
sanatane dcambhite kabhite lagila 4.54 25 581 (६०/08 krame (4079 kahiba amare 5.60 145
sandtane alingite prabhu 380 haila 4.19 10 sei kavi sarva tyaji’ rahila (71136216 5158 199
sanatane dekhi’ prabhu haila camatkara 418 10  sei-ksane nija-loka pathaila grame 6.52 227
sanatane kahe haridasa kari’ dlingana 4.93 46 sei nama haya tara ‘muktira’ 5.155 198
sandtanera dehe krsna kandu upajana 4195 94
sei nija-karyaprabhukarenatomaradvire = 4100 50
sanatanera klede amara ghrna nd upajiya” == 4187 90 sei pani-laksye inhara kandu upajaila 4203 98
saficar], sattvika, sthiyi-bhavera laksana 5.23 128  sei-pathe cali’ yaya se-sthina dekhiya 4.211 101
sandhya-kale dekbite ila prabhuracarapa = 5.68 = 148  sei-pathe sanatana karils gamana 4118 57
sandhya-kale rahili eka gopera bithane 6174 279  sei-pathe yaite mana kaila santana 4.209 100
$ankarananda-sarasvati vindavana haite व = 6.288 334
sei prabhu dhanya, ye na chide nija-jana 4.46 21
sannyasi pandlita-ganera karite garvanasa 5.84 156 sei saba granthe vrajera rasa vicarila 4226 109
saptagrama-mulukera se haya ‘caudhuri’ 617 211 sei-sabde sarasvati karena stavana 5136 189
sarasvatira artha ei kahilun vivarana 5154 197  sei-sange raghunatha gela palana 6.179 281
sarasvatiraarthasuna, yate ‘stuti’ 5147 194
sei thakura dhanya tare cule dhari’ ane 4.47 22
sarasvati sei-sabde kariyache stuti 5135 188 sei-vakye sarasvati karena stavana 5146 194
sdrvabhauma, rimananda, jagadananda, 4.109 54 sei vipra bhrtya, cari-sata mudra lana 6.267 324
sarva-dina karena vaispava ndma-sankirtana 6.218 300 sei vrksa-male vasila nija-gana lana 6.126 258


--- Page 378 ---
376 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta

se karya karaibe toma, seha mathurate 4.95 47 $ri-bhagavata-$astra— tahate pramana 5.44 137
se manusya Sivananda-senere puchila 6.249 315  $ri-caitanya-krpatireka-satata-snigdhah 6262 321
ese nrtya kare preme jagat bhasaya 6.102 248  éri-caitanya-lila ei—amrtera sindhu 5.88 159
se ‘turuk’ kichu na pana haila pratipaksa 6.19 212 éri-caitanya-nityananda-carana cintiya 6172 278
seva chadiyache, tare sadhibara tare 6.164 275 $ri-haste prabhu taha sabakare banti’ dila 6.98 246
sevaka gatagati kare, nahi avasara 4127 617 $ri-haste Sila diya ei 375 dila 6.298 339
sevaka kahe,— 'raghunatha dandavat kare’ = 6.46 = 224  éri-krspa-caitanya-lili—amrtera 5162 201
sevaka kabhila,— ‘dina haila avasana’ 5.66 174  $ri-krspa-caitanya-prabhu dese 5.153 197
“sevaka raksaka ara keha nahi sarge 6170 277  éri-ramadasadi gopa premavista hails 690 243
sevaka tambala laa kare samarpana 6.97 246  éri-rapa-dvara vrajera prema-rasa-lila 587 158
seva sari’ ratrye kare grhete gamana 6.215 299  $ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 4.239 115
seva yena kare, dra nahika brahmana” 6.165 275  éri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 5164 202
seva-yogya nahi, aparadha karon niti niti 4151 72 éri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 6329 353
sevya-bujhi aropiya karena sevana 5.20 126  subalayaicheparve krspa-sukhera sahdya = 6.9 208
siddha-deha-tulya, tate ‘prakrta’ nahe mana = 5.51 141 ‘Suddha-vaisnava’ nahe, haye ‘vaisnavera 6.198 290
siddhanta-sara grantha kaila ‘dasama- 4.220 160  sugandhisundaraprasida—madhuryerasira 6.117 254
siddhanta-viruddha sunite na haya ullisa 5102 167  sukhakari’ mane visaya-visera maha-pida 6.197 290
$ighra ramananda tabe sabhate aila 5.27 130  $unahavallabha, krsna—parama- 4.34 16
sighra yaha, yavat tenho achena sabhate” 5.54 142 “$una, prabhu, mui dina grhastha adhama! = 5.5 119
“Sila diya gosani samarpila ‘govardhane’ 6307 343 Suni’ anandita haila raghunatha mane 651 226
Silare kahena prabhu—'krsna-kalevara’ 6.292 336 Suni caiva $vapake ca 4177 85
simha-dvara khada haya ahara lagiya 6.255 318 uni’ hasi’ kahe prabhu saba bhakta-gane = 6.134 262
sirha-dvare annarthi vaispave dekhiya 6.216 300 Suni’mahaprabhu hasi’ balite lagila 6.277 328
sirhha-dvare bhiksa-vrtti—vesyara dcara 6.284 332 Suni’ mahaprabhu kichu lajjita haila mane 4.165 78
simha-dvare gabhi-age sei bhata dare 6.316 347 Suni’ mahaprabhu mane santosa paila 4128 62
sirmha-dvare khada rahe bhik sara lagiya 6.214 299 Suni’ mahaprabhu tabe kabhite lagila 5.34 133
sirhha-dvare patha—Sitala, kene na ila? 4123 60 Suni’ pandita bhattacarya yatavipra ila 6.64 232
sirhha-dvare yaite mora nahi adhikara 4.126 61 Suni’ prabhu kahe, — “cora dili darasana 6.47 225
sificanga nas tvad-adharamrta-parakena 4.64 30 uni’ raghunithera pita manusya pathaila 6.248 315
$isnodara-parayana krspa nahi paya” 6.227 305 Suni’ rimananda riya hail premavese 557 143
Sivananda kahe, -- (5703 etha na aila’ 6.182 282 Suni’ sabha-sadera citte haila 5.128 184
Sivananda kahe,— “tenho haya prabhura 6.251 316  suni’sanatana paye dhari’prabhurekahila = 4161 76
sSivananda kahe, — “tumi saba yaite 6.260 320  suni’tanra mata pita dubkhita ha-ila 6.258 319
Sivananda-sena tanre kahena vivarana 6.246 314 Sunite dnanda bade yara mukha-bandhe” 5.108 170
Sivananda yaiche sei manusye kahila 6.265 323  suniteicchahayayadi,punahyaha tatha 552 141
Sivanande patri dila vinaya kariya 6.180 81 Suni’ tusta hana prabhu kahite lagila 6.222 302
$ivanandera thai pathaila tata-ksana 6.259 319  suniyakavira haila lajja, bhaya, 5.129 184
$loka Suni’ sarva-loka tahare vakhane 5113 172 Suniya sabara haila anandita-mana 5116 174
smaranera kale gale pare guija-mala 6.290 335 svabhavika dasi-bhava karena dropana 520 126
snanadi kardya, pardya vasa-vibhasana 5.39 135 svacchande karena jagannatha darasana 6.218 300
sodasopacara-pajaya tata sukha naya 6.302 340 sva-haste karana snana, gatra sammarjana 5.17 125
5300015 kari’ dile, sei amrtera sama 6.304 341 sva-haste karena tara abhyanga-mardana 5.17 125
$raddha kari’ ei lila yei pade, $€ 5.163 201  sva-haste pardnavastra, sarvangamandana = 5.18 125


--- Page 379 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 377
svarapa-3jfidya govinda (3803 kare samadhina 6.305 342 tabe sei dui-jane nrtya Sik haila 5.22 127
svarapa, deha, —cid-ananda 5122 179 tabe sei dui-jane prasada khaoyaila 5.25 129
svarapa dilena kurja anibare pani 6.299 339 tabe sei kavi nandi-sloka 02618 5.11 171
svarapadi saba bhaktera carapa vandila 6.192 287 tabe sei kavi sabara carape padiya 5.156 198
svarapadi-saha gosani dchena vasiya 6.189 285 tabe svarapa-gosani tanre kahila vacana 6.303 341
svardpa-govinda-dvara kahdya nija-vat 6.230 307 (30860 janiba siddhanta-samudra- 5132 187
svardpa kahe, —“aiche amrta khao niti-niti 6.320 349 tabe tara mata kahe tara pita sane 6.37 220
svarapakahe, —‘ei sloka karaha vyakhyane’ 5113 = 172 = tabeta panditya tomdra ha-ibe 5133 187
svardpa kahe, —‘'mahaprabhura ye 2175 6205 295 (386 toma sabakare sange land yamu 6.261 320
svardpa kahe, — “mane kichu vicara 6.273 326 tabe yei djiia deha, sei karibena” 5.15 124
svardpa kahe, —“sirhha-dvare duhkha 6.283 331 tabe ye vaikalya prabhura varpana na yaya 96.5 206
svardpa kahe, —“tumi ‘gopa’ parama-udara = 5.101 166 tabu nirvikara rdya-ramanandera mana 5.18 125
svarapa-thani uttare yadi, 1372, tarra mana 5.96 163 tabu nirvikara raya-ramanandera mana 5.40 135
svardpe puchila tabe sacira nandana 6.272 326 tadamrtatvarh pratipadyamano 4.194 93
svardpera haste tarre samarpana kaila 6.204 294 tad va idam bhuvana-mangala 5125 181

‘svarapera raghu’—3ji haite ihdra name” 6.203 294
taha ani’ nitya avasya dena donhakare 4.53 25
svargpera sthane tare kariyachena 6.252 316 taha chadite caha tumi, kemane sahimu?” 4.83 42
svardpera sthane toma karibe samarpane 6.142 265 taha dekhi’ premavesa haya sanatane 4.212 102
svarapera (0371 acarya kaila nivedana 5.99 166 taha janibare ara dvitiya nahi patra 5.43 136
svarapera thafi ihdra paibe visesa 6.238 310  taha khana apanake kahe nirveda-vacana 6313 346

svardpere kahena prabhu krpardra-citta hada 6.201 293
svavidya sarvrto jivah 5.127 183 tahan ‘dharma’ Sikhaite nahi nija-bale 4.82 42
taharn eta dharma cahi karite pracarana 4.81 41
tahan yaba, sei mora ‘prabhu-datta desa” 4144 69
T tahara milana kari’ ekata yaiche 5150 195
tahara pariksa kailun ami-dui-jane 4.33 16

(98301) vikara paya mora tanu-mana 5.36 133
tabe ami-dunhe tare alingana kailur 4.43 20 tahate amara ange kandu-rasa-rakta cale 4.153 73
tabe asta-kaudirakhajakare samarpana 6.305 342 tahe ramanandera bhava-bhakti-prema-sima 5.21 127
tabe hasi’ nityananda vasila dsane 6.83 240 taiche ei sloke tomara arthe 5147 194
tabe mahaprabhu kari’ durhare alingana 4.92 46 taiche svarapa-gosani rakhe mahaprabhura = 6.10 = 208
धि tale upare bahu-bhakta hafache vestita 6.45 224

tabe mahaprabhu-thani karaya sravana 59 163
tabe misra ramanandera vrttanta kahila 5.34 133 tamo-rajo-dharme krsnera na paiye marma 4.57 26
tabe pradyumna-misra gela ramanandera 511 122 tanha jagi’ rahe saba raksaka-gana 6.156 271
tabe pradyumna-misra tahan rahila vasiya 5.16 124 tanhara manera bhava terha jane matra 5.43 136
tabe punah raghunatha kahe panditere 6.149 268 tanha-saha atmata eka-rapa hana 5149 195
tarra agrahe svarapera sunite iccha ha-ila 5.110 171

tabe raghava-pandita tanre ghare 1275 gela 6.148 268
tabe raghunatha kari’ aneka yatana 6.269 324 tanra djidya aila, ajia-phala paila 4.235 113
tabe raghunatha kichu cintila upaya 6.24 215 tanra eka Sisya tanra thakurera seva kare 6.164 275
tabe raghunatha kichu vicarila mane 6.42 223 tanra guru-pase varta puchilena giya 6.176 280
tabe raghunathe prabhu nikate bolaila 6138 264  tanra kandu-rasa prabhura $ri-ange lagila 4.133 64
tabe ramananda krame kahite lagila 5.63 146 tanra laghu-bhrata—sri-vallabha-anupama 4.227 110
tabe raya krsna-kathara karila visrama 5.66 147 tanra mata-pita ha-ila cintita antara 6.183 283
tabe saba bhakta tare angikara 5157 198 tanra mathe pada dhari’ kahite lagila 6.138 264
tabe sanatana kahe, — “tomake namaskare = 4.84 43 tanra mukhe diya khaoyaya hasiya hasiya 6.80 239


--- Page 380 ---
378 इते Caitanya-caritamrta
tanra pada-dhali lana svagrhe aila 6.154 270 tattvatah kahi toma-visaye yaiche mora mana 4.183 8
tara phala ki kahimu, kahane na yaya 5.50 140  tavakipa kadila ama, —ei ami mani’ 6.194 288
tarra pita kahe, —“gaudera saba bhakta- 6.178 281 ‘tava yogyanahe’bali’ bale kadi’ nila 6.323 350
tara pita kahe tare nirvinpa hana 6.38 221 terha bhakti-sastra bahu kaila pracarana 4228 110
tanra putra maha-pandita—jiva-gosani 4227 110 tenhakahe, (वतव magi’ gela nija-ghara’ 6177 280
tenha kahena, —'parama margala 4.24 12
tarra ratha-cakaya chadimu ei 5373 411 7
tanra sarge aneka vaisnava nataka sunila 5.93 162 tenha kahe, —'samudra-pathe, karilury 4122 59
tanra sesa paile, tomara khandila bandhana’ = 6.123 = 257 (9003 sei sila-guAja-mala land gela 6.288 334
tanra sparsa haile mora habe aparadhe 4.9 6 tenho kahe, —*“ye kahila vidyanagare 5.60 145
tanra sparse gandha haila candanera sama 4.198 96 thakura darsana (६2/05 mala-candana dila 6.148 268
tina bhai ekatra rahimu krspa-katha-range” = 4.35 17
tanra sukha-hetu sarge rahe dui jana 6.8 207 tina-guna-ksobha nahe, ‘maha-dhira’ haya 5.46 137
tare kaili jaganasvara-prakrta-kaya!! 5.118 175
tare kaili ksudra jiva sphulinga 5119 175 tina ‘raghunatha’-nama haya amara gane 6.203 294
tarre karaila sabara kpara bhajana 4.111 55 tire sthana na pana ara kata jana 669 234
tarre lana sabara ০103 dekhite lagila 6.78 238 “toma-dunhara aja ami kemane langhimu? 4.37 18
toma-dvare karaibena, bujhilun asaya 4.97 48
tanre mili’ (३/2 ghare karila alaya 5.92 162 toma laite tomara pita pathaila dasa jana 6.246 314
tarre nisedhila, — “prabhure ebe na kahiba 6.174 268
tarire santosite kichu balena vacane 4165 78  tomara dgamane mora pavitra haila ghara 5.30 131
tan-sabara carana raghunatha vandila 6.144 263 tomadra alingane ami pai badla sukha 4199 96
tan-sabara sarge raghundtha yaite nd pare 6.158 272  tomaraange lage, tabu sparsaha tumibale == 4153 = 73
tomara bapa-jyetha—visaya-vistha-gartera 6197 290
tapta-valukate pa pode, taha nahi jane 4119 58  “tomadra bhagyera sima na yaya kathana 4.93 46
tapta-valukaya tomara paya haila vrana 4.124 60
tara adhikara gela, mare se dekhiya 618 212 tomara bhai anupamera haila ganga-prapti == 4.27 13
tara dravya malya diya tahare khaoyaya 6.92 244 tomara carane mora aparadha ha-ila 529 131
tara duhkha dekhi, svarapa sadaya 5.130 184 tomaradehaamare lage amrta-samana 4172 81
tomara deha kahena prabhu ‘mora nija-dhana’ 4.94 47
tara guna kahi’ mahaprabhure 5.157 198  tomara deha tumi kara bibhatsa-jfiana 4772 81
tara-i mukhe sarasvati karena 5.139 190
tara madhye kahilury ramanandera 5.160 200 tomara gambhira hrdaya bujhana na yaya 4.188 90
tara madhye sarva-srestha nama-sankirtana = 4.71 35 = tomara gambhira hrdaya bujhite na pari 4.89 45
tara 5363 anga-seva karena apani 5.38 134  tomaragambhira hrdaya ke bujhite pare? 4.84 43
tomdra 8006 stuti karaya yaiche tomaraguna 4.170 80
tara sparsa haile, sarva-nasa habe mora” 4127 61 tomara hrdayera arthe dunhaya 5.134 188
tare alingana kaila hana sadaya 4189 91
taruni-sparse ramanandera taiche ‘svabhava’ 5.19 126 “tomara jyetha nirbuddhi asta-laksa khaya 6.32 218
tasmai namo bhagavate 5125 181  tomdra kipa vina keha ‘caitanya’ na paya 6.131 260
tate anuragi variche apana marana 4.62 29  tomara krpaya vamse margala amara 4.29 14
tomara sarira—mora pradhana ‘sadhana’ 4.78 40
tate ihan rahile mora na haya 'kalyana’ 4155 74  tomarasaubhagya ei kahilun niscaya 4.96 47
tate jani aprakrta-deha tanhara 5.42 136 tomarasthane krsna-katha sunibara tare’ 5.53 142
tate yadi ei deha bhala-sthane diye 4.10 6
tathapi mara ajiiaya sraddha yadi haya 6.235 309 tomara sthane krspa-katha sunibara tare’ 5.56 143
“tomara upadesta kari’ svarapere dila 6.233 308
tathapi bhakta-svabhava—maryada-raksana 4.130 63 tomara varnse prabhu diyachena sei-sthane 4.234 113
tathapi bhakta-vatsalye ‘manusya’ 5.142 192 tomareha upadese —balaka kare aiche karya 4.160 76
tathapi tomara tate prakrta-buddhi haya 4173 81  tomare kadila visaya-vistha-garta haite” 6.193
tathapi visayera svabhava—kare maha- 6.199 291 tomare ‘lalya’, 3panake ‘lalaka’ abhimana 4.184 88


--- Page 381 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 379
tomdre pathaite patri pathaila more 6.247 314 Vv
tomdre upadesa kare, nd yaya sahana 4.169 80
tomare upadese, na jane apana-malya 4159 75
toma-sabareha upadesakarite lagila 4.158 75  ‘vicala kahiye —‘veda-pravartaka’ 5140 191
toma-sabare (८३/00) muri balaka-abhimana 4.185 89  vacalarh balisarh stabdhari 5137 189
vacoditarh tad anrtar 4175 84
toma-sama bhagyavan nahi kona jana 4.94 47 vaigunya-kita-kalitah 5.1 117
toma-sparse pavitra haya deva-muni-gana == 4129 = 63 = vairagi haiia kare jihvéra lalasa 6225 304
toma uddhdrite gaura 3//3 30376 6.141 265
tomdya (0003 kari’ gaura kaild 3gamana 6.139 264  vairagi hana yeba kare parapeksa 6.224 304
tora 5386 na yujhimu, “yahi 5143 192  vairagi karibe 5303 nama-sankirtana 6223 303
vairagira krtya— sada nama-sarkirtana 6.226 305
trijagat bhasaite pare yara eka bindu 5.88 159 vairagyera katha tanra adbhuta-kathana 6.311 345
0030 api sunicena 6.239 311 vaisnaverakartavya yahan paiye para 4221 107
trtiya prahara haila, nahe katha-anta 564 146
tumi aiche na karile kare kon jana?” 4132 64 vaisnavera krtya, ara vaisnava-acara 4.79 40
tumi ihan utsava kara, ghare prasadarahila” = 6.73 236  vakta srota kahe Sune dunhe premavese 5.65 147
vamana hana yena canda dharibare cya 6.129 259
tumi ihan vasi’ raha, ksaneke asibena 5:15 124 vandyabhave ‘anamra’—‘stabdha’ 5141 191
tumi krpa kaile (37776 adhameha paya 6.131 260 varsantare sivananda cale nilicale 6.266 323
tumi more kariyacha atma-samarpana 4.76 39
tumi na janaile keha janite 73 pare 4.90 45 varsdra cari-masa rahila saba nija bhakta-gane 4.107 53
tumi —sarva-guru, tumi jagatera arya 4103 51  vasiyichena—yena koti saryodaya kare 6.44 224
tumi sarva-sastra jana ‘jinda-pira’-praya” 6.28 217  vastutah prabhu yabe (८211 alingana 4198 96
vasudeva-dattera (61703 haya ‘anugrhita’ 6.161 273
tumi suk he ghare yaha—more 3jia haya 6.169 277 vasudeva—galat-kusthi, tite anga—kida 4.189 9
tumi Sunile bhala-manda janibe vicara’ 5109 170
tumi yaiche-taiche kaha, na janiya 5135 188  vasudeva, murari, raghava, ddmodara 4.108 54
“tumni ye karaila ei pulina-bhojana 6.139 264 vatsara rahi’ tomdare ami pathdimu vrndavane 4.200 97
tusta hana sila-mala raghunathe dila 6.293 336  vidagdha-atmiya-vikya sunite haya ‘sukha’ 5.107 169
tusta hana tanre kichu kahite lagila 4.128 62 ‘vidagdha-madhava’, ‘lalita-madhava’, 4.225 109
vidaya ha-iya misra nija-ghara gela 5.32 132
U vidya-vinaya-sampanne 4177 85
vikaca-kamala-netre Sri-jagannatha-sarhjie = 5.112 172
vikriditarh vraja-vadhabhir idarh ca visnoh = 5.48 = 139
uddhdrana datta adi yata nija-gana 6.63 231  vinati kariya kahe sei mleccha-paya 624 215
ujire kahiya raghunithe chadaila 631 218  viprad dvisad-guna-yutad aravinda-nabha- = 4.69 33
ujjvala madhura prema-bhakti sei paya 5.47 139
‘ujjvala-nilamani’-nama grantha kaila ara 4.224 109  viraha-vedanaya prabhura rikhaye parana 6.6 206
ulatiya cahe pache,— nahi kona jana 6171 278  ‘visayi’ hada sannyasire upadese 580 153
visayira anna haya ‘rajasa’ nimantrana 6.279 329
upadesa kaila tare yaiche ‘hita’ 5130 184  ‘visayira anna khiile malina haya mana 6.278 329
upama dibara nahi e-tina bhuvane 6.104 249 visayira dravya laia kari nimantrana 6.274 326
upare vasild saba, ke kare ganana? 6.63 231
uparodhe prabhu mora manena 6.276 328  visese durgama ei caitanya-vihdra 5105 168
visese kayastha-buddhye antare kare dara 6.23 214
upavasi dekhi’ gopa dugdha ani’ dila 6175 279  visese—thakurera tahan sevakerapracara 4126 61
uro-gudija-hararh priyam api ca govardhana- = 6.327 352 vismita hana kare tara bhagya-prasamsana = 6.210 297
uthi’ prabhu krpdya tanre kaila alingana 6.191 286  vraja-prema-lild-rasa-sara dekhaila 4.230 111
utkata viraha-duhkha yabe bahiraya 6.5 206  vraja-vadha-sange krsnera rasadi-vilasa 5.45 737


--- Page 382 ---
380 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta
vraje radha-krsna-seva manase karibe 6.237 310  yaiche taiche ahara kari’ rakhaye parana 6254 317
vrndavanat punah praptarin 41 2. yanra name yata raghava cithi lekhaila 6152 270
vindavana yaite tenha upadesa dila” 4156 74  yarakrsna-kathdya ruci, sei bhagyavan 59 121
vindavane krsna-seva prakasa karila 4218 105  ydre yaiche nacio, se taiche kare nartane 4.86 43
yasyanghri-pankaja-rajah-snapanari mahinto 4.63 29
vrnddvane vaisa, tahan sarva-sukha paiye 4.142 68
vrndavane ye karibena, saba sikhaila 4207 100  yata-bara palai ami grhadi chadiya 6.130 260
“vyakarana’ nahi jane, na jane ‘alark ara’ 5.104 168  yatadravya land aise, sabamalyakari’laya = 6.92 244
vyavahire-paramarthe tumi—taraguru-tulya 4159 = 75  yathayogya karaila sabaracarapa vandana 4.111 55
yathayogya krpa-maitri-gaurava-bhajana 4.112 55
[१ yatna kari’ khdoydya, na rahe avasese 6114 253
yatra-kale ail saba gaudera bhakta-gana 4105 52
yeba mane, taha prabhu na dil karite 4137 66  yatrdyam aropana-tulya-kalari 6.264 322
yabe yei mile, tahe rakhe nija prapa 6.187 284  yei bhaje sei 6303, abhakta—hina, chara 4.67 32
11111 6.160 272  yeijanakahe, $une kariya visvasa 5.45 137
‘yadva-tadva’ kavira vakye haya ‘rasabhasa’ 5102 167  yei vana-pathe prabhu geld vindavana 4209 100
yadyapi antare krsna-viyoga badhaye 6.4 205
yadyadi brahmanya kare brahmanera sahdya 6.198 290  ye-kdle vidaya haild prabhura carane 4208 100
ye kardite cahe isvara, sei siddha haya 4.96 47
yadyapi kahara ‘mamata’ bahu-jane haya 4.171 81 ye-karye ila, prabhura dekhila carana 4.143 68
“yadyapio tumi hao jagat-pavana 4129 63 ye-mate bhala haya karuna, bhara dilun tare 6.33 2719
“yaha, bhagavata pada vaisnavera 5.131 185 ye-pathe, ye grama-nadi-saila, yahan yei 4210 101
yaha dekhi’ prita hana gaura-bhagavan 6.220 301
yaha haite anya purusa-sakala 5144 193  ye-saba sunilun, krspa-rasera sigara 575 151
yaha haite anya "vijia’ nahi—se 5141 191  ye-se $astra $unite icchaupaje tomara 5101 166
ye sune, ye padle, tanra phala etadrsi 5.49 140
yaha haite ‘premananda’, ‘bhakti-tattva-jdidna’ 5.89 = 160 ye varhsera upare tomara haya krpa-lesa 4.44 21
yaha tumi, tomdra jyethare mildha amare 6.33 219
yah sarva-lokaika-manobhirucya 6.264 322 ye-ye-lila prabhu pathe kaila ye-ye-sthine = 4.212 102
yaiche indra, daityadi kare krsnera 5136 189 yo dustyajan dara-sutin 6.137 263
yaiche kahaya, taiche kahi, —yena vina-yantra 5.73 = 150  yukta ity ucyate yogi 4178 85
yaiche nacao, taiche nici, —yena kastha- 4.74 38 = yukti kari’ {ata mudra, 5০03 tola-site 6.146 267


--- Page 383 ---
=
General Index
Numerals in bold type indicate references to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
verses. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
A Anupama
determination of fixed on serving
Absolute Truth Raghunatha dasa, 18-20
as master of material energy, 182 heard Bhagavatam from Rapa and
Bengali poet has no knowledge of, 177 Sanatana, 16
understood from three angles of vision, requests initiation into Krsna mantra, 18
180 Vallabha a name of, 17
See also: Krsna, Supreme Lord Anyabhilasita-sanyari jhdana
Activities quoted, 291
of devotee are spiritual, 141 Arcye vispau siladhir gurusu
Adi-lila quoted, 92, 175, 337
cited on India, 49 Asrama
Advaita Acarya duties performed according to, 122
as ocean of mercy, 119 Association
false followers of, 273 six kinds of, 329
Yadunandana Acarya initiated by, 274 with devotees required to understand
Affection devotional service, 187
for devotees causes Krsna's appearance Austerity
as ordinary human being, 192 devotional service satisfies Krsna more
Ami ta’ vaisnava, e-buddhi ha-ile than, 28
verses quoted, 82
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya
cited on caste brahmanas, 158 B
cited on entanglement in family life,
310 Balabhadra Bhattacarya
cited on those who are almost gave Sanatana Gosvami Caitanya's
Vaisnavas, 291 route, 101
Fourth Chapter summarized in, 1-2 Balarama
quoted on kdyastha community, 215 ate with Krsna on banks of Yamuna,
quoted on Ramananda Raya’s dancing 242
girls, 126 Bandhu-han
summary of Chapter Six in, 203-204 Krsna as, 193-194
summary of Fifth Chapter in, 117 Bengal
Anubhasya brdhmana from wrote drama about
cited on govardhana 5112, 337 Caitanya, 161
devotees of Nityananda described in, Caitanya met devotees from, 312
232 devotees of went to jagannatha Puri,
Anupama 272
as good devotee of Raghunatha (Rama- kayastha community highly honored in,
candra), 14 215
as younger brother of Saniatana and offense committed by poet of, 177,
Rapa Gosvamis, 14-16 184, 188-189
381


--- Page 384 ---
382 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Bengal Bhaktivinoda Thakura
poet of compared to duck, 184 as author of Kalyanpa-kalpa-taru, 82
poet of stays at Jagannatha Puri, 199 cited on invitations in the modes, 330
shelter of devotees taken by poet of, quoted on visiting holy places, 102
198 Bharata-bhami
Bhagavad-gita See: India
quoted on bondage of karma, 291 Bharata Maharaja
quoted on conditioned life, 176 renunciation of, 263
quoted on equal vision of humble sage, Bhatta Raghunatha
85 as one of three Raghunatha of Caitanya,
quoted on equal vision of perfect yogi, 294
86 Bhavartha-dipika
quoted on freedom from maya, 194 quoted on miseries of conditioned soul,
quoted on transmigration, 173 183
Bhagavan Birth
as angle of vision of Absolute Truth, low or high not related to devotional
180 service, 32
See also: Krsna Body, material
Bhagavan Acarya as instrument for enjoyment to karmis,
as liberal cowherd boy, 167 82
listened to drama of brahmana from as temporary and full of miseries, 292
Bengal, 162 of Ramananda Raya is transformed into
Bhagavat-sandarbha spirit, 136
as compiled by Jiva Gosvami, 111 sannyasi should not see as good or bad,
Bhakti 83
cult of preached by Caitanya, 161 Body, spiritual
See also: Devotional service as non-different from soul, 176-180
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu devotee possesses, 141
describes devotional service and devotee has, 177
mellows, 108 devotee’s body transformed into, 93
quoted on rasabhasa, 164-165 service performed in one’s, 312
written by Ripa Gosvami, 108 Brahma
Bhakti-ratnakara can’t understand all topics about Krsna,
list of Sanatana Gosvami's books in, 108 152
quoted on Rapa Gosvami’'s books, 110 quoted on the Lord's form, 182
Bhakti-sandarbha Brahmacari
quoted, 304 as self-controlled, 154
quoted on chanting, 35-36 Brahmaloka
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati happiness in not valued by devotee,
cited on false followers of Advaita, 273 263
cited on govardhana sila, 337 Brahman
cited on Hari-bhakti-vilasa, 107 as angle of vision of Absolute Truth,
cited on materialists, 327-329 180
cited on rasabhasa, 164-165 Caitanya as moving, 197
quoted on liberation from lusty desires, no change or deterioration of internal
138 potency in, 182
quoted on transformation of devotee’s Brahmana
body, 82 not as good as candala devotee, 33


--- Page 385 ---
General Index 383
Brahmana Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Pradyumna Misra as beggar, 145 characteristics of like sugar cane, 115
Pradyumna Misra as purified, 158 chastises Jagadananda Pandita, 75-77
pride of birthright cut down by compared to fire, 176
Caitanya, 158 considers Sanatana and Haridasa as His
sannydsa as topmost position of, 156 little boys, 89-90
those who are almost Vaisnavas give converses with Sanitana regarding
charity to, 291 Anupama, 14-21
Brahma sambhita cures Sanatana Gosvami's itch, 97
quoted on Krsna's mercy, 292-293 cuts down pride of renunciants and
Brhad-bhagavatamrta scholars, 156
compiled by Sanatana Gosvami, 41 dances before car of Jagannatha, 53
explains devotee, devotional service, demonstrates qualities of devotees, 155
and Krsna, 106 doesn’t know topics concerning Krsna,
referred to in Bhakti-ratnakara, 108 120
quoted on holy name, 36 embraced Haridasa Thakura, 9, 46, 70
embraced 53173803173 Gosvami, 11, 46,
72
^ excludes material intelligence of
prakrta-sahajiyas, 138
Caitanyacandra explains His external relationship with
as name of Caitanya, 222 53৪17309173 Gosvami, 78-87
Caitanya-caritamrta explains how He wants to use
devotees should relish nectar of daily, 53173031735 body, 39-42
160 felt pangs of separation from Krsna,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu 206-207
and Jagannatha as Krsna, 195 gave Raghunatha dasa govardhana Sila,
and Jagannatha desire to deliver the 334
world, 196-197 identical to Jagannatha Deity, 175
argues against Sanatana’s suicide instructs 5873६३78 Gosvami and
resolution, 25-46 Haridasa Thakura, 23
ashamed, 78 known as Gaurahari, 265
as merciful and liberal, 88, 242 made lepor Vasudeva beautiful, 91
as most munificent personality, 157 mercy of devotees of is inexplicable,
as physician, 118 199
as sannyasi, 134 mercy of makes miseries disappear,
as son of Saci, 118 21
ate at house of Raghava Pandita daily, met daily with Sanatana Gosvami and
253 Haridasa Thakura, 24
ate decomposed prasada, 350-351 mission of to spread holy name, 50
Bhagavatam is understandable by Nilambara Cakravarti as grandfather of,
followers of, 186 289
body of smeared by discharge of no one can understand ideas in heart of,
Sanatana’s sores, 11, 65, 73 43
came to festival for Nitydnanda, observed dancing of Nityananda,
238-243 248-249
can't tolerate transgressions of eti- preached through Ramananda Raya,
quette, 79 151, 158, 200


--- Page 386 ---
384 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Caitanya Dasama-tippani
quoted on duties of those in renounced as commentary on the Tenth Canto,
order, 309-311 106
Raghunatha dasa desires shelter of, 259, written by Sanatana Gosvami, 106
261 Deha-smrti nahi yara
Ramananda Raya instructs, 145 quoted, 347
rasabhasa not tolerated by, 164 Deity
remained in Jagannatha Puri by order of as completely spiritual, 175
His mother, 42 at home of Raghava Pandita seen by
satisfied by renunciation of His devo- Raghunatha dasa, 268
tees, 301 considered stone by hellish persons,
saved 53817309173 Gosvami from suicide, 337
3 never considered stone or wood, 92
saw upala-bhoga offering to Jagan- Raghava Pandita offered food to, 236,
natha, 9 252
sent prasiada through Govinda for worshiped by those who are almost
Sanatana Gosvami and 17311038539 Vaisnavas, 291
Thakura, 23 Demigods
shelter of attained by Nityananda’s can't understand all topics about Krsna,
mercy, 260 152
tested Sanatana Gosvami, 56-64 Demons
Cata-taskara-durvrttari chastise Krsna, 189
verses quoted, 215 Jarasandha as one of, 192
Chanting Desires
as most important of nine deovtional for material enjoyment vanish by
processes, 35 associating with devotees, 187
as only occupation of pure devotees, heart disease as lusty, 140
304 to deliver the world meet in Caitanya
must accompany devotional service, 36 and Jagannatha, 196
Charity Devotees
devotional service satisfies Krsna more become like materialists by association,
than, 29 329
Chatrabhoga bodies of never material, 92
crossed by Raghunatha dasa, 284 Caitanya demonstrates qualities of, 155
Conditioned souls Caitanya enjoyed life with His, 209
as friends of maya, 193 deliver themselves and their entire
as servants of material energy, 182 family, 33
as unhappy, 183 difficulty of understanding greatness of,
division of body and soul for, 173,180 127
Cowherd boys feelings of separation from Krsna of, 28
Nityananda's associates as, 237, 243 have spiritual bodies, 177
hearing words of causes happiness,
169-170
D in separation desire own death, 29
mercy of Caitanya’s is inexplicable, 199
Dancing of Bengal visited Ratha-yatra, 53
sweetness of Nitydnanda's, 248-249 of Caitanya must go everywhere, 69


--- Page 387 ---
General Index 385
Devotees Dola-yatra
possess spiritual bodies, 141 observed by Caitanya and Sanatana, 56
preserve Vaisnava etiquette, 63 Dramas
renunciation sustains lives of Caitanya's, standard for writing of set by Rapa
301 Gosvami, 170
should relish nectar of Caitanya- Durga-mandapa
caritamrta daily, 160 Raghunatha dasa slept on, 271, 273
should visit all Caitanya’s pastime sites, Durvasa Muni
102 Radharani received benediction from,
silence as characteristic of advanced, 254
153 Duty
to understand devotional service one performed without attachment for
must associate with, 187 Krsna as useless, 122
who met Sanatana Gosvami listed, 54
who remain with their Lord are glorious,
22 E
work for satisfaction of Supreme Lord,
82 Ecstatic symptoms
See also: Pure devotees expressed by dancing girls, 128-129,
Devotional service 135
association with devotees required to of Raghunitha dasa, 340-341
understand, 187 of Sanatana Gosvami, 102
attained by hearing rasa-1il3140 Enjoyment
chanting as most important process of, experienced by relishing Krsna's
35 pastimes, 139
essence of exhibited through Sanatana Etad isanam isasya
Gosvami, 159 quoted, 179
fitness for not determined by birth, 32 Etan nirvidyamananam
is established as irrevocable fact, 186 verses quoted, 36
Krsna attainable by, 26 Evam ekantinarn prayah
nine prescribed methods of, 34 verses quoted, 303-304
of puffed-up persons is showbottle, 328
Ramananda Raya exemplifies perfect,
127 [3
Ramananda Raya fully absorbed in, 150
rendered in brahma-bhata stage, 178 Faith
those advanced in do not boast, 153 pastimes of Krsna heard and described
understood by hearing pastimes of with great, 138
Krsna, 201 Family life
Dhanafjaya obstructs awakening love for Krsna, 186
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 Raghunatha dasa renounced in, 211
Dig-darsini Raghunitha dasa saved from blind well
referred to in Bhakti ratnakara, 108 of, 204
Disease Fire
lusty desires as heart, 140 Caitanya compared to, 176
of lusty desires can be nullified, 138 Form of Krsna
of material enjoyment, 118, 290 as auspicious, 182


--- Page 388 ---
386 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Fortune Govardhana sila
inclination to hear about Krsna as good, Caitanya’s use of, 335-336
121 worship of by Raghunitha dasa, 334,
Fruitive activities 336-343
offenses committed by one engaged in, Govinda
178 Raghunatha dasa informed Caitanya of
his desires through, 307
supplied, prasada to Raghunatha dasa,
G 298
Grhastha
Gadadhara dasa Ramananda Raya as low born, 158
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 See also: Householder
Ganges Gundica
as sacred river in India, 49 temple of cleansed by Caitanya, 313
festival for Nityananda on bank of, Guru
227-234 not to be taken as ordinary human
Nityananda bathed in, 258 being, 150
Raghunatha dasa met Nityananda on See also: Spiritual master
bank of, 224 Curusu mara-matih
thought to be Yamuna by Nityananda's quoted, 150
associates, 243
Garuda Purana
quoted on catuhsana, 96 H
Gaura amara, ye saba sthane
verses quoted, 102 Happiness
Gauracandra caused by hearing words of devotee,
as name of Caitanya, 205 169-170
Gaurahari given by Ramananda Raya to Caitanya,
Caitanya known as, 265 208
Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa in Brahmaloka not valued by devotee,
quoted on Raghunitha 08585 263
deliverance, 352-353 materialist accepts his condemned posi-
Gauridasa tion as, 290
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 of the Lord compared to unhappiness
Copala-campa of conditioned soul, 183
as compiled by Jiva Gosvami, 111 Raghunatha dasa’s material, 262
(225 Hari
dancing girls compared to, 126 name of chanted by associates of
prayer of to Krsna quoted, 30 Nityananda, 241-242
sent home by Krsna to increase ecstatic See also: Krsna
love, 31 Hari-bhakti-vilasa
Gosvami Bhaktisiddhanta’s statements on, 107
not inherited designation, 105 compiled by Sanatana Gosvami, 107
Govardhana Majumadara explains Vaisnava's behavior and duty,
as almost Vaisnava, 291 107
as father of Raghunatha dasa, 319 quoted on duties of one in renounced
Govardhana sila order, 303-304
as directly the body of Krsna, 336, 337 referred to in Bhakti-ratnakara, 108


--- Page 389 ---
General Index 387
Hari-nama Householder
See: Holy name hears Bhagavatam to increase material
Haridasa Thakura life, 186
born in Mohammedan family, 159 Pradyumna Misra as cripple-minded,
Caitanya met with daily, 24 119
chanted 300,000 holy names daily, Ramananda Raya 25 self-controlled, 154
51 Humility
declares his body useless, 49 of Bengali poet exhibited, 198-199
embraced by Caitanya, 9, 46, 70 of Ramananda Raya described, 152
embraced Sanatana Gosvami, 8, 46 Hunger
encouraging statements of Santana to, no impediment to Raghunatha dasa,
50-51 284
encouraging statements of to Sanatana,
46-48
expert in understanding mellows,
23
glories of holy name exhibited through, Ignorance
159 acts such as suicide influenced by, 26
rejects Caitanya’s speaking on external always covers conditioned soul, 183
formalities, 87 imitation of rasa-/ila performed in, 138
Hearing Impersonalism
as one of nine processes of devotional devotional service satisfies Krsna more
service, 34 than, 28
Bhagavatam as pious activity, 186 India
from a realized soul, 140 person born in is automatically God
pastimes gives understanding of devo- conscious, 49
tional service, 201 sacred rivers of, 49
Heart bound by karma, 292-293
lusty desires as disease of, 140 Indra
Hiranya dasa chastises Krsna, 189-191
as almost Vaisnava, 291 Raghunatha dasa’s opulence equal to
as crooked tax collector, 212-213 that of, 222, 262
as uncle of Raghunatha dasa, 212 Initiation, spiritual
Hoda Krsnadasa devotee gives up material ideas at, 94
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 Krsna accepts devotee at time of, 93
Holy name Intelligence
as uttered during chastisement, 198 lost by Indra, 190
Caitanya’s mission to spread, 50 of prakrta-sahajiyas excluded by
chanted by associates of Nitydnanda, Caitanya, 138
241-242 lyari ca kirtanakhya bhaktir bhagavato
chanted by Vaisnavas all day, 301 verses quoted, 35-36
chanting of as only occupation of pure
devotee, 304
chanting of the way of success, 37 )
glories of exhibited through Haridasa
Thakura, 159
lotus feet of worshiped, 36 Jagadananda Pandita
See also: Chanting advises Sanatana, 68


--- Page 390 ---
388 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Jagad-guru Jiva Gosvami
qualities of, 158 compiled Copala-campa, 111
See also: Spiritual master embraced by Nityananda, 113
Jagadisa given permission by Nityananda to go
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 to Vrndavana, 112-114
Jagannatha Deity statements of on chanting, 35-36
and Caitanya desire to deliver the went to Vrndavana, 110
world, 196-297 wrote 400,000 verses, 112
as Absolute Person appearing in wood, JAana
195 binds one to birth and death, 292
as completely spiritual, 175 JAanis
Caitanya identical to, 175 as offenders, 178
dancing girls at temple of, 126
dancing girls exhibit ecstasy before, 129
offense committed against, 177-180, K
184, 188-189
prasada offerings to of highest quality, Kalyana-kalpa-taru
25 quoted on defects of sahajiyas, 82
Ramananda Raya's drama meant for Kamalakara
pleasure of, 124 attended festival for Nityananda, 231
residence of Caitanya near temple of, 6 Karma
Sanatana offered obeisances to wheel bondage to reactions of, 291-293
on top of temple of, 24 even Indra bound by, 292-293
seen by Raghunatha dasa, 298 Lord can change reactions of, 287-288
seen by Vaisnavas with full freedom, reaction of stopped by Krsna, 292-293
301 Karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti
Jagannatha Puri verses quoted, 292,293
all men not admitted to, 197 Karmis
Bengali poet stays at, 199 as offenders, 178
Caitanya and associates enjoyed bliss only interested in personal satisfaction,
in, 161 82
devotees of Bengal went to, 272 Kastarikaya dvau bhagau
pastimes of Caitanya performed at, 205 verses quoted, 96
reached by Raghunatha dasa, 285 Kaveri
Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka as sacred river in India, 49
as drama by Ramananda Raya, 124, 126 Kavi-karnapara
Jarasandha as author of Sri-Caitanya-candrodaya-
as demon, 192 nataka, 321
chastises Krsna, 192 Kayastha community
Jayati jayati namananda-rapam Raghunatha dasa as member of,
verses quoted, 36 214-215
Jharikhanda Forest Knowledge
Sanatana Gosvami walked through, 4 form of Krsna full of, 182
Jiva Gosvami of Krsna as unsurpassed, 192
activities of in Vrndavana, 114 Pradyumna Misra poor in, 146
as son of Anupama, 110 Krsna
as spiritual master of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, accepts nothing from materially-
114 minded, 94


--- Page 391 ---
General Index 389
Krsna Krsna consciousness movement
and His soul are identical, 175 members of must chant sixteen rounds
as bandhu-han, 193-194 and preach, 52
as Caitanya and Jagannatha, 195 natives of India should help spread, 49
as master of material energy, 182 Krsnadasa Kavirdja
as son of Nanda Maharaja, 180 follows in footsteps of Rapa and
as supremely attractive, 17 Raghunatha Gosvamis, 202
as the goal of life, 34 statement of on devotees’ feelings, 83
ate with Balarama on banks of Yamuna, Krsna-katha
242 Pradyumna Misra asks Ramananda Raya
attainable by devotional service, 26 to speak, 144
awakening dormant love only means to Pradyumna Misra drowned in ocean of,
attain, 27 149
blasphemed by Sisupala, 194 Krtyanyetani tu prayo grhinam
Caitanya doesn’t know topics concern- verses quoted, 303
ing, 120 Karma Purana
Caitanya felt pangs of separation from, quoted on sameness of the Lord's body
206-207 and soul, 181
cannot be attained simply by suicide,
26
cannot be understood in ignorance and L
passion, 26
chastised by demons, 189 Lalita
chastised by Indra, 189-191 Radha helped by in many ways, 208
demigods can't understand all topics Svarapa Damodara was formerly, 312
about, 152 Lalita-madhava
favorable to the meek, 33 as drama compiled by Rapa Gosvami,
family affection obstructs love for, 109
186 Lila-stava
given happiness by Subala, 208 referred to in Bhakti-ratnakara, 108
glories of mercy of, 292-293 Living entities
has a navel shaped like a lotus, 33 as distinguished from Supreme Lord,
known as Uttama-$loka, 263 178-180
one subservient to tongue can't attain, can’t understand Ramananda Raya's
306 mentality, 129
presents Himself as innocent boy, 191 compared to sparks, 176
qualities of, 192 Lotus feet of Caitanya
Radha’s feelings of separation for, 208 Sanatana Gosvami eager to see, 9
Ramananda Raya speaks on topics of, seeing makes everything auspicious, 12
146-147 Lotus feet of Krsna
seen by Raghunatha dasa in govardhana dust of drives away ignorance, 29
sila, 340 never achieved by sinful actions, 28
spiritual master as representative of, value of fragrance of, 263
69 Love of God
spiritual master knows science of, 157 for Krsna obstructed by family affection,
strength of mercy of, 287-288 186
Krsna one attains audience of Krsna by
as sacred river in India, 49 ecstatic, 28


--- Page 392 ---
390 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Love of God Mercy
Ramananda Raya has spontaneous, 141 of Caitanya bestowed on Raghunatha
Lust dasa, 262
vanishes by associating with devotees, of Caitanya on Raghunatha dasa
187 Gosvami, 204, 222
of Caitanya on Raghunatha dasa,
286-287
M of Caitanya overfloods world, 160
of Caitanya’s devotees as inexplicable,
Madana-mohana 199
as first Deity in Vindavana, 41 of Nityananda, 243
1421165 of Raghava Pandita on Raghunatha
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 dasa, 256-257
Mamaivarnso jiva-loke of Vasudeva Datta accepted by Yadu-
quoted, 176,179 nandana Acarya, 273
Mam eva ye prapadyante shelter of Caitanya attained by Nitya-
quoted, 194 nanda’s, 260
Materialists strength of Krsna’s, 287-288
association with changes service to Mind
Krsna into sense gratification, 329 as a sense, 176
as under bodily conception of life, 327 as contaminated by food offered by
compared to worms in stool, 287-288, materialist, 329
290 contaminated, cannot think of Krsna,
invitation of pious in mode of passion, 329
330 only Ramananda Raya can understand
invitation of sinful in mode of ig- his own, 137
norance, 330 of Caitanya diverted by association of
offerings of to Krsna not accepted, 328 devotees, 207
turn against Vaisnavas, 328 of Raghunatha dasa not tied down by
Mathura-Vindavana his opulence, 222
as very dear abode of Caitanya, 41 of Ramananda Raya unchanged by
Matir na krsne paratah dancing girls, 125-129, 135-136,
quoted, 186 141
Maya spiritually inspired, 136
as friend of conditioned soul, 193 Miseries
Mayavadis conditioned soul embarrased by, 183
claim that the Lord accepts material Modes of nature
body, 179 agitation caused by can be nullified,
Ramananda Raya not among, 154 138
Meditation the Lord and His devotees are
Nityananda brought Caitanya in, 238 unaffected by, 177
Mellow Mohammedans
of topics of Krsna agitated, 146 Haridasa Thakura born in family of,
Mental speculation 159
dispatches one to hell, 182 Raghunatha dasa arrested by, 213
Mercy Money
Advaita as ocean of, 119 honestly earned, can be used to serve
glories of Krsna's, 292-293 Krsna, 327


--- Page 393 ---
General Index 391
Mukunda Datta Nityananda
sees Raghunatha dasa, 286 Raghunatha dasa has interview with,
Murari Gupta 223-226
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 shelter of attained by mercy of, 260
determination of compared to sweet dancing of, 248-249
Anupama, 21 Nondevotees
always condemned, 32
Nanarh pramattah kurute vikarma
N verses quoted, 292
Naitat samacarej jatu ০
quoted, 138
Namastaka Offenses
quoted on holy name, 36 committed by ahangrahopasaka-
Nanda Maharaja mayavadis, 178-179
as father of Krsna, 180 Opulences
Narada Indra displays pride of, 190
as liberated soul, 36 Krsna possesses six spiritual, 182
quoted on renunciation, 346-347 of Caitanya deep, 155
Narmada of Raghunatha dasa compared to those
as sacred river in India, 49 of Indra, 222
Narottama dasa Thakura
quoted on spiritual knowledge, 347
represented mercy of Caitanya, 160 ण
Nasta-prayesv abhadresu
quoted, 186 Padma Purana
Nescience quoted on hellish intelligence, 337
entangles everyone in material world, quoted on nature of Deity, 92
193 quoted on spirituality of Deity, 175
Nikhila-sruti-mauli-ratna-mala Panihati
verses quoted, 36 Raghunatha dasa met Nityananda at,
Nilacala 223
See: Jagannatha Puri Paramatma
Nilambara Cakravarti as angle of vision of Absolute Truth,
as grandfather of Caitanya, 289 180
Nityananda Paramesvara dasa
as merciful and liberal, 118, 242 attended festival for Nityananda, 231
distributed garlands to devotees, 246 Parampara
embraced Jiva Gosvami, 113 followed by devotees, 170
gave Jiva Gosvami permission to go to pure devotee speaks in system of, 150
Vrndavana, 112-114 See also: Disciplic succession
meeting of Raghunatha dasa and, Paraspara-vairayor yadi yogas
259-266 quoted, 165
ordered His friends to chant holy name, Pastimes of Caitanya
241 can be described only by devotee,
placed His feet on head of Raghunatha 169
dasa, 264 full of transcendental pleasure, 205


--- Page 394 ---
392 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Pastimes of Caitanya Prasada
should be relished daily by devotees, decomposed eaten by Raghunatha
160 dasa, 347-351
Pastimes of Krsna given to Raghunatha dasa by Raghava
as essence of nectar, 201 Pandita, 269
Caitanya pacified by hearing, 207 in Jagannatha temple of highest quality,
can be described only by devotee, 169 25
enjoyment experienced by relishing, offered by Raghava Pandita to Caitanya,
139 251-255
exhibited through Rapa Gosvami, 159 of Jagannatha sold by shopkeepers, 347
following Caitanya’s principles required received by dancing girls, 129
for recording, 188 supplied by Govinda to ২৪870738073
heard with great faith, 138 dasa, 298
Pious activity taken by devotees of Caitanya, 255
hearing Bhagavatam as, 185 See also: Food
Pleasure Prayers
pastimes of Caitanya full of, 205 offered by Sarasvati, 188-189, 191,
Poetry 193, 194
with rasabhasa not tolerated by of gopis to Krsna quoted, 30
Caitanya, 163-165 of Rukminidevi to Krsna quoted, 30
written without proper knowledge, sublime offered to Krsna, 263
167-170 Premera svabhava yahan premera sambandha
Prabhate cardha-ratre ca verses quoted, 83
verses quoted, 303 Pride
Pradyumna Misra aristocrats always afflicted by, 33
and Ramananda Raya lose perception of renunciates and scholars vanquished,
of time, 147 156
as beggar brahmana, 145 Prostitute
as cripple-minded householder, 119 begging alms resembles behavior of,
asks Ramananda Raya to speak krspa- 323-333
katha, 144 Prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama
as poor in knowledge, 146 quoted, 69
as purified brahmana, 158 Purandara
dances in satisfaction, 148 attended festival for Caitanya, 231
describes activities of Ramananda Raya, Pure devotees
133 chanting as only occupation of, 304
drowned in ocean of krsna-katha, 149 don’t accept food from materialists,
heard discourses by Ramananda Raya, 328
200 don't distinguish between Jagannatha
purified by seeing Ramananda Raya, and His body, 175
132 don’t speak independently, 150
Ramananda Raya offends, 131 free from bondage to karma, 293
Ramananda Raya offers obeisances to, invitation of in mode of goodness, 330
130 Purification
visits Ramananda Raya, 122 achieved by hearing Bhagavatam, 186
Prakrta-sahajiyas Purusadhama
want to hear rasa-lila, 138 same as purusottama, 193


--- Page 395 ---
General Index 393
Purusottama Raghunatha dasa
same as purusadhama, 193 ceased using his father's money,
Purusottama-ksetra 326-328
See: )Jagannatha Puri compares himself to dwarf, 260
delivered gold coins to Raghava Pan-
dita, 267-270
R did not take birth as brahmana, 337
entrusted to Svaripa Damodara,
Radharani 294-295
cooked at house of Raghava Pandita, given remnants of Nityananda's food,
253 245-247
helped by Lalita in many ways, 208 got interview with Nityananda,
Krsna's feelings of separation for, 208 223-226
received benediction from Durvasa had opulences like Indra, 222
Muni, 254 his escape from his parents, 277-285
Raghava Pandita good fortune of, 242
arrived at festival for Nityananda, Hiranya dasa as uncle of, 212
235-237 Krsnadasa Kaviraja follows in footsteps
Caitanya ate at house of daily, 253 of, 202
has mercy on Raghunatha dasa, made festival for Nityananda, 227-
256-257 234
Nityananda went to temple of, 248- meeting of Nityananda and, 259-266
253 met the Lord at Santipura, 210
Radharani cooked at house of, 253 opulence of equal to Indra’s 262
Raghunatha dasa saw Deity at home of, parents of desired comfort for him,
268 319-320
Raghunatha dasa played like pounds-and-shillings man,
activities of glorified by Kavi-karnapara, 210
321 Raghava Pandita has mercy on,
arrested by Mohammedans, 213 256-257
as author of Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa, renounced life of, 317-318, 344-346
352 represented mercy of Caitanya, 160
as one of three Raghunathas of saved from blind well of family life, 204
Caitanya, 294 saw Deity at house of Raghava Pandita,
as same age as Caitanya, 289 268
as spiritual master of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, thought of means to escape his parents,
114 271-273
begged alms at Simba-dvara, 299, 302 under charge of Svaripa Damodara,
belonged to kayastha community, 317
214-215 used father’s money to invite Caitanya,
blessed by all devotees, 266 324-325
Caitanya placed His feet on head of, Yadunandana Acarya as spiritual master
264 of, 273
Caitanya satisfied by behavior of, 336 Ramadasa
called madman of Caitanya, 222 attended festival for Nityananda, 231
ceased begging at Sirmha-dvara gate, headed confidential devotees of Nitya-
331-332 nanda, 243


--- Page 396 ---
394 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Ramananda Raya Rasa-lila
and Pradyumna Misra lose perception lusty desires are nullified by hearing
of time, 147 about, 138
as conversant in topics on Krsna, prakrta-sahajiyas want to hear, 138
120-121 Ratha-yatra festival
as instructor for Caitanya, 145 Caitanya danced with devotees during,
as lowborn grhastha, 158 313
as maidservant of gopis, 126-127 devotees of Bengal visited, 53
as offender against Pradyumna Misra, Sanatana resolves to commit suicide
131 during, 7
as only knower of his mind, 137 Renounced order
as self-controlled householder, 154 duties of one in, 303-305, 309-311
as source of humility, 152 See also: Sannyasa
as sadra, 156 Renunciation
Caitanya pacified by talks with, not expressed externally by Raghunatha
206-209 dasa, 211
Caitanya preached through, 158 of King Bharata, 263
compared to person touching wood, sustains lives of Caitanya’s devotees,
126, 136 301
compared to stringed instrument, 151 Rukminidevi
discussed Krsna with Pradyumna Misra, prayer of to Krsna quoted, 30
200 Rapa Gosvami
feeds dancing girls prasada, 129 absorption in Krsna as following, 140
has spiritual body, 136 as author of Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu,
has spontaneous love of God, 141 108
massages bodies of dancing girls, 125, as spiritual master of Krsnadasa Kaviraja,
135 114
not to be taken as ordinary human compiled drama Lalita-madhava, 109
being, 150 compiled drama Vidagdha-madhava,
offers obeisances to Pradyumna Misra, 109
130 compiled Ujjvala-nilamani, 109
Pradyumna Misra describes activities of, Dana-keli-kaumudi as first book of,
133 109
Pradyuman Misra is purified by seeing, delayed a year in Bengal, 103
132 how he divided his money, 104
requested to speak krspa-katha, 144 Krsnadasa Kaviraja follows in footsteps
speaks on topics of Krsna, 146-147 of, 202
spoke at Vidyanagara, 145 left Jagannatha Puri for Bengal, 13
teaches dancing girls, 123-124, met Sanatana Gosvami at Vindavana,
128-129 105
visited by Pradyumna Misra, 122 pastimes of Vrndavana exhibited
Ramayana through, 159
Anupama heard and chanted from, 15 standard for writing dramas set by,
Rasabhasa 170
not tolerated by Caitanya, 164 statements of on holy name, 36
Rasa-lila stayed in Jagannatha Puri for ten
devotional service attained by hearing, months, 13
140 wrote 100,000 verses, 110


--- Page 397 ---
General Index 395
Sanatana Gosvami
5 offered respects to Haridasa Thakura, 8
offers obeisances to Caitanya, 9-10,
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha 71
body of Krsna is, 175 ordered by Caitanya to stay for one
Sact year, 97
as mother of Caitanya, 118 reasons of for committing suicide, 6-7
Sadasiva saved from suicide by Caitanya, 3
attended festival for Nityananda, 231 separation scene with Caitanya piteous,
Sahajiyas 100
as materialists, 329 specific accomplishments of, 41
foolishly think they are transcendental, statements of on chanting, 36
82 stayed with Haridasa Thakura, 23
Sanatana Gosvami tells Jagadananda about his distress,
as advanced in renunciation, 72 65-67
as author of Dasama-tippani, 106 tested by Caitanya, 56-64
as deliverer of the entire universe, 63 thinks himself low-caste and useless, 5
as spiritual master of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, walked through Jharikhanda Forest, 4
114 went from Mathura to Jagannatha Puri,
attempts to avoid Caitanya’s embrace, 3
10-11, 71-72 went to Vrndavana by Caitanya's route,
basic principle of books of, 107 101
Caitanya met with daily, 24 Sankarananda Sarasvati
compares chastisement of Caitanya to brought govardhana sila and conchshell
nectar, 77 garland to Caitanya, 334
compares himself to wooden doll, 43 Sannyasa
compiled Hari-bhakti-vilasa, 107 as topmost position for brahmana,
conversation of Caitanya and regarding 156
Anupama, 14-21 devotional service satisfies Krsna more
cured by Caitanya’s embrace, 97 than acceptance of, 29
dear to everyone for his learning, 55 paramahariisa as highest stage of, 186
discharge of sores of smear Caitanya’s Sannyasi
body, 11, 65, 73 acceptance and rejection of matter not
embraced by Caitanya, 11, 46, 72 concern of, 86
essence of devotional service exhibited affected by women, 134
through, 159 as self-controlled, 154
expert in understanding mellows, 23 Caitanya as, 134
explains his distress to Caitanya, 72-74 in line of Sankara, 158
feet of blistered by hot sand, 60 Santipura
had almostbecome Mohammedan, 159 Caitanya met Raghunatha dasa at, 210
has power to convince Caitanya, 79 Saptagrama
his life's work delineated by Caitanya, Mohammedan official collected taxes
39-42 i of, 211
instructed by Caitanya to chant and Saranagati
hear, 31 written by Bhaktivinoda Thakura, 102
itching disease of, 4 Sarasvati
no one as fortunate as, 46-47 offers prayers to Krsna, 194, 188-189,
offered obeisances to devotees, 12 191,193


--- Page 398 ---
396 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Sastras Sivananda Sena
Caitanya distributed real essence of, Raghunatha dasa’s father wrote letter
157 to, 282
Sat-sandarbha Songs
See: Bhagavat-sandarbha of Svaripa Damodara pacify Caitanya,
Sense gratification 206-209
devotees of Caitanya not attached to, with rasabhasa not tolerated by
302 Caitanya, 163-165
difficult to give up, 290 Soul
minds of living entities are absorbed in, as nondifferent from spiritual body,
129 176-180
offenses committed by one engaged in, Bengali poet distinguishes between
178 Jagannatha's body and, 177-179
pure devotee has no desire for, 82 Spiritual master
Ramananda Raya's service to dancing as representative of Lord Krsna, 69
girls devoid of, 127 bona fide must act and preach cor-
spoils human life, 49 rectly, 52
Senses considered ordinary human being by
living entities struggle with six, 176 hellish persons, 337
Separation knows science of Krsna, 157
Caitanya felt pangs of from Krsna, of entire world is Haridasa, 51
206-207 qualities of, 158
feelings of Krsna for Radha, 208 Yadunandana Acarya accepted
Sex , Vasudeva Dattaas his, 273
materialists hear Bhagavatam to in- Sravanam kirtanari visnoh
crease, 186 , verses quoted, 34
Siksastaka Sri Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka
quoted on humility and holy name, 37 quoted on Raghunatha dasa, 322
Silence $rimad-Bhagavatam
as characteristic of advanced devotees, as heard and spoken by pure Vaisnava,
153 138
Sirnha:dvara cited on India, 49
as main gate of Jagannatha temple, 60 gives evidence on the spiritually in-
Raghunatha dasa begged alms at, 299, spired mind, 136
302 professional readers of condemned,
Sanatana said he had no right to pass 185-186
by, 61 quoted on angles of vision of Absolute
Vaisnavas beg alms at, 300 Truth, 180
Sin quoted on attainment of Krsna, 27
purification of those addicted to, 157 quoted on bondage of karma, 292
Sisupala quoted on availability of Krsna to hum-
blasphemes Krsna, 194 ble, 35
Siva quoted on chanting, 37
desires to bathe in dust of Krsna's lotus quoted on death-wish of Rukminidevi,
feet, 29 29-30
drank poison, 138 quoted on distinguishing spiritual body
Sivananda Sena from soul, 179
describes Raghunatha dasa’s renounced quoted on divinity of the Lord and His
life, 316-318 devotees, 176


--- Page 399 ---
General Index 397
Srimad-Bhagavatam Svarapa Damodara
quoted on fruitless labor, 122 as kindhearted, 185
quoted on grhavratas, 186 Caitanya pacified by songs of, 206-207
quoted on illusion of “good” and “bad”, chastised brahmana poet from Bengal,
84 174-184
quoted on imitating rasa-lila, 138 considers Bengali poet an offender, 177,
quoted on Indra’s chastisement of 184, 188-189
Krsna, 190 embraced Raghunatha dasa, 287,
quoted on nine kinds of devotional ser- Raghunatha dasa placed under charge
vice, 34 of, 204
quoted on renunciation, 346-347 Raghunatha dasa entrusted to, 294-295
quoted on renunciation of King 8harata, Raghunatha dasa under charge of, 317
263 Raghunatha dasa informed Caitanya of
quoted on spiritual initiation, 94 his desires through, 307
quoted on the Lord's form, 182 screened songs and poetry brought to
quoted on unimportance of birth status, Caitanya, 163-165
33, 34 was formerly Lalita, 312
understandable by followers of Syamananda Gosvami
Caitanya, 186 represented mercy of Caitanya, 160
understood by hearing from Vaisnava,
185
Sri-rapa-gosvami grantha sodasa karila T
quoted, 110
Srnvatarn sva-kathah Time
quoted, 185 not perceived by Ramananda Raya and
Subala Pradyumna Misra, 147
Krsna given happiness by, 208 Transmigration
Sadra described in Gita, 173
Ramananda Raya as, 156 71030 api sunicena
Suicide verses quoted, 37
influenced by mode of ignorance, 26 Tulasi
Sukadeva offered to govardhana sila, 338, 341
statements of on chanting, 36-37
Sundarananda ।8।
attended festival for Nityananda, 231
Supreme Lord Uddharana Datta Thakura
as distinguished from living entity, attended festival for Nityananda, 232
178-180 Ujjvala-nilamani
as full of bliss, 183 compiled by Rapa Gosvami, 109
as praised with songs, 186 explains loving affairs of Radha and
can change reactions of karma, 287- Krsna, 109
288 Uttama-3loka
Deity of never considered stone, 92 Krsna known as, 263
dictates to spiritually advanced, 150
doesn't accept offerings of puffed-up
materialists, 328 Vv
favorable to the meek, 33
resides everywhere, 257-258 Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam
served by full surrender, 327 quoted, 180


--- Page 400 ---
398 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Vaidya Raghunatha Vidyanagara
as one of three Raghunathas of Ramananda Raya spoke at, 145
Caitanya, 294 Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura
Vaisnavas quoted on rasabhasa, 165
acceptance and rejection of matter not Vindavana
concern of, 86 awarded by Caitanya to Sanatana’s
Bhagavatam heard and spoken by pure, family, 113
138 given to Sanitana and Rapa as resi-
considered sectarian by hellish persons, dence, 69
337 Indra offended by cowherd men of, 190
don't distinguish between body and one should think of how to serve Radha
soul of the Lord, 179 and Krsna in, 310
etiquette of as the ornament of a devo- pastimes of exhibited through Rapa
tee, 63 Gosvami, 159
not subject to six kinds of bodily
change, 154
should hanker for spiritual service, 87 w
to understand Bhagavatam one must
hear from, 185-186 Women
beg alms at Sirhha-dvara, 300 sannyasis affected by, 134
don't like poetry with rasabhasa, 167 World, material
Krsna consciousness movement creates ideas of “good” and “bad” in all specu-
pure, 157 lations, 84
Raghunatha dasa’s father and uncle as nescience entangles everyone in, 193
almost, 290-291 World, spiritual
those who are almost, 291 Ramananda Raya’s service as affair of,
proper behavior of given in Hari-bhakti- 130
vilasa, 41 Worship
Vaisnava-aparadha of one’s own body as Supreme Lord,
explained, 94 178
Vaisnava tosani priests performing must be pure, 62
referred to in Bhakti-ratnakara, 108
Vaisnavism
outward show of, 291 Y
Vallabha
See: Anupama
Vanaprastha Yadunandana Acarya
as self-controlled, 154 accepted money of Vasudeva Datta,
Varna 273
duties performed according to, 122 as spiritual master of Raghunatha dasa,
Vasudeva Datta 273
Caitanya’s embrace made body of initiated by Advaita Acarya, 274
beautiful, 91 Yadyapi sri-bhagavata-mate
Yadunandana Acarya accepted mercy verses quoted, 304
of, 273 Yaha, bhagavata pada vaisnavera
Vidagdha-madhava quoted, 186
as drama compiled by Rapa Gosvami, ১3/৭3/0030 karmano ‘nyatra loko
109 quoted, 291


--- Page 401 ---
General Index 399
YajAavalkya Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi
quoted on kdyastha community, 215 quoted, 186
Yamesvara Yathagner visphulinga vyuccaranti
garden of, 57 quoted, 176
Yamuna Yei krspa-tattva-vetta
as sacred river in India, 49 quoted, 157
Ganges thought to be by Nityananda's Yoga
associates, 243 binds one to birth and death,
Krsna ate with Balarama on banks of, 292
242


--- Page 402 ---
(continued from front flap)

Madhya-lila (the middle period), the
longest of the three, is a detailed narration of
Sri Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels
throughout India as a renounced mendicant,
teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and
mystic. Finally, Antya-/ila (the final period)
concerns the last eighteen years of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s manifest presence, spent in
semiseclusion in Jagannatha Puri, Orissa.
During these final years, Sri Caitanya drifted
deeper and deeper into trances of spiritual
ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and
literary history, Eastern or Western.

Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of 4
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, was a great saint and
a confidential disciple and student of
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the renowned
ascetic saint who was one of the most inti-
mate disciples of Sri Caitanya. He com-
menced work on the text while in his late
nineties and in failing health, as he vividly
describes in the text itself: “1 have now be-
come too old and disturbed in invalidity.
While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot
remember anything, nor can | see or hear
properly. Still | write, and this is a great
wonder.” That he nevertheless completed,
under such debilitating conditions, the
greatest literary gem of medieval India is
surely one of the wonders of literary history.

The English translation and commentary is
the work of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished scholar and teacher of
indian religious and philosophical thought.
He himself is a disciplic descendant of Sri
Caitanya, and his intimate familiarity with
the precepts of Caitanya Mahaprabhu emi-
nently qualifies him to present this impor-
tant classic to the English-speaking world.
The ease and clarity with which he ex-
pounds upon Sri Caitanya’s precepts lures
even a reader totally unfamiliar with Indian
religious tradition into a genuine under-
standing and appreciation of this profound
and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, pre-
sented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
represents a contribution of major impor-
tance to the intellectual, cultural and
spiritual life of contemporary man.


--- Page 403 ---
ए. সম
| ॥ ANTYA-LILA
| ॥ -
- ॥
5 | |
৩১ ৫ | ९
9.2; गः च्‌
५ d \
\ ¢ A CAITANYA-
দ ১. / রণ |
NE Gand ply ঢা
৯২ # 4
1 he ;
८ < ১25. NF Te
| 0/3), ९५ 0,
| 4 US /,। rd a 2
1 ८ ১ 10
८ I ১৮
রা Fe ४ भू fost |
१1 ^ हि श) ४ (1 ১৬
et ৮ 4 7 » A “wp J 1 Rie HIS DIVINE GRACE
pol ১৯. it 4 BG AC. Bhaktivedanta
# # ^. ২ >: Swami
` 0 দর Prabhupada
८ \
- ~ शः वि
॥॥ 1৬ > 7 ৷ সত
7 তম (ति .
RR ^ ५ ८ Be
4 | - Gr ১. pe ৯ ¢
ned NZ TN Be
+ arc; म क द
011 es ई
का Caitanya-caritdmrta is the authorized work on the life and teachings of ना
Krsna Caitanya—the philosopher, saint, spiritual preceptor, mystic and divine
incarnation who pioneered a great social and religious movement in Sixteenth
Century India. His teachings, which embody the highest philosophical and
theolgoical truths, have affected centuries of religious and philosophical
thinkers until the present day.
This translation and commentary on the original Bengali text is the work of =
His Divine Grace ^. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (pictured above), the
world’s most distinguished scholar and teacher of Indian thought and culture
and author of the best-selling Bhagavad-gita As It Is. This translation of Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta represents a contribution of major importance to the Hl
intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man. BHAKTIVEDANTA
BY R

