
--- Page 1 ---
.
Introduction

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is the principal work on the life and teachings of इ
Krsna Caitanya. ऽ Caitanya is the pioneer of a great social and religious move-
ment which began in India a little less than five hundred years ago and which has
directly and indirectly influenced the subsequent course of religious and phi-
losophical thinking not only in India but in the recent West as well.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu is regarded as a figure of great historical significance.
However, our conventional method of historical analysis —that of seeing a man as
a product of his times —fails here. अ Caitanya is a personality who transcends the
limited scope of historical settings.

At a time when, in the West, man was directing his explorative spirit toward
studying the structure of the physical universe and circumnavigating the world in
search of new oceans and continents, ঠা Krsna Caitanya, in the East, was in-
augurating and masterminding a revolution directed inward, toward a scientific
understanding of the highest knowledge of man’s spiritual nature.

The chief historical sources for the life of $ri Krsna Caitanya are the kagacas (di-
aries) kept by Murari Gupta and Svaripa Damodara Gosvami. Murari Gupta, a
physician and close associate of नं Caitanya’s, recorded extensive notes on the
first twenty-four years of जा Caitanya’s life, culminating in his initiation into the
renounced order, sannyasa. The events of the rest of Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s for-
ty-eight years are recorded in the diary of Svaripa Damodora Gosvami, another of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s intimate associates.

$ri Caitanya-caritamyta is divided into three sections called 11125, which literally
means “pastimes” — Adi-lila (the early period), Madhya-lila (the middle period)
and Antya-lila (the final period). The notes of Murari Gupta form the basis of the
Adi-lila, and SvarGpa Damodara'’s diary provides the details for the Madhya- and
Antya-lilas.

The first twelve of the seventeen chapters of Adi-lila constitute the preface for
the entire work. By referring to Vedic scriptural evidence, this preface establishes
Sri Caitanya as the avatara (incarnation) of Krsna (God) for the age of Kali—the
current epoch, beginning five thousand years ago and characterized by material-
ism, hypocrisy and dissension. In these descriptions, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
is identical with Lord Krsna, descends to liberally grant pure love of God to the
fallen souls of this degraded age by propagating sankirtana—literally,
“congregational glorification of God” —especially by organizing massive public
chanting of the maha-mantra (Great Chant for Deliverance). The esoteric purpose
of Lord Caitanya’s appearance in the world is revealed, his co-avataras and prin-
cipal devotees are described and his teachings are summarized. The remaining
portion of Adi-lila, chapters thirteen through seventeen, briefly recounts his
divine birth and his life until he accepted the renounced order. This includes his
childhood miracles, schooling, marriage and early philosophical confrontations, as
well as his organization of a widespread sankirtana movement and his civil disobe-
dience against the repression of the Mohammedan government.

vi


--- Page 2 ---
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

The subject of Madhya-lila, the longest of the three divisions, is a detailed nar-
ration of Lord Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels throughout India as a
renounced mendicant, teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and mystic. Dur-
ing this period of six years, ऽन Caitanya transmits his teachings to his principal dis-
ciples. He debates and converts many of the most renowned philosophers and
theologians of his time, including Sarikarites, Buddhists and Muslims, and incor-
porates their many thousands of followers and disciples into his own burgeoning
numbers. A dramatic account of Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s miraculous activities at
the giant Jagannatha Cart Festival in Orissa is also included in this section.

Antya-lila concerns the last eighteen years of $rf Caitanya’s manifest presence,
spent in semiseclusion near the famous Jagannatha temple at Jagannatha Puri in
Orissa. During these final years, अ Caitanya drifted deeper and deeper into
trances of spiritual ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and literary history,
Eastern or Western. $f Caitanya’s perpetual and ever-increasing religious
beatitude, graphically described in the eyewitness accounts of Svaripa Damodara
Gosvami, his constant companion during this period, clearly defy the investigative
and descriptive abilities of modern psychologists and phenomenologists of
religious experience.

The author of this great classic, Krsnadasa Kavirdgja Gosvami, born in the year
1507, was a disciple of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, a confidential follower of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Raghunatha dasa, a renowned ascetic saint, heard and
memorized all the activities of Caitanya Mahaprabhu told to him by SvarGpa
Damodara. After the passing away of Sri Caitanya and Svaripa Damodara,
Raghunatha dasa, unable to bear the pain of separation from these objects of his
complete devotion, traveled to Vrndavana, intending to commit suicide by jump-
ing from Govardhana Hill. In Vrndavana, however, he encountered Ripa Gosvami
and Sanatana Gosvami, the most confidential disciples of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
They convinced him to give up his plan of suicide and impelled him to reveal to
them the spiritually inspiring events of Lord Caitanya’s later life. Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Cosvami was also residing in Vrndavana at this time, and Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami endowed him with a full comprehension of the transcendental life of ऽन
Caitanya.

By this time, several biographical works had already been written on the life of
क Caitanya by contemporary and near-contemporary scholars and devotees.
These included $r7 Caitanya-carita by Murari Gupta, Caitanya-mangala by Locana
dasa Thakura and Caitanya-bhagavata. This latter text, a work by Vindavana dasa
Thakura, who was then considered the principal authority on Sri Caitanya's life,
was highly revered. While composing his important work, Vrndavana dasa, fearing
that it would become too voluminous, avoided elaborately describing many of
the events of ri Caitanya's life, particulary the later ones. Anxious to hear of these
later pastimes, the devotees of Vrndavana requested Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami,
whom they respected as a great saint, to compose a book to narrate these

vii


--- Page 3 ---
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
episodes in detail. Upon this request, and with the permission and blessings of the
Madana-mohana Deity of Vindavana, he began compiling $ri Caitanya-caritamrta,
which, due to its biographical excellence and thorough exposition of Lord
Caitanya’s profound philosophy and teachings, is regarded as the most significant
of biographical works on ও Caitanya.

He commenced work on the text while in his late nineties and in failing health,
as he vividly describes in the text itself: “I have now become too old and dis-
turbed in invalidity. While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot remember any-
thing, nor can | see or hear properly. Still | write, and this is a great wonder.” That
he nevertheless completed, under such debilitating conditions, the greatest liter-
ary gem of medieval India is surely one of the wonders of literary history.

This English translation and commentary is the work of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of In-
dian religious and philosophical thought. His commentary is based upon two
Bengali commentaries, one by his teacher Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami,
the eminent Vedic scholar who predicted, “The time will come when the people
of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,” and the other by
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta’s father, Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is himself a disciplic
descendant of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he is the first scholar to execute
systematic English translations of the major works of $ri Caitanya’s followers. His
consummate Bengali and Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with the
precepts of Sri Krsna Caitanya are a fitting combination that eminently qualifies
him to present this important classic to the English-speaking world. The ease and
clarity with which he expounds upon difficult philosophical concepts lures even a
reader totally unfamiliar with Indian religious tradition into a genuine understand-
ing and appreciation of this profound and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, presented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, represents a contribution of major im-
portance to the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man.

— The Publishers
viii


--- Page 4 ---
CHAPTER 16
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Tastes Nectar from the Lips of
Lord Sri Krsna

The Sixteenth Chapter is summarized by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-
pravaha-bhasya. When the Bengali devotees of the Lord returned to Jagannatha
Puri, a gentleman named Kalidasa who was an uncle of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
went with them to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Kalidasa had tasted the rem-
nants of food of all the Vaisnavas in Bengal, even Jhadu Thakura. Because of this,
he received the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri.

When Kavi-karnapara was only seven years old, he was initiated by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu into the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. He later became the greatest poet
among the Vaisnava acaryas.

When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate the remnants of food known as vallabha-
bhoga, He described the glories of such remnants of the Lord's food and then fed
all the devotees the prasada. Thus they all tasted adharamrta, the nectar from the
lips of Lord Sri Krsna.

TEXT 1
বন্দে লীকৃষ্ণচৈতন্তযাং কৃষ্ণতাবামৃতং হি स ।
আস্বাত্যযাস্বাদয়ল্‌ ভক্তান্‌ প্রেমদীক্ষামশিক্ষয়ৎ ॥ ১ ॥
vande $ri-krsna-caitanyam
krsna-bhavamrtam hi yah
asvadyasvadayan bhaktan
prema-diksam asiksayat
SYNONYMS

vande —I| offer my respectful obeisances; $ri-krsna-caitanyam—unto Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna-bhava-amrtam—the nectar of ecstatic love of Krsna;
hi—certainly; yah—He who; dsvadya—tasting; asvadayan—causing to taste;
bhaktan—the devotees; prema—in love of Krsna; diksam—initiation; asiksayat—
instructed.

1


--- Page 5 ---
2 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
personally tasted the nectar of ecstatic love for Krsna and then instructed His
devotees how to taste it. Thus He enlightened them about ecstatic love of
Krsna to initiate them into transcendental knowledge.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় EoD জয় निररं नन्त |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃষ্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; $ri-caitanya—to Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
jaya—all glories; nityananda—to Nityananda Prabhu; jaya—all glories; advaita-
candra—to Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vinda—to all the
devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All
glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to all the devotees of the Lord!
TEXT 3
এইমত মহাপ্রভু রহেন লীলাচলে |
ভক্তগণ-সঙ্গে সদা প্রেম-বিহবলে ॥ ৩ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu rahena nilacale
bhakta-gana-sange sada prema-vihvale
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rahena—stays;
nilacale—in Jagannatha Puri; bhakta-gana-sange—in the association of devotees;
sada—always; prema-vihvale—merged in ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus stayed at Jagannatha Puri in the association
of His devotees, always merged in ecstatic devotional love.


--- Page 6 ---
Text 6] The Lord Tastes Nectar 3
TEXT 4
বর্ষাত্তরে Aes সব (NCTA ভক্তগণ |
fae আসি” কৈল প্রভুর মিলন ॥ 8 ॥
varsantare aila 52602 gaudera bhakta-gana
parvavat asi’ kaila prabhura milana
SYNONYMS
varsa-antare —the next year; aila—came; saba—all; gaudera—of Bengal; bhak-
ta-gana—the devotees; parva-vat—as previously; asi’—coming; kaila—did;
prabhura milana—meeting with $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The next year, as usual, all the devotees from Bengal went to Jagannatha
Puri, and, as in previous years, there was a meeting between Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and the devotees.
TEXT 5
ভা-সবার সঙ্গে আইল কালিদাস নাম ।
কৃষ্ণনাম বিন৷ (Fez) নাহি কহে আন ॥ ৫ ॥
tan-sabara sange aila kalidasa nama
krspa-nama vina tenho nahi kahe ana
SYNONYMS
tan-sabara sange—with all of them; dila—came; kali-dasa nama—a man
named Kalidasa; krspa-nama—the holy name of Krsna; vina—besides; teriho—
he; nahi—does not; kahe —say; ana—anything else.
TRANSLATION
Along with the devotees from Bengal came a gentleman named Kalidasa. He
never uttered anything but the holy name of Krsna.
TEXT 6
মহাতাগবত তেঁহে। সরল উদার |
কুষ্ণলাম-“সন্কেতে'” চালায় ব্যবহার ॥ ৬ ॥


--- Page 7 ---
4 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
maha-bhagavata tenho sarala udara
krspa-nama-‘sankete’ calaya vyavahara
SYNONYMS
maha-bhagavata—a highly advanced devotee; tennho—he; sarala udara—very
simple and liberal; krspa-nama-sankete—with chanting of the holy name of
Krsna; calaya—performs; vyavahara—ordinary dealings.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa was a very advanced devotee, yet he was simple and liberal. He
would chant the holy name of Krsna while performing all his ordinary
dealings.
TEXT 7
ক্ৌতুকেতে (Srl যদি পাশক খেলায় ।
“হরে কৃষ্ণ” FY করি” পাশক চালায় ॥ ৭ ॥
kautukete tenho yadi pasaka khelaya
‘hare krsna’ ‘*krspa’ kari’ pasaka calaya
SYNONYMS
kautukete —in jest; tenho—he; yadi—when; pasaka khelaya—plays with dice;
hare krspna—the holy name of the Lord; krspna—Krsna; kari’—chanting; pasaka
calaya—throws the dice.
TRANSLATION
When he used to throw dice in jest, he would throw the dice while chanting
Hare Krsna.
PURPORT
In this connection Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura warns the men of this
age not to imitate the jesting of a maha-bhagavata like Kalidasa. If someone imi-
tates him by playing with dice or gambling while chanting the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra, he will certainly become a victim of offenses unto the holy name. As it is
said, hari-nama-bale pape pravrtti: one must not commit sinful activities on the
strength of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. Playing with dice is certainly
gambling, but it is clearly said here that Kalidasa did this only in jest. A maha-
bhagavata can do anything, but he never forgets the basic principles. Therefore it
is said, vaispavera kriya-mudra vijieha na bujhaya: “No one can understand the
activities of a pure devotee.” We should not imitate Kalidasa.


--- Page 8 ---
Text 10] The Lord Tastes Nectar 5
TEXT 8
রঘুনাথ-দ।সের তেঁহে। হয় ভ্ঞাতি-খুড়া |
বৈষ্ণবের উচ্ছিষ্ট খাইতে (दर) टेल বুড়া ॥ ৮ ॥
raghunatha-dasera tenho haya jaati-khuda
vaispavera ucchista khaite tenho haila buda
SYNONYMS
raghunatha-dasera—of Raghunatha dasa Cosvami; tertho—he (Kalidasa);
haya—is; jnati—relative; khuda—uncle; vaispavera—of the Vaisnavas; uc-
chista—remnants of food; khaite —eating; tenho—he; haila—became; buda—
aged.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa was an uncle of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. Throughout his entire
life, even in his old age, he tried to eat the remnants of food left by Vaisnavas.
TEXT 9
গৌড়দেশে হয় যত বৈষ্ণবের গণ |
সবার উচ্ছিষ্ট ভেঁহে। করিল ভোজন ॥ > ॥
gauda-dese haya yata ৮৪/503%9/73 gana
sabara ucchista tenho karila bhojana
SYNONYMS
gauda-dese—in Bengal; haya—are; yata—as many; vaispavera gana—
Vaisnavas; sabara—of all; ucchista—remnants of food; tenho—he; karila bho-
jana—ate.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa ate the remnants of food of as many Vaisnavas as there were in
Bengal.
TEXT 10
ত্রাহ্মণ-বৈঞ্চব যত — ছোট, বড় 27 |
উত্তম-বসন্ত ভেট লঞ Sta $ यऽ যায় ॥ ১০ ॥
brahmana-vaisnava yata——chota, 2993 haya
uttama-vastu bheta lana tanra thani yaya


--- Page 9 ---
6 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
brahmana-vaisnava—Vaisnavas coming from brahmana families; yata—all;
chota—neophyte; bada—highly advanced; haya—are; uttama-vastu—first-class
eatables; bheta lana—taking as gifts; tanra thani—to them; yaya—goes.
TRANSLATION
He would go to all the Vaisnavas born in brahmana families, be they
neophyte or advanced devotees, and present them gifts of first-class eatables.
TEXT 11
তার शोय শেষ-পাত্র লয়েন মাগিয়া ।
কাই না পায়, তবে রহে ল্ুকাঞা ॥ ১১ ॥
tanra thani 9653-023173 layena magiya
kahan na paya, tabe rahe lukana
SYNONYMS
tanra thani—from them; sesa-patra—plates of remnants; layena—takes;
magiya—begging; kahan—where; na paya—does not get; tabe—then; rahe—
remains; lukana—hiding.
TRANSLATION
He would beg remnants of food from such Vaisnavas, and if he did not
receive any, he would hide.
TEXT 12
ভোজন করিলে পাত্র ফেলাঞ। যায় ।
ল্যুকাঞ। সেই পাত্র আনি” চাটি' খায় ॥ ১২ ॥
bhojana karile patra phelana yaya
lukana sei patra ani’ cati’ khaya
SYNONYMS
bhojana karile—after eating; patra—the plate; phelana yaya—is thrown away;
lukana—hiding; sei patra—that plate; ani’—bringing; cati’ khaya—he licks up.
TRANSLATION
After the Vaisnavas finished eating, they would throw away their dishes or
leaves, and Kalidasa would come out of hiding, take the leaves and lick up the
remnants.


--- Page 10 ---
Text 14] The Lord Tastes Nectar 7
TEXT 13
শুদ্র-বৈষ্ণবের ঘরে যায় ভেট লঞ। |
এইমত ভার উচ্ছিষ্ট খায় ল্লুকাঞ। so ॥
$adra-vaisnavera ghare yaya bheta lana
ei-mata tanra ucchista khaya lukana
SYNONYMS
sadra-vaisnavera—of Vaisnavas born in sadra families; ghare—at the homes;
ydya—goes; bheta lana—taking gifts; ei-mata—in this way; tanra—their; uc-
chista—remnants of food; khaya—eats; lukana—hiding.
TRANSLATION
He would also take gifts to the homes of Vaisnavas born in sadra families.
Then he would hide and eat the remnants of food they threw away in this man-
ner.
TEXT 14
ভুইেমালি-জাতি, Lama —arg ভার নাম |
खांब्मफन नयं Ful গেলা তার স্থান ॥ ১৪ ॥
bhanimali-jati, ‘vaisnava’— ‘jhadu’ tanra nama
amra-phala lara tenho gela tanra sthana
SYNONYMS
bhanimali-jati—belonging to the bhanimali caste; vaisnava—a great devotee;
jhadu—Jjhadu; tanra—his; nama—name; amra-phala—mango fruits; lana—
taking; tennho—he; gela—went; (5712 sthana—to his place.
TRANSLATION
There was a great Vaisnava named Jhadu Thakura, who belonged to the
bhanimali caste. Kalidasa went to his home, taking mangoes with him.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks that both Kalidasa and Jhadu
Thakura are worshiped at a place called Sripatabatj, in the village known as Bhedo
or Bhaduya. This village is situated about three miles south of the village of
Krsnapura, the birthplace of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, which is about one mile
west of the Byandel junction of the Burdwan line. A post office there is named


--- Page 11 ---
8 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
Devananda-pura. Jhadu Thakura used to worship the Deity of Sri Madana-gopala.
The Deity is still worshiped by one Ramaprasada dasa, who belongs to the
ramdyet community. It is said that the Deity worshiped by Kalidasa had been
worshiped until now in the village of Sankhya on the bank of the Sarasvati River,
but the Deity has been taken away by a gentleman named Matilala Cat-
topadhyaya from the village of Triveni. The Deity is now being worshiped at his
place.
TEXT 15
আত্ম ভেট দিয়া তার চরণ वन्निनि। |
তার পত্মীরে তবে নমস্কার टेकल। ॥ ১৫ ॥
amra 60919 diya tanra carana vandila
tanra patnire tabe namaskara kaila
SYNONYMS
amra—mangoes; bheta—gift; diya—presenting; tanra—his; carana—feet; van-
dila—offered respects to; tanra patnire—to his wife; tabe —thereafter; namaskara
kaila—offered respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa presented the mangoes to Jhadu Thakura and offered him respect-
ful obeisances. Then he also offered respectful obeisances to the Thakura’s
wife.
TEXT 16
ARES তেঁহে। আছেন বসিয়া |
Ag সম্মান टेकन। কালিদাসেরে দেখিয়। ॥ ১৬ ॥
patni-sahita tenho achena vasiya
bahu sammana kaila kalidasere dekhiya
SYNONYMS
patni-sahita—with his wife; tenho—he (Jhadu Thakura); achena vasiya—was
sitting; bahu—much; sammana—respect; kaila—offered; kalidasere dekhiya—
seeing Kalidasa.
TRANSLATION
When Kalidasa went to Jhadu Thakura, he saw that saintly person sitting
with his wife. As soon as Jhadu Thakura saw Kalidasa, he likewise offered his
respectful obeisances unto him.


--- Page 12 ---
Text 19] The Lord Tastes Nectar 9
TEXT 17
ইষ্টগোষ্ঠী কতক্ষণ করি” Sta সনে |
ঝড়-ঠাকুর কহে SICA ALT AGTH ॥ ১৭ ॥
istagosthi kata-ksana kari’ tanra sane
jhadu-thakura kahe tanre madhura vacane
SYNONYMS
ista-gosthi—discussion; kata-ksana—for some time; kari’—performing; tarnra
sane —with him; jhadu-thakura—Jhadu Thakura; kahe —says; tarire —unto him
(Kalidasa); madhura vacane —in sweet words.
TRANSLATION
After a discussion for some time with Kalidasa, Jhadu Thakura said some-
thing to him in sweet words.
TEXT 18
“আমি-নীচজাতি, তুমি, অতিথি সর্বোত্তম |
কোন্‌ প্রকারে করিম আমি তোমার সেবন ? ১৮ ॥
“ami ——nica-jati, tumi, —atithi sarvottama
kon prakare karimu ami tomdra sevana?
SYNONYMS
ami—I; nica-jati—belong to a low caste; tumi—you; atithi—guest; sarva-ut-
tama—very respectable; kon prakare—how; karimu—shall perform; ami—I;
tomdra sevana—your service.
TRANSLATION
“4 belong to a low caste, and you are a very respectable guest. How shall |
serve you?
TEXT 19
আজ্ঞা দেহ”- ত্রাহ্মণ-খরে खन्न Sel দিয়ে |
তাই তুমি প্রসাদ পাও, তবে আমি জীয়ে ॥”১৯॥
2/7 deha’,——brahmana-ghare anna lana diye
tahan tumi prasada pao, tabe ami jiye”


--- Page 13 ---
10 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
2/7 deha’—permit me; brahmana-ghare —to the house of a brahmana; anna—
food; lana diye—I| shall offer; taharn—there; tumi—you; prasada pao—take
prasada; tabe —then; ami—I; jiye—shall live.
TRANSLATION
““1f you will permit me, | shall send some food to a brahmana’s house, and
there you may take prasada. If you do so, | shall then live very comfortably.”
TEXT 20
কালিদাস কহছে,- “ঠাকুর, कुन] কর মোরে ।
তোমার দর্শনে खादेद्‌ সুই পতিত পামরে ॥ ২০ ॥
kalidasa kahe, — “thakura, krpa kara more
tomara darsane ainu mui patita pamare
SYNONYMS
kalidasa kahe —Kalidasa replied; thakura—my dear saintly person; krpa kara—
bestow your mercy; more —upon me; tomdra darsane —to see you; ainu—have
come; mui—I; patita pamare—very fallen and sinful.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa replied, “My dear sir, please bestow your mercy upon me. | have
come to see you, although | am very fallen and sinful.
TEXT 21
পবিত্র 22 মুই পাইনু দরশন |
Fold হইন্কু, মোর সফল জীবন ॥ ২১ ॥
pavitra ha-inu mui painu darasana
krtartha ha-inu, mora saphala jivana
SYNONYMS
pavitra ha-inu—have become purified; mui—I; painu darasana—have gotten
your interview; krta-artha—obliged; ha-inu—! have become; mora—my; sa-
phala—successful; jivana—life.
TRANSLATION
“Simply by seeing you, | have become purified. | am very obligated to you,
for my life is now successful.


--- Page 14 ---
Text 24] The Lord Tastes Nectar 11
TEXT 22
এক বাঞ্ছ। হয়, যদি কৃপা করি” কর ।
পাদরজ দেহ, পাদ মোর মাথে ধর ॥”২২ ॥
eka vancha haya, —yadi krpa kari’ kara
pada-raja deha’, pada mora mathe dhara”
SYNONYMS
eka varicha—one desire; haya—there is; yadi—if; krpa kari’—being merciful;
kara—you do; pada-raja—the dust of your feet; deha’—give; pada—feet;
mora—my; mathe—on the head; dhara—please place.
TRANSLATION
‘“My dear sir, | have one desire. Please be merciful to me by kindly placing
your feet upon my head so that the dust on your feet may touch it.””
TEXT 23
ঠাকুর কহে,--“এঁছে AS কহিতে না gaa |
আমি-নীচজাতি, ङूभि - স্মসঙ্জন রায় ॥”২৩ ॥
thakura kahe, —"aiche vat kahite na yuyaya
ami—-—nica-jati, tumi——susajjana raya”
SYNONYMS
thakura kahe—J)hadu Thakura said; aiche vat—such a request; kahite na
yuyaya—should not be spoken; ami —I; nica-jati—coming froma family of a very
low caste; tumi—you; su-sat-jana raya—very respectable and rich gentleman.
TRANSLATION
Jhadu Thakura replied, “11 does not befit you to ask this of me. | belong to a
very low-caste family, whereas you are a respectable rich gentleman.”
TEXT 24
তবে কালিদাস (न्नी क পড়ি” नादेन |
শুনি” ঝড়,-ঠাকুরের বড় दथ হইল ॥ ২৪ ॥
tabe kalidasa sloka padi’ sunaila
Suni’ jhadu-thakurera bada sukha ha-ila


--- Page 15 ---
12 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; kalidasa—Kalidasa; sloka—verses; padi’—reciting; sunaila—
caused to hear; Suni’—hearing; jhadu-thakurera—of Jhadu Thakura; bada—very
great; sukha—happiness; ha-ila—there was.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa then recited some verses, which Jhadu Thakura was very happy to
hear.
TEXT 25
न মেইভক্তস্চতুর্বেদী মস্তক্তঃ স্বপচঃ প্রিয়ঃ ৷
STR (मग्रः ততো ATRL AB THT যথা হৃহম্‌ ॥ ২৫ ॥
na me ‘bhaktas catur-vedi
mad-bhaktah sva-pacah priyah
tasmai deyam tato grahyam
sa ca pujyo yatha hy aham
SYNONYMS
no—not; me—My; abhaktah—devoid of pure devotional service; catuh-
vedi—a scholar of the four Vedas; mat-bhaktah—My devotee; sva-pacah—even
from a family of dog-eaters; priyah—very dear; tasmai—to him (the pure devo-
tee); deyam—should be given; tatah—from him; grahyam —should be accepted
(remnants of food); sah —that person; ca—also; pajyah—is worshipable; yatha—
as much as; hi—certainly; 2/12/72 - 1.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Even though one is a very learned scholar in Sanskrit literature, if he is not
engaged in pure devotional service, he is not accepted as My devotee. But if
someone born in a family of dog-eaters is a pure devotee with no motives for
enjoyment through fruitive activity or mental speculation, he is very dear to
Me. All respect should be given to him, and whatever he offers should be ac-
cepted, for such devotees are indeed as worshipable as | am.’
PURPORT
This verse spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is found in Hari-
bhakti-vilasa.


--- Page 16 ---
Text 27] The Lord Tastes Nectar 13
TEXT 26
বিপ্রাদ্দ্বিষড়, গুণযুতাদরবিন্দনাভ-
পাদারবিন্দবিমুখাং শ্বপচং বরিষ্টম্‌ ।
মন্তযে তদপিতমনোবচনেহিতার্থ-
প্রাণৎ পুনাতি म কুলং ন তু ভূরিমানঃ॥ ২৬ ॥
viprad dvi-sad-guna-yutad aravinda-nabha-
padaravinda-vimukhat sva-pacari varistham
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitartha-
(21822071 punati sa kulam na tu bhari-manah
SYNONYMS
viprat—than a brahmana; dvi-sat-guna-yutat—who is qualified with twelve
brahminical qualifications; aravinda-nabha—of Lord Visnu, who has a lotuslike
navel; pada-aravinda—unto the lotus feet; vimukhat—than a person bereft of
devotion; sva-pacam—a candala, or person accustomed to eating dogs;
varistham—more glorified; manye—I think; tat-arpita—dedicated unto Him;
manah—mind; vacana—words; fhita—activities; artha—wealth; pranam—life;
punati—purifies; sah—he; kulam—his family; na tu—but not; bhdri-manah—a
brahmana proud of possessing such qualities.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘A person may be born in a brahmana family and have all twelve brahmini-
cal qualities, but if in spite of being qualified he is not devoted to the lotus
feet of Lord Krsna, who has a navel shaped like a lotus, he is not as good as a
candala who has dedicated his mind, words, activities, wealth and life to the
service of the Lord. Simply to take birth in a brahmana family or to have
brahminical qualities is not sufficient. One must become a pure devotee of the
Lord. If a $va-paca or candala is a devotee, he delivers not only himself but his
whole family, whereas a brahmana who is not a devotee but simply has
brahminical qualifications cannot even purify himself, not to speak of his
family.”
PURPORT
This and the following verse are quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.9.10 and
3.33.7).
TEXT 27
অহেো বত স্বপচো ইতেো! গরীয়ান্‌
যজ্জিহ্বাগ্রে বর্ততে নাম FoI ।


--- Page 17 ---
14 ও Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
তেপুস্তপস্ডে জুহবুঃ ARAN
FRAN গৃণস্তি যে তে॥২৭॥
aho bata $৮৪-230০ ‘to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmandacur nama grnanti ye te
SYNONYMS
aho bata—how wonderful it is; sva-pacah—a dog-eater; atah—than the ini-
tiated brahmana; gariyan—more glorious; yat—of whom; jihva-agre —on the tip
of the tongue; vartate —remains; nama—the holy name; tubhyam—of You, my
Lord; tepuh—have performed; tapah—austerity; te—they; juhuvuh—have per-
formed sacrifices; sasnuh—have bathed in all holy places; aryah—actually
belonging to the Aryan race; brahma—all the Vedas; andcuh—have studied;
nama—the holy name; grnanti—chant; ye—who; te—they.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘My dear Lord, anyone who always keeps Your holy name on his tongue is
greater than an initiated brahmana. Although he may be born in a family of
dog-eaters and therefore, by material calculations, be the lowest of men, he is
glorious nevertheless. That is the wonderful power of chanting the holy name
of the Lord. One who chants the holy name is understood to have performed
all kinds of austerities. He has studied all the Vedas, he has performed all the
great sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas, he has already taken his bath in all the
holy places of pilgrimage, and it is he who is factually the Aryan.’ ८
TEXT 28
শুনি' ঠাকুর কছে,- “sim এই সত্য कञ्च |
সেই শ্রেষ্ঠ, এছে যাতে ক্বষ্ণভক্তি হয় ॥ ২৮ ॥
Suni’ thakura kahe, — “sastra ei satya kaya
sei srestha, aiche yante krsna-bhakti haya
SYNONYMS
suni’—hearing; thakura kahe —Jhadu Thakura said; sastra—revealed scripture;
ei—this; satya—truth; kaya —says; sei—he; srestha—best; aiche —in such a way;
yante—in whom; krsna-bhakti—devotion to Krsna; haya—there is.


--- Page 18 ---
Text 29] The Lord Tastes Nectar 15
TRANSLATION

Hearing these quotations from the revealed scripture Srimad-Bhagavatam,
Jhadu Thakura replied, “Yes, this is true, for it is the version of $astra. It is
true, however, for one who is genuinely advanced in devotion to Krsna.

TEXT 29
আমি -_নীচজাতি, আমার নাহি কৃষ্ণভক্তি |
অস্ত এঁছে হয়, আমায় নাহি এঁছে শক্তি ॥” ২৯ ॥
ami ——nica-jati, amara nahi krspa-bhakti
anya aiche haya, amaya nahi aiche sakti”
SYNONYMS

2111-1; nica-jati—belonging to a lower caste; amara—my; nahi—there is not;
krsna-bhakti—devotion to Krsna; anya—others; aiche haya—may be such;
amaya—unto me; nahi—there is not; aiche sakti—such power.

TRANSLATION

‘Such a position may befit others, but | do not possess such spiritual power.

॥ belong to a lower class and have not even a pinch of devotion to Krsna.”
PURPORT

In his statement, Jhadu Thakura presents himself as being born in a low-caste
family and not having the qualifications of a bona fide devotee of Lord Krsna. He
accepts the statements declaring a lowborn person highly exalted if he is a
Vaisnava. However, he feels that these descriptions from Srimad-Bhagavatam ap-
propriately describe others, but not himself. Jhadu Thakura’s attitude is quite
befitting a real Vaisnava, for a Vaisnava never considers himself exalted, even if he
factually is. He is always meek and humble and never thinks that he is an ad-
vanced devotee. He assigns himself to a lower position, but that does not mean
that he is indeed low. Sanatana Gosvami once said that he belonged to a low-
caste family, for although he was born in a brahmana family, he had associated
with mlecchas and yavanas in his service as a government minister. Similarly,
Jhadu Thakura presented himself as someone who belonged to a low caste, but
he was actually elevated above many persons born in brahmana families. Not only
is there evidence for this in Srimad-Bhagavatam, as quoted by Kalidasa in verses
26 and 27; there is also considerable evidence for this conclusion in other $astras.
For example, in the Mahabharata, Vana-parva, Chapter 180, it is stated:


--- Page 19 ---
16 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
sadre tu yad bhavel laksma
dvije tac ca na vidyate
na vai sadro bhavec chadro
brahmano na ca brahmanah
“If the characteristics of a brahmana are found in a sadra and not in a brahmana,
that sadra should not be known as a sadra, and that brahmana should not be
known as a brahmana.”
Similarly, in the Vana-parva, Chapter 211, it is said:
sadra-yonau hi jatasya
sad-gunanupatisthatah
arjave vartamanasya
brahmanyam abhijayate
“If a person born in a sadra family has developed the qualities of a brahmana, such
as satya [truthfulness], sama [peacefulness], dama [self-control] and arjava
[simplicity], he attains the exalted position of a brahmana.”
In the Anusasana-parva, Chapter 163, it is said:
sthito brahmana-dharmena
brahmanyam upajivati
ksatriyo vatha vaisyo va
brahma-bhayah sa gacchati
ebhis tu karmabhir devi
Subhair acaritais tatha
sadro brahmanatan yati
vaisyah ksatriyatarm vrajet
na yonir napi samskaro
na srutarir na ca santatih
karanani dvijatvasya
vrttam eva tu karanam
“If one is factually situated in the occupation of a brahmana, he must be con-
sidered a brahmana, even if born of a ksatriya or vaisya family.

“O Devi, if even a sadra is actually engaged in the occupation and pure
behavior of a brahmana, he becomes a brahmana. Moreover, a vaisya can become
a ksatriya.

“Therefore, neither the source of one’s birth, nor his reformation, nor his educa-
tion is the criterion of a brahmana. The vrtta, or occupation, is the real standard by
which one is known as a brahmana.”


--- Page 20 ---
Text 29] The Lord Tastes Nectar 17
We have seen that a person who is not the son of a doctor and has not at-
tended a medical college is sometimes able to practice medicine. By practical
knowledge of how to perform a surgical operation, how to mix medicine and how
to give certain medicines for certain diseases, a person can receive a certificate
and be registered as a medical practitioner in the practical field. He can do a medi-
cal man’s work and be known as a doctor. Although qualified medical men may
consider him a quack, the government will recognize his work. Especially in India,
there are many such doctors who perform their medical services perfectly. They
are accepted even by the government. Similarly, if one is engaged in brahminical
service or occupational duties, he must be considered a brahmana despite the
family in which he is born. That is the verdict of all the sastras.
In the $rimad-Bhagavatam, (7.11.35), it is said:
yasya yal laksanarh proktarn
purso varnabhivyaijakam
yad anyatrapi drsyeta
tat tenaiva vinirdiset
This is a statement by Narada Muni to Maharaja Yudhisthira, wherein Narada says
that the symptoms of a brahmana, ksatriya and vaisya are all described in ৩3503.
Therefore, if one is found exhibiting the symptoms and qualities of a brahmana
and serving in a brahminical occupation, even if he is not born a brahmana or
ksatriya, he should be considered according to his qualifications and occupation.
Similarly, in the Padma Purana it is said:
na sadra bhagavad-bhaktas
te tu bhagavata matah
sarva-varpesu te $adra
ye na bhakta janardane
“A devotee should never be considered a sadra. All the devotees of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead should be recognized as bhagavatas. If one is not a devo-
tee of Lord Krsna, however, even if born of a brahmana, ksatriya or vaisya family,
he should be considered a sadra.” =
In the Padma Purana it is also said:
$va-pakam iva nekseta
loke vipram avaisnavam
vaisnavo varno-bahyo ‘pi
punati bhuvana-trayam
“If a person born in a brahmana family is an avaisnava, a nondevotee, one should
not see his face, exactly as one should not look upon the face of a candala, or


--- Page 21 ---
18 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
dog-eater. However, a vaisnava found in varnas other than brahmana can purify all
the three worlds.”

The Padma Purana further says:

sadram va bhagavad-bhaktam
nisadam $va-pacarn tatha
viksate jati-samanyat
sa yati narakam dhruvam
“One who considers a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who was
born in a family of sadras, nisadas or candalas to belong to that particular caste
certainly goes to hell.”

A brahmana must be a Vaisnava and a learned scholar. Therefore in India it is
customary to address a brahmana as pandita. Without knowledge of Brahman,
one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore a
Vaisnava is already a brahmana, whereas a brahmana may become a Vaisnava. In
the Garuda Purana it is said:

bhaktir asta-vidha hy esa
yasmin mlecche ‘pi vartate
sa viprendro muni-sresthah
sa jnani sa ca panditah
“If even a mleccha becomes a devotee, he is to be considered the best of the
brahmanas and a learned pandita.”
Similarly, Tattva-sagara says:
yatha kancanatam yati
karnsyarn rasa-vidhanatah
tatha diksa-vidhanena
dvijatvarn jayate nrnam
"As bell metal is turned to gold when mixed with mercury in an alchemical pro-
cess, so one who is properly trained and initiated by a bona fide spiritual master
becomes a brahmana immediately.” All this evidence found in the revealed scrip-
tures proves that according to the Vedic version, a Vaisnava is never to be con-
sidered an abrahmana, or non-brahmana. A Vaisnava should not be thought to
belong to a lower caste even if born in a mleccha or yavana family. Because he has
become a devotee of Lord Krsna, he has become purified and has attained the
stage of brahmana (dvijatvam jayate nrpnam).


--- Page 22 ---
Text 32] The Lord Tastes Nectar 19
TEXT 30
তারে নমস্করি” কালিদাস বিদায় মাগিলা ।
ঝড়, ঠোকুর তবে ভার অনুত্রজি' আইল ॥ ৩০ ॥
tare namaskari’ kalidasa vidaya magila
jhadu-thakura tabe tanra anuvraji’ aila
SYNONYMS
tare—unto him (Jhadu Thakura); namaskari’—offering obeisances; kalidasa—
Kalidasa; vidaya magila—asked permission to go; jhadu-thakura—Jhadu Thakura;
tabe —at that time; tarira—him; anuvraji’—following; aila—went.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa again offered his obeisances to Jhadu Thakura and asked his per-
mission to go. The saint Jhadu Thakura followed him as he left.
TEXT 31
তারে বিদায় দিয়া ঠাকুর যদি ঘরে আইল ।
ভার চরণ-চিহ্্র যেই ঠাঞি পড়িল ॥ ৩১ ॥
tanre vidaya diya thakura yadi ghare aila
tanra carana-cihna yei thani padila
SYNONYMS
tanre—unto him (Kalidasa); ৮০3৮৭ diya—bidding farewell; thakura—J)hadu
Thakura; yadi—when; ghare aila—returned to his home; tanra carana-cihna—the
mark of his feet; yei thani—wherever; padila—fell.
TRANSLATION
After bidding farewell to Kalidasa, Jhadu Thakura returned to his home,
leaving the marks of his feet plainly visible in many places.
TEXT 32
সেই शनि লঞ। ক।লিদাস সর্বাঙ্গে লেপিলা ।
ভার নিকট একস্থানে ল্ুকাঞ। রহিল ॥ ৩২ ॥
sei dhali lana kalidasa 53/৮3/785০ lepila
tanra nikata eka-sthane lukana rahila


--- Page 23 ---
20 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
sei dhali—that dust; lana —taking; kalidasa—Kalidasa; sarva-arnge—all over his
body; lepila—smeared; tanra nikata—near his place; eka-sthane—in one place;
lukana rahila—remained hidden.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa smeared the dust from those footprints all over his body. Then he
hid in a place near Jhadu Thakura’s home.
TEXT 33
ঝড়-ঠাকুর ঘর যাই” wf सोव्यफन |
মানসেই কৃষ্ণচন্ছ্ে অপিল। ज कन्‌ ॥ ৩৩ ॥
jhadu-thakura ghara yai’ dekhi’ amra-phala
manasei krsna-candre arpila sakala
SYNONYMS
jhadu-thakura—)hadu Thakura; ghara yai’—returning home; dekhi’ amra-
phala—seeing the mangoes; manasei—within his mind; krsna-candre—unto
Krsna; arpila—offered; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
Upon returning home, Jhadu Thakura saw the mangoes Kalidasa had pre-
sented. Within his mind he offered them to Krsna-candra.
TEXT 34
কলার পাটুয়া-খোল। হৈতে আম্ম নিকাশিয়া ।
তার পত্নী STH দেন, খায়েন চুষিয়। ॥ ৩৪ ॥
kalara patuya-khola haite amra nikasiya
tanra patni tanre dena, khayena casiya
SYNONYMS
kalara—of the banana tree; patuya-khola—leaves and bark; haite —from with-
in; amra—mangoes; nikasiya—taking out; tanra patni—his wife; tarnre—to him;
dena—gives; khayena—eats; ctisiya—sucking.


--- Page 24 ---
Text 36] The Lord Tastes Nectar 21
TRANSLATION
Jhadu Thakura’s wife then took the mangoes from their covering of banana
tree leaves and bark and offered them to Jhadu Thakura, who began to suck
and eat them.
TEXT 35
চুষি' एसि, ८छास। আঁটি ফেলিলা পাটুয়াতে |
তারে খাওয়াঞ। তার AF খায় পল্চাতে ॥ ৩৫ ॥
casi’ casi’ cosa anthi phelila patuyate
tare khaoyana tanra patni khaya pascate
SYNONYMS
casi’ casi’—sucking and sucking; cosa —sucked; arithi—the seeds; phelila—
left; patuyate—on the plantain leaf; tare —him; khaoyana—after feeding; tara
patni—his wife; khaya—eats; pascate —afterwards.
TRANSLATION
When he finished eating, he left the seeds on the banana leaf, and his wife,
after feeding her husband, later began to eat.
TEXT 36
আঅঁঠি-চোষ। সেই পাটুয়া-খোলাতে ভরিয়া ।
বাহিরে উচ্ছিষ্ট-গর্তে ফেলাইলা sie) ॥ ৩৬ ॥
anthi-cosa sei patuya-kholate bhariya
bahire ucchista-garte phelaila lana
SYNONYMS
anthi—the seeds; cosa—that had been sucked; sei—that; patuya-kholate —
banana leaf and bark; bhariya—filling; bahire —outside; ucchista-garte—in the
ditch where refuse was thrown; phelaila lana—picked up and threw.
TRANSLATION
After she finished eating, she filled the banana leaves and bark with the
seeds, picked them up and threw them in the ditch where all the refuse was
thrown.


--- Page 25 ---
22 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 37
সেই খোলা, আঁটি, চোকল। চুষে কালিদাস |
চুষিতে চুষিতে হয় প্রেমেতে উল্লাস ॥ ৩৭ ॥
sei khola, anthi, cokala case kalidasa
casite casite haya premete ullasa
SYNONYMS
sei—that; khold—bark of the banana tree; anthi—seeds of the mango;
cokala—skin of the mango; case—licks up; kalidasa—Kalidasa; casite casite—
while licking up; haya—there was; premete ullasa—great jubilation in ecstatic
love.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa licked the banana bark and the mango seeds and skins, and while
licking them he was overwhelmed in jubilation by ecstatic love.
TEXT 38
এইমত যত বৈষ্ণব বৈসে গৌড়দেশে |
কালিদাস এঁছে সবার নিল। অবশেষে ॥ ৩৮ ॥
ei-mata yata vaisnava vaise gauda-dese
kalidasa aiche sabara nila avasese
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; yata—as many as; vaisnava—Vaisnavas; vaise —reside;
gauda-dese—in Bengal; kalidasa—Kalidasa; aiche—in that way; sabara—of all of
them; nila—took; avasese—the remnants.
TRANSLATION
In this way Kalidasa ate the remnants of food left by all the Vaisnavas
residing in Bengal.
TEXT 39
সেই কালিদাস যবে নীলাচলে আইলা |
মহাপ্রভু তার উপর यङ] कृ] কৈলা ॥ ৩৯ ॥
sei kalidasa yabe nilacale aila
mahdaprabhu tanra upara maha-krpa kaila


--- Page 26 ---
Text 41] The Lord Tastes Nectar 23
SYNONYMS
sei kalidasa—that Kalidasa; yabe—when; nilacale aila—came to Jagannatha
Puri; mahaprabhu—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanra upara—upon him; maha-
10003 —great mercy; kaila—bestowed.
TRANSLATION
When Kalidasa visited Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
bestowed great mercy upon him.
TEXT 40
প্রতিদিন প্রভু যদি ars দরশনে |
জল-করঙ্গ লঞ। গোবিন্দ যায় সআভু-সনে ॥ ৪০ ॥
prati-dina prabhu yadi ya’na darasane
jala-karanga lana govinda yaya prabhu-sane
SYNONYMS
prati-dina—every day; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yadi—when;
ya’na—goes; darasane—to see Lord Jagannatha; jala-karanga—a waterpot;
lana—taking; govinda —the personal servant of the Lord (Govinda); yaya—goes;
prabhu-sane—with ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had been regularly visiting the temple of Jagan-
natha every day, and at that time Govinda, His personal servant, used to carry
His waterpot and go with Him.
TEXT 41
সিংহদ্বারের উত্তরদিকে কপাটের আড়ে |
বাইশ “'পাহাচ'-তলে আছে এক निच গাড়ে ॥ ৪১ ॥
sirnha-dvarera uttara-dike kapatera ade
baisa ‘pahaca’-tale ache eka nimna gade
SYNONYMS
sirhha-dvarera—of the Simha-dvara; uttara-dike—on the northern side;
kapatera ade —behind the door; baisa ‘pahaca’—of the twenty-two steps; tale —
at the bottom; ache —there is; eka—one; nimna—low; gade —ditch.


--- Page 27 ---
24 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
On the northern side of the Sirmha-dvara, behind the door, there are twenty-
two steps leading to the temple, and at the bottom of those steps is a ditch.
TEXT 42
সেই গাড়ে করেন প্রভু পাদ-প্রক্ষালনে।
তবে করিবারে যায় ঈশ্বর-দরশনে ॥ ৪২ ॥
sei 8306 karena prabhu pada-praksalane
tabe karibare yaya isvara-darasane
SYNONYMS
sei gade—in that ditch; karena—does; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
pada-praksalane—washing the feet; tabe—thereafter; karibare—to do; yaya—
He goes; isvara-darasane—to visit Lord Jagannatha.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would wash His feet in this ditch, and then He
would enter the temple to see Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 43
গোবিশ্দেরে মহাপ্রভু কৈরাছে নিয়ম |
‘CAF প।দজল যেন না লয় কোন জন” ॥ ৪৩ ॥
govindere mahaprabhu kairache niyama
‘mora pada-jala yena na laya kona jana’
SYNONYMS
govindere—unto Govinda;  mahaprabhu—S$ri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu;
kairache—has given; niyama—a regulative principle; mora—My; pada-jala—
water from washing the feet; yena—that; na laya—does not take; kona jana—
anyone.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered His personal servant Govinda that no one
should take the water that had washed His feet.


--- Page 28 ---
Text 46] The Lord Tastes Nectar 25
TEXT 44
প্রাণিমাত্র লইতে না পায় সেই जन |
खखत्रक ভক্ত লয় FA কোন छल ॥ 88 ॥
prani-matra la-ite na paya sei jala
antaranga bhakta laya kari’ kona chala
SYNONYMS
prani-matra—all living beings; la-ite—to take; na paya—do not get; sei jala—
that water; antaranga—very intimate; bhakta—devotees; laya—take; kari’—
doing; kona chala—some trick.
TRANSLATION
Because of the Lord’s strict order, no living being could take the water.
Some of His intimate devotees, however, would take it by some trick.
TEXT 45
একদিন eg Stal পাদ গ্রক্ষালিতে |
কালিদাস আসি” ऊा। পাতিলেন হাতে ॥ ৪৫ ॥
eka-dina prabhu tanha pada praksalite
kalidasa asi’ tahan patilena hate
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tinha—there; pada
praksalite —washing His feet; kalidasa—Kalidasa; asi’—coming; tahan—there;
patilena—spread; hate—his palm.
TRANSLATION
One day as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was washing His feet in that place,
Kalidasa came and extended his palm to take the water.
TEXT 46
এক অঞ্জলি, তুই অঞ্জলি, তিন অঞ্জলি Hel)
তবে মহাপ্রভু Sica নিষেধ করিল ॥ ৪৬ ॥
eka anjali, dui anjali, tina 20/2/1 pila
tabe mahaprabhu tanre nisedha karila


--- Page 29 ---
26 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
eka anjali—one palmful; dui anjali—two palmfuls; tina afjali—three palmfuls;
pila—he drank; tabe—at that time; mahdprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tanre—him; nisedha karila—forbade.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa drank one palmful and then a second and a third. Then Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu forbade him to drink more.
TEXT 47
“অতঃপর আর না করিহ পুরর্বার |
এতাবতা ৷ বাঞঙ্ছা-পুতর্ণ করিল্ু: তোমার ॥” ৪৭ ॥
“atahpara ara na kariha punar-bara
etavata vancha-parana karilur tomara”
SYNONYMS
atahpara—hereafter; ara—any more; na kariha—do not do; punah-bara—
again; etavata—so far; vancha-parana—fulfilling the desire; karilun—I have done;
tomara—of you.
TRANSLATION
‘“Do not act in this way any more. | have fulfilled your desire as far as pos-
sible.”
TEXT 48
সর্বশ্ত-শিরোমণি চৈতন্য ঈশ্বর ।
বৈষ্ণবে তাঁহার বিশ্বাস, জানেন অন্তর ॥ ৪৮ ॥
sarvajna-siromani caitanya isvara
vaispave tanhdra visvasa, janena antara
SYNONYMS
sarva-jia—omniscient; siromani—topmost; caitanya—Lord $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; isvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaisnave —unto the
Vaisnavas; tanhara visvasa—his faith; janena—He knows; antara—the heart.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the most exalted, omniscient Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and therefore He knew that Kalidasa, in the core of his
heart, had full faith in Vaisnavas.


--- Page 30 ---
Text 51] The Lord Tastes Nectar 27
TEXT 49
সেইগুণ লঞ প্রভু তারে তুষ্ট 28a |
SCA দুর্লভ প্রস।দ কাহারে করিল ॥ ৪৯ ॥
sei-guna lana prabhu tanre (0519 ha-ila
anyera durlabha prasada tanhare karila
SYNONYMS
sei-guna—that quality; /afnd—accepting; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tanre—him; tusta ha-ila—satisfied; anyera—for others; durlabha—not attainable;
prasada—mercy; tanhare —unto him; karila—showed.
TRANSLATION
Because of this quality, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu satisfied him with mercy
not attainable by anyone else.
TEXT 50
বাইশ “পাহাচ”-পাছে উপর দক্ষিণ-দিকে |
এক নৃসিংহ-মুতি আছেন উঠিতে বামভাগে ॥ ৫০ ॥
baisa ‘pahaca’-pache upara daksina-dike
eka nrsimha-marti achena uthite vama-bhage
SYNONYMS
baisa pahaca—of the twenty-two steps; pache —toward the back; upara—
above; daksina-dike —on the southern side; eka—one; nrsirhha-marti—Deity of
Lord Nrsirmha; achena—there is; uthite —while stepping upward; vama-bhage —
on the left side.
TRANSLATION
On the southern side, behind and above the twenty-two steps, is a Deity of
Lord Nrsirmhadeva. Itis on the left as one goes up the steps toward the temple.
TEXT 51
প্রতিদ্বিন Sica প্রভু করেন नगच्छान्न ৷
नमच्छन्नि' এই শ্লোক পড়ে বারবার ॥ ৫১ ॥
prati-dina tanre prabhu karena namaskara
namaskari’ ei $loka pade bara-bara


--- Page 31 ---
28 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
„ prati-dina—every day; tanre—unto the Deity of Lord Nrsirmhadeva; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karena—does; namaskara—obeisances; namaskari’—
offering obeisances; ei sloka—these verses; pade—recites; bara-bara—again and
again.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu, His left side toward the Deity, offered obeisances
to Lord Nrsirnha as He proceeded toward the temple. He recited the following
verses again and again while offering obeisances.
TEXT 52
ANCE নরসিৎহায় প্রহলাদাহলাদদায়িনে |
হিরণ্যকশিপোরক্ষঃশিলাটক্ষ-নখালয়ে ॥ ex ॥
namas te nara-simhaya
prahladahlada-dayine
hiranyakasipor vaksah-
sila-tarika-nakhalaye
SYNONYMS
namah —I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; nara-simhaya—Lord
Nrsimhadeva; prahlada—to Maharaja Prahlada; ahlada—of pleasure; dayine—
giver; hiranya-kasipoh—of Hiranyakasipu; vaksah—chest; sila—like stone;
tarika—like the chisel; nakha-alaye —whose fingernails.
TRANSLATION
“I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, Lord Nrsirnhadeva. You are the
giver of pleasure to Maharaja Prahlada, and Your nails cut the chest of
Hiranyakasipu like a chisel cutting stone.
PURPORT
This and the following verse are quoted from the Nrsimha Purana.
TEXT 53
ইতো नृजिर्ङ्ः পরতো gfe
যতো यट्छ। যামি ততো नृजिश्र््‌ः ।
বহিনৃনসি'হে। হৃদয়ে নৃসেংহো
ন্বনিংহুমাদিং শরণং ait neo


--- Page 32 ---
Text 55] The Lord Tastes Nectar 29
ito nrsirmhah parato nrsirmho
yato yato yami tato nrsimhah
bahir nrsimho hrdaye nrsirhho
nrsimham adirn sarapam prapadye
SYNONYMS
itah—here; nrsimhah—Lord Nrsirmha; paratah—on the opposite side;
nrsirhhah—Lord Nrsimmha; yatah yatah—wherever; yami—| go; tatah—there;
nrsirhhah —Lord Nrsirmha; bahih—outside; nrsirnhah—Lord Nrsirnha; hrdaye—in
my heart; nrsihhah—Lord Nrsirnha; nrsimham—Lord Nrsimha; adim—the
original Supreme Personality; saranam prapadye—I take shelter of.
TRANSLATION
‘Lord Nrsirhhadeva is here, and He is also there on the opposite side.
Wherever | go, there | see Lord Nrsirmhadeva. He is outside and within My
heart. Therefore | take shelter of Lord Nrsirhhadeva, the original Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.”
TEXT 54
তবে প্রভু THEN জগন্নাথ দরশন |
ঘরে আসি” মধ্যাহ্ করি” করিল ভোজন ॥ ৫৪ ॥
tabe prabhu karila jagannatha darasana
ghare asi’ madhyahna kari’ karila bhojana
SYNONYMS
tabe —after this; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karila—did; jagannatha
darasana—uvisiting Lord Jagannatha; ghare asi’—after returning home; madhyahna
kari’—after performing His noon activities; karila bhojana—took lunch.
TRANSLATION
Having offered obeisances to Lord Nrsirmhadeva, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
visited the temple of Lord Jagannatha. Then He returned to His residence,
finished His noon duties and took His lunch.
TEXT 55
বহিদ্বণারে আছে কালিদাস প্রত্যাশা করিয়া ।
গোবিন্দেরে ঠারে প্রভু কহেন জানিয়া ॥ ৫৫ ॥
bahir-dvare ache kalidasa pratyasa kariya
govindere thare prabhu kahena janiya


--- Page 33 ---
30 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
bahih-dvare —outside the door; ache —there was; kalidasa—Kalidasa; pratyasa
kariya—expecting; govindere —unto Covinda; thare—by indications; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahena—speaks; janiya—knowing.
TRANSLATION
Kalidasa was standing outside the door, expecting the remnants of food
from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Knowing this, Mahaprabhu gave an indication
to Govinda.
TEXT 56
মহাপ্রভুর ইঙ্গিত গোবিন্দ जव জানে |
কালিদাসেরে দিল প্রভুর শেষপাত্র-দানে ॥ ৫৬ ॥
mahaprabhura ingita govinda saba jane
kalidasere dila prabhura sesa-patra-dane
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; irgita—indications; govinda—
His personal servant; saba—all; jane —knows; kalidasere —unto Kalidasa; dila—
delivered; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sesa-patra—the remnants of
food; dane —presentation.
TRANSLATION
Govinda understood all the indications of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Therefore he immediately delivered the remnants of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s food to Kalidasa.
TEXT 57
বৈষ্বের শেষ-ভক্ষণের এতেক মহিমা |
কালিদাসে পাওয়াইল প্রভুর কূপা-সীমা ॥ ৫৭ ॥
vaispavera sesa-bhaksanera eteka mahima
kalidase paoyaila prabhura krpa-sima
SYNONYMS
vaispavera—of Vaisnavas; sesa-bhaksanera—of eating the remnants of food;
eteka mahima—so much value; kalidase—Kalidasa; paoyaila—caused to get;
prabhura—of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa-sima—the supreme mercy.


--- Page 34 ---
Text 59] The Lord Tastes Nectar 31
TRANSLATION
Taking the remnants of the food of Vaisnavas is so valuable that it induced
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to offer Kalidasa His supreme mercy.
TEXT 58
SITS “বৈষ্ণবের A,B খাও ছাড়ি” সঘ্বণা-লাজ |
যাহা হৈতে পাইব। নিজ वा दि जव কাজ ॥ ৫৮ ॥
tate ‘vaispavera jhuta’ khao chadi’ ghrna-laja
yaha haite paiba nija vanchita saba kaja
SYNONYMS
tate —therefore; vaispavera jhuta—remnants of the food of Vaisnavas; khao—
eat; chadi’—giving up; ghrna-laja—hate and hesitation; yaha haite—by which;
paiba—you will get; nija—your own; vanchita—desired; saba—all; kaja—suc-
cess.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, giving up hatred and hesitation, try to eat the remnants of the
food of Vaisnavas, for you will thus be able to achieve your desired goal of
life.
TEXT 59
কৃষ্ণের উচ্ছিষ্ট হয় 'সহাপ্রসাদ' নাম |
‘SECT হৈলে “মসহা-মহাপ্সাদাখ্যান” ॥ ৫৯ ॥
krsnera ucchista haya ‘maha-prasada’ nama
‘bhakta-sesa’ haile ‘maha-maha-prasadakhyana’
SYNONYMS
krspera ucchista—remnants of the food of Krsna; haya—are; maha-prasada
nama—called maha-prasada; bhakta-sesa—the remnants of a devotee; haile —
when it becomes; maha-maha-prasada—great maha-prasada; akhyana—named.
TRANSLATION
The remnants of food offered to Lord Krsna are called maha-prasada. After
this same maha-prasada has been taken by a devotee, the remnants are ele-
vated to maha-maha-prasada.


--- Page 35 ---
32 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 60
ভক্তপদধূলি আর ভক্তপদ-জল।
ভক্তভুক্ত-অবশেষ,- তিন মহাবল ॥ ৬০ ॥
bhakta-pada-dhali ara bhakta-pada-jala
bhakta-bhukta-avasesa, — tina maha-bala
SYNONYMS
bhakta-pada-dhali—the dust of the lotus feet of a devotee; ara—and; bhakta-
pada-jala—the water that washed the feet of a devotee; bhakta-bhukta-
avasesa—and the remnants of food eaten by a devotee; tina—three; maha-
bala—very powerful.
TRANSLATION
The dust of the feet of a devotee, the water that has washed the feet of a
devotee, and the remnants of food left by a devotee are three very powerful
substances.
TEXT 61
এই তিন-সেবা হৈতে FRCS 29 |
शूनः পুনঃ Adem FFT FA ॥ ৬১ ॥
ei tina-seva haite krsna-prema haya
punah punah sarva-sastre phukariya kaya
SYNONYMS
ei tina-seva—rendering service to these three; haite—from; krsna-prema—
ecstatic love for Krsna; haya—there is; punah punah—again and again; sarva-
sastre—all the revealed scriptures; phu-kariya kaya—declare loudly.
TRANSLATION
By rendering service to these three, one attains the supreme goal of ecstatic
love for Krsna. In all the revealed scriptures this is loudly declared again and
again.
TEXT 62
তাতে বার বার FZ, —w ভক্তগণ |
বিশ্বাস করিয়। কর এ-তিন সেবন ॥ ৬২ ॥


--- Page 36 ---
Text 64] The Lord Tastes Nectar 33
tate bara bara kahi,—suna bhakta-gana
visvdsa kariya kara e-tina sevana
SYNONYMS
tate—therefore; bara bara—again and again; kahi—I say; suna—hear; bhakta-
gana—devotees; visvasa kariya—keeping faith; kara—do; e-tina sevana—ren-
dering service to these three.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear devotees, please hear from me, for | insist again and
again: please keep faith in these three and render service to them without
hesitation.
TEXT 63
তিন হৈতে কৃষ্ণনাম-প্রেমের উল্লাস |
কৃষ্ণের প্রসাদ, তাতে ANF কালিদাস ॥ ৬৩ ॥
tina haite krsna-nama-premera ullasa
krsnera prasada, tate ‘saksi’ kalidasa
SYNONYMS
tina haite—from these three; krsna-nama—of the holy name of Lord Krsna;
premera ullasa—awakening of ecstatic love; krsnera prasada—the mercy of Lord
Krsna; tate—in that; saksi—evidence; kalidasa—Kalidasa.
TRANSLATION
From these three one achieves the highest goal of life—ecstatic love of
Krsna. This is the greatest mercy of Lord Krsna. The evidence is Kalidasa him-
self.
TEXT 64
নীলাচলে মহাপ্রভু রহে এইমতে |
কালিদাসে মহাকুপ! কৈল। অলক্ষিতে ॥ ৬৪ ॥
nilacale mahaprabhu rahe ei-mate
kalidase maha-krpa kaila alaksite
SYNONYMS
nilacale —at Jagannatha Puri; mahaprabhu —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rahe —
remains; ei-mate—in this way; kalidase —unto Kalidasa; maha-krpa—great favor;
kaila—bestowed; alaksite —invisibly.


--- Page 37 ---
34 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
In this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained at Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala,
and He invisibly bestowed great mercy upon Kalidasa.
TEXT 65
সে বছসর শিবানন্দ नद्धो न] আইলা |
“পুবরীদাস-ছোটপুত্রে সঙ্গেতে আমিলা ॥ ৬৫ ॥
se vatsara sivananda patni lana aila
‘puridasa’-chota-putre sangete anila
SYNONYMS
se vatsara—that year; sivananda—Sivananda Sena; patni—the wife; lana—
bringing; dila—came; puri-dasa—Puridasa; chota-putre—the youngest son;
sangete anila—he brought with him.
TRANSLATION
That year, Sivananda Sena brought with him his wife and youngest son,
Puridasa.
TEXT 66
পুত্র সজে लये তেঁহে। আইলা প্রভু-স্থানে |
পুত্রেরে করাইলা প্রভুর চরণ ACA ॥ ৬৬ ॥
putra sange lana tenho aila prabhu-sthane
putrere karaila prabhura carapa vandane
SYNONYMS
putra—the son; sange—along; landa—taking; tenho—he; aila—came; prabhu-
sthane—to the place of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; putrere—his son; karaila—
made to do; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carapa vandane—
worshiping the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Taking his son, Sivananda Sena went to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at His
residence. He made his son offer respectful obeisances at the lotus feet of the
Lord.


--- Page 38 ---
Text 69] The Lord Tastes Nectar 35
TEXT 67
“কৃষ্ণ কহ” বলি” व्य्‌ বলেন বার বার |
তবু কৃষ্ণনাম বালক না করে উচ্চার ॥ ৬৭ ॥
‘krsna kaha’ bali’ prabhu balena bara bara
tabu krsna-nama balaka na kare uccara
SYNONYMS
krsna kaha—say Krsna; bali’—saying; prabhu—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
balena—said; bara bara—again and again; tabu—still; krspa-nama—the holy
name of Krsna; balaka—the boy; na kare uccara—did not utter.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked the boy again and again to chant the name
of Krsna, but the boy would not utter the holy name.
TEXT 68
শিবানন্দ বালকেরে Ag যত্ন করিলা।
তবু সেই বালক কৃষ্ণনাম FA কহিল। ॥ ॥ ৬৮ ॥
sivananda balakere bahu yatna karila
tabu sei balaka krsna-nama na kahila
SYNONYMS
Sivananda—Sivananda Sena; balakere—unto the boy; bahu—much; yatna—
endeavor; karila—did; tabu —still; sei balaka—that boy; krsna-nama—the name
of Krsna; na kahila—did not utter.
TRANSLATION
Although Sivananda Sena tried with much endeavor to get his boy to speak
Krsna’s holy name, the boy would not utter it.
TEXT 69
यद्‌ কহে, “আমি নাম জগতে नजग्राटेलु ।
স্থাবরে পর্যন্ত কৃষ্ণনাম करोल ॥ ৬৯ ॥
prabhu 13909, — “ami nama jagate laoyailun
sthavare paryanta krsna-nama kahailun


--- Page 39 ---
36 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe --5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; ami—I; nama—the holy name;
jagate—throughout the whole world; laoyailunn—induced to take; sthavare —the
unmovable; paryanta—up to; krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna; kahailur—I
induced to chant.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, 1 have induced the whole world to take to
the holy name of Krsna. | have induced even the trees and immovable plants
to chant the holy name.
TEXT 70
ইহারে নারিলু* কৃষ্ণনাম কহাইতে 7
শুনিয়া স্ব করূপগোলসাঞ্ঞি লাগিল কহিতে ॥ ৭০ ॥
ihare narilun krsna-nama kahaite!”
Suniya svarapa-gosani lagila kahite
SYNONYMS
ihare —this boy; narilun—I could not; krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna;
kahaite —cause to speak; Suniya—hearing; svarapa-gosani—Svarapa Damodara
(05871; lagila—began; kahite —to say.
TRANSLATION
०९५५१ | could not induce this boy to chant the holy name of Krsna.” Hearing
this, Svaripa Damodara Gosvami began to speak.
TEXT 71
“তুমি কুষ্ণনাম-মন্ত্র কৈল। SATA |
मह्न Piel कोर আগে না করে প্রকাশে ॥ ৭১ ॥
“tumi krsna-nama-mantra kaila upadese
mantra pana ka'ra age na kare prakase
SYNONYMS
tumi—You; krspa-nama—the holy name of Krsna; mantra—this hymn; kaila
upadese —have instructed; mantra pana—getting the hymn; kara age—in front
of everyone; na kare prakase —he does not express.
TRANSLATION
“My Lord,” he said, ‘You have given him initiation into the name of Krsna,
but after receiving the mantra he will not express it in front of everyone.


--- Page 40 ---
Text 74] The Lord Tastes Nectar 37
TEXT 72
মনে মনে জপে, মুখে Fl করে আখ্যান |
এই ইহার মনঃকথা - করি অনুমান 1” ৭২ ॥
mane mane jape, mukhe na kare akhyana
ei ihara manah-katha——kari anumana”
SYNONYMS
mane mane —within the mind; jape—chants; mukhe—in the mouth; na kare
akhyana—does not express; ei—this; ihara—his; manah-katha—intention; kari
anumana—| guess.
TRANSLATION
‘This boy chants the mantra within his mind, but does not say it aloud. That
is his intention, as far as I can guess.”
TEXT 73
আর দিন কহেন व्य्‌, “नङ्‌, পুবীদাস ।”
এই cal করি” তেঁহো৷ করিল৷ প্রকাশ ॥ ৭৩ ॥
ara dina kahena prabhu,— ‘pada, puridasa’
ei Sloka kari’ tenho karila prakasa
SYNONYMS
ara dina—another day; kahena prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; pada—
recite; puridasa—Puridasa; ei—this; sloka—verse; kari’—making; tenho—he;
karila prakasa—manifested.
TRANSLATION
Another day, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to the boy, ‘‘Recite, My
dear Puridasa,”’ the boy composed the following verse and expressed it before
everyone.
TEXT 74
অ্বসোঃ কুবলয়মঙ্ষনে/রঞ্জনমুরসে। মহেন্দ্রমণিদাম।
বুন্দাবনরমণীনাং মণ্ডনমখিলং হরির্জয়তি ॥ as ॥
sravasoh kuvalayam aksnor afjanam
uraso mahendra-mani-dama
vrndavana-ramaninarh mandanam
akhilam harir jayati


--- Page 41 ---
38 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
sravasoh—of the two ears; kuvalayam—blue lotus flowers; aksnoh—of the
two eyes; anjanam—ointment; urasah—of the chest; mahendra-mani-dama—a
necklace of indranila gems; vrndavana-ramaninam—of the damsels of Vrndavana;
mandanam—ornaments; akhilam—all; harih jayati—all glories to Lord Sri Krsna.
TRANSLATION
“Lord Sri Krsna is just like a bluish lotus flower for the ears; He is ointment
for the eyes, a necklace of indranila gems for the chest, and universal orna-
ments for the gopi damsels of Vrndavana. Let that Lord Sri Hari, Krsna, be
glorified.”
TEXT 75
সাত বঙসরের শিশু, নাহি অধ্যয়ন।
এঁছে শ্লোক করে,- লোকের চমৎকার মন ॥ ৭৫ ॥
sata vatsarera sisu, nahi adhyayana
aiche sloka kare, —lokera camatkara mana
SYNONYMS
sata vatsarera—seven years old; sisu—the boy; nahi adhyayana—without
education; aiche—such; sloka—verse; kare—composes; lokera—of all the
people; camatkara—struck with wonder; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
Although the boy was only seven years old and still had no education, he
composed such a nice verse. Everyone was struck with wonder.
TEXT 76
देडच्व्यङ्न এই কৃপার মহিমা ।
ত্রহ্মাদি দেব যার নাহি পায় সীমা ॥ ৭৬ ॥
caitanya-prabhura ei krpara mahima
brahmadi deva yara nahi paya sima
SYNONYMS
caitanya-prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei—this; krpara
mahima—the glory of the mercy; brahma-adi—headed by Lord Brahma; deva—
the demigods; yara—of which; nahi paya—do not reach; sima—the limit.


--- Page 42 ---
Text 78] The Lord Tastes Nectar 39
TRANSLATION
This is the glory of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s causeless mercy, which even
the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, cannot estimate.
TEXT 77
ভক্তগণ প্রভু-সঙ্গে রহে চারিমাসে |
প্রভু আজ্ঞ। দিলা সবে গেল৷ গৌড়দেশে ॥ ৭৭ ॥
bhakta-gana prabhu-sange rahe cari-mase
prabhu ajna dila sabe gela gauda-dese
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gana—all the devotees; prabhu-sange —with $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
rahe —remained; cari-mase—for four months; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; djna dila—gave the order; sabe —unto everyone; gela—returned;
gauda-dese —to Bengal.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees remained with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continuously for
four months. Then the Lord ordered them back to Bengal, and therefore they
returned.
TEXT 78
তাঁা-সবার সঙ্গে প্রভুর ছিল বাহুজ্ঞান |
তারা গেলে পুনঃ হৈল। উন্মাদ প্রধান ॥ ৭৮ ॥
tan-sabara sange prabhura chila bahya-jiana
tanra gele punah haila unmada pradhana
SYNONYMS
tan-sabara—all of them; sarge —with; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
chila—there was; bahya-jiana—external consciousness; tanra gele—when they
departed; punah—again; haila—there was; unmada—madness; pradhana—the
chief business.
TRANSLATION
As long as the devotees were in Nilicala, Jagannatha Puri, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu maintained His external consciousness, but after their departure
His chief engagement was again the madness of ecstatic love for Krsna.


--- Page 43 ---
40 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 79
রাত্রি-দিনে স্ফুরে কৃষ্ণের রূপ-গন্ধ-রস।
সাক্ষাদন্দুভবে,-_ যেন কৃষ্ণ-উপস্পর্শ || ৭৯ ॥
ratri-dine sphure krsnera rapa-gandha-rasa
saksad-anubhave, —yena krsna-upasparsa
SYNONYMS
ratri-dine —night and day; sphure —appears; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; rapa—the
beauty; gandha—fragrance; rasa—mellow; saksat-anubhave—directly €<
perienced; yena—as if; krsna-upasparsa—touching Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Throughout the entire day and night, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu directly
relished Krsna’s beauty, fragrance and mellow as if He were touching Krsna
hand to hand.
TEXT 80
একদিন প্রভু গেলা FTAFIL-FASTH |
সিংহদ্বারে দলই আসি” করিল বন্দনে ॥ ৮০ ॥
eka-dina prabhu gela jagannatha-darasane
sirhha-dvare dala-i asi’ karila vandane
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; geli—went; jagan-
natha-darasane—to see Lord Jagannatha; sirmha-dvare—at the gate known as
Sirmha-dvara; dala-i—the gatekeeper; asi’—coming; karila vandane—offered
respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
One day, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to visit the temple of Lord
Jagannatha, the gatekeeper at Simha-dvara approached Him and offered
respectful obeisances.
TEXT 81
তারে বলে» “কোথা কৃষ্ণ, মোর প্রাণনাথ ?
মোরে কৃষ্ণ দেখাও” বলি” ধরে তার হাত ॥ ৮১ ॥


--- Page 44 ---
Text 83] The Lord Tastes Nectar 41
tare bale, — ‘kotha krspa, mora prana-natha?
more krsna dekhao’ bali’ dhare tara hata
SYNONYMS
tare—to him; bale —said; kotha krspa—where is Krsna; mora—My; prana-
natha—Lord of life; more—to Me; krspa dekhdo—please show Krsna; bali’'—
saying; dhare—catches; tara—his; hata—hand.
TRANSLATION
The Lord asked him, “Where is Krsna, My life and soul? Please show Me
Krsna.” Saying this, He caught the doorkeeper’s hand.
TEXT 82
(गङ्‌ কহে,-_“ই"হা হয় लदजल्छमन्नन |
আইস তুমি মোর সঙ্গে, FANS দরশন ॥ ৮২ ॥
seha kahe,—‘inha haya vrajendra-nandana
aisa tumi mora sange, karana darasana’
SYNONYMS
seha kahe—he said; inha—here; haya—is; vrajendra-nandana—the son of
Nanda Mahardja; adisa—come; tumi—You; mora sange—with me; karana
darasana—I| shall show.
TRANSLATION
The doorkeeper replied, “The son of Maharaja Nanda is here; please come
along with me, and | shall show You.”
TEXT 83
“তুমি মোর সখা, দ্বেখাহ,__কাহা।৷ প্রাণনাথ ?”
এত বলি” জণগমোহন গেলা ধরি” তার FS ॥ ৮৩ ॥
‘tumi mora sakha, dekhaha——kahan prapa-natha?’
eta bali’ jagamohana gela dhari’ tara hata
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; mora sakha—My friend; dekhaha—please show; kahan—where;
prana-natha—the Lord of My heart; eta bali’—saying this; jagamohana—to
Jagamohana; gela—went; dhari’—catching; tara—his; hata—hand.


--- Page 45 ---
42 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya said to the doorman, “You are My friend. Please show Me
where the Lord of My heart is.”” After the Lord said this, they both went to the
place known as Jagamohana, where everyone views Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 84
(मङ्‌ বলে,-_“এই দেখ ध्योचज्ग्ट सोम |
নেত্র ভরিয়া তুমি করহ দরশন৷ ॥” ৮৪ ॥
seha bale, — ‘ei dekha $ri-purusottama
netra bhariya tumi karaha darasana’
SYNONYMS
seha bale—he also said; ei—this; dekha—just see; sri-purusa-uttama—Lord
Krsna, the best of all Personalities of Godhead; netra bhariya—to the full satisfac-
tion of Your eyes; tumi—You; karaha darasana—see.
TRANSLATION
‘Just see!”’ the doorkeeper said. ‘‘Here is the best of the Personalities of
Godhead. From here You may see the Lord to the full satisfaction of Your
eyes.”
TEXT 85
গরুড়ের পাছে রহি” করেন দরশন |
দেখেন, জগন্নাথ হয় মুরলীবদন ॥ ৮৫ ॥
garudera pache rahi’ karena darasana
dekhena, —jagannatha haya murali-vadana
SYNONYMS
garudera pache—behind the Garuda column; rahi’—staying; karena
darasana—He was seeing; dekhena—He saw; jagannatha—Lord )agannatha;
haya—was; murali-vadana—Lord Krsna with His flute to the mouth.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed behind the huge column called the
Garuda-stambha and looked upon Lord Jagannatha, but as He looked He saw
that Lord Jagannatha had become Lord Krsna, with His flute to His mouth.


--- Page 46 ---
Text 87] The Lord Tastes Nectar 43
TEXT 86
এই नोन নিজ-গ্রন্থে রঘুনাথ-দাস |
KN
“গোরাঙ্গস্তব-কল্মবক্ধে” করিয়াছেন প্রকাশ ॥ ৮৬ ॥
ei lila nija-granthe raghunatha-dasa
‘gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse’ kariyachena prakasa
SYNONYMS
ei lila—this pastime; nija-granthe—in his own book; raghunatha-dasa—
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; gaurdnga-stava-kalpa-vrkse —Gauranga-stava-
kalpavrksa; kariyachena prakasa—has described.
TRANSLATION
In his book known as Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa, Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami has described this incident very nicely.
TEXT 87
ক্ব মে কান্তঃ कृक्ख्तिरुजजिर्‌ তং লোকয় সখে
ত্বমেবেতি দ্বারাধিপমভিবদন্ন,ব্মদ ইব 1
TSR গচ্ছ FB) প্রিয়মিতি তছুক্তেন ধৃত-তদ্‌-
ভূজাস্তগৌরাঙ্গে৷ হৃদয় উদয়ন্মাং মদয়তি ॥ ৮৭ ॥
1:৮৪ me kantah krsnas tvaritam iha tam lokaya sakhe
tvam eveti dvaradhipam abhivadann unmada iva
drutarn gaccha drasturih priyam iti tad-uktena dhrta-tad-
bhujantar gaurango hrdaya udayan marin madayati
SYNONYMS
kva—where; me—My; kantah—beloved; krspah—Lord Krsna; tvaritam—
quickly; iha—here; tam—Him; lokaya—show; sakhe—O friend; tvam—you;
eva—certainly; iti—thus; dvara-adhipam—the doorkeeper; abhivadan—re-
questing; unmadah—a madman; iva—like; drutam—very quickly; gaccha—
come; drastum—to see; priyam—beloved; iti—thus; tat—of him; uktena—with
the words; dhrta—caught; tat—His; bhuja-antah—end of the arm; gaurangah —
Lord তা Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hrdaye —in my heart; udayan—rising; mam —me;
madayati—maddens.


--- Page 47 ---
44 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
‘“ ‘My dear friend the doorkeeper, where is Krsna, the Lord of My heart?
Kindly show Him to Me quickly.” With these words, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu addressed the doorkeeper like a madman. The doorkeeper
grasped His hand and replied very hastily, ‘Come, see Your beloved!’ May that
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rise within my heart and thus make me mad
also.”
TEXT 88
হেনকালে “গোপাল-বল্লভ”-ভোগ লাগাইল |
শত্ব-ঘণ্টা-আদি সহ আরতি বাজিল ॥ ৮৮ ॥
hena-kale ‘gopala-vallabha’-bhoga lagaila
Sankha-ghanta-adi saha arati bajila
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; gopala-vallabha-bhoga—the food offered early in the
morning; lagaila—was offered; sankha—conch; ghanta-adi—bells and so on;
saha—with; drati—arati; bajila—sounded.
TRANSLATION
The offering of food known as gopala-vallabha-bhoga was then given to
Lord Jagannatha, and arati was performed with the sound of the conch and the
ringing of bells.
TEXT 89
ভোগ সরিলে জগন্লাথের সেবকগণ |
প্রসাদ Ap] প্রভু-ঠাঞি কৈল আগমন ॥ ৮৯ ॥
bhoga sarile jagannathera sevaka-gana
prasada lana prabhu-thani kaila agamana
SYNONYMS
bhoga sarile—when the food was taken away; jagannathera—of Lord Jagan-
natha; sevaka-gana—the servants; prasada lana —taking the prasada; prabhu-
thafi—unto Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila dgamana—came.
TRANSLATION
When the arati finished, the prasada was taken out, and the servants of Lord
Jagannatha came to offer some to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 48 ---
Text 92] The Lord Tastes Nectar 45
TEXT 90
মালা न॑रो প্রসাদ দিল প্রভুর হাতে ।
SFE দূরে TG, যার গন্ধে মন মাতে ॥ ৯০ ॥
mala parana prasada dila prabhura hate
asvada dire rahu, yara gandhe mana mate
SYNONYMS
mala parana—after garlanding; prasada—the remnants of Lord Jagannatha's
food; dila—delivered; prabhura hate—in the hand of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
asvada—tasting; dire rahu—what to speak of; yara—of which; gandhe —by the
aroma; mana—mind; mate—becomes maddened.
TRANSLATION
The servants of Lord Jagannatha first garlanded Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and then offered Him Lord Jagannatha’s prasada. The prasada was so nice that
its aroma alone, to say nothing of its taste, would drive the mind mad.
TEXT 91
TEIN; প্রসাদ সেই AB সর্বোত্তম |
তার অল্প খাওয়াইতে সেবক করিল যতন ॥ >> ॥
bahu-milya prasada sei vastu sarvottama
tara alpa khaoyaite sevaka karila yatana
SYNONYMS
bahu-mialya—very valuable; prasada—remnants of food; sei—that; vastu—in-
gredients; sarva-uttama—first class; tara—of that; alpa—very little; khaoyaite —
to feed; sevaka—the servant; karila yatana—made some endeavor.
TRANSLATION
The prasada was made of very valuable ingredients. Therefore the servant
wanted to feed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu a portion of it.
TEXT 92
তার सन्न লঞ। প্রভু জিহ্বাতে যদি দিলা ।
আর जव গোবিন্দের আঁচলে বান্ধিল। ॥ ৯২ ॥


--- Page 49 ---
46 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
tara alpa lana prabhu jihvate yadi dila
ara saba govindera ancale bandhila
SYNONYMS
tira—of that; alpa—very little; laAd—taking; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; jihvate—on the tongue; yadi—when; dila—put; ara saba—all the
balance; govindera—of Covinda; ancale—at the end of the wrapper; bandhila—
bound.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tasted a portion of the prasida. Govinda took the
rest and bound it in the end of his wrapper.
TEXT 93
ক্োটি-অনৃত-স্বাদ পাঞ প্রভুর চমৎকার |
সর্বাঙ্গে পুলক, নেত্রে বহে অশ্রেধার ॥ >< ॥
koti-amrta-svada pana prabhura camatkara
sarvange pulaka, netre vahe asru-dhara
SYNONYMS
koti—millions upon millions; amrta—nectar; svada—taste; pana—getting;
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; camatkara—great satisfaction; sarva-
ange —all over the body; pulaka—standing of the hair; netre—from the eyes;
vahe —flows; asru-dhara—a stream of tears.
TRANSLATION
To Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the prasida tasted millions upon millions of
times better than nectar, and thus He was fully satisfied. The hair all over His
body stood on end, and incessant tears flowed from His eyes.
TEXT 94
“এই BC এত স্বাদ का] হৈতে আইল ?
কৃষ্ণের खधन्न रू ইথে সঞ্চারিল ॥” ৯৪ ॥
© ‘ei dravye eta 5৮303 kahan haite aila?
krsnera adharamrta ithe sancarila’


--- Page 50 ---
Text 96] The Lord Tastes Nectar 47
SYNONYMS
ei dravye—in these ingredients; eta—so much; svada—taste; kahan—where;
haite—from; aila—has come; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; adhara-amrta—nectar from
the lips; ithe—in this; sancarila—has spread.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considered, “Where has such a taste in this
prasida come from? Certainly it is due to its having been touched by the nec-
tar of Krsna’s lips.”
TEXT 95
এই বুদ্ধ্যে মহাপ্রভুর প্রেমাবেশ হৈল।
জগল্লাথের সেবক দেখি” সন্বরণ কৈল ॥ ৯৫ ॥
ei buddhye mahaprabhura premavesa haila
jagannathera sevaka dekhi’ samvarana kaila
SYNONYMS
ei buddhye—by this understanding; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; prema-avesa—ecstatic emotion; haila—there was; jagannathera—
of Lord Jagannatha; sevaka—servants; dekhi’—seeing; samvarana kaila—
restrained Himself.
TRANSLATION
Understanding this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt an emotion of ecstatic
iove for Krsna, but upon seeing the servants of Lord Jagannatha, He restrained
Himself.
TEXT 96
“সকৃতি-লত্য ফেলা-লব”- বলেন বারবার |
ঈশ্বর-সেবক शरटः “कि অর্থ ইহার” ? ৯৬ ॥
‘sukrti-labhya phela-lava’—balena bara-bara
i$vara-sevaka puche,— ‘ki artha ihara’?
SYNONYMS
sukrti—by great fortune; labhya—obtainable; phela-lava—a particle of the
remnants; balena—says; bara-bara—again and again; isvara-sevaka—the servants
of Jagannatha; puche—inquire; ki—what; artha—the meaning; ihara—of this.


--- Page 51 ---
48 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
The Lord said again and again, “Only by great fortune may one come by a
particle of the remnants of food offered to the Lord.” The servants of the
Jagannatha temple inquired, “What is the meaning of this?’’
PURPORT
The remnants of Krsna's food are mixed with His saliva. In the Mahabharata and
the Skanda Purana it is stated:
maha-prasade govinde
nama-brahmani vaispave
svalpa-punyavatarm rajan
visvaso naiva jayate
“Persons who are not very highly elevated in pious activities cannot believe in the
remnants of food [prasadal of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nor in Govin-
da, the holy name of the Lord, nor in the Vaisnavas.”
TEXT 97
প্রভু FLT, —“92 যে क्िल। কৃষ্ণাধরাষ্বত |
ত্রহ্মাদি-তুর্লভ এই নিন্দয়ে “অমৃত” ॥ ৯৭ ॥
prabhu kahe,— “ei ye dila (05$030103/3/771(39
brahmadi-durlabha ei nindaye ‘amrta’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; ei—this; ye —which; dila—you
have given; krsna—of Lord Krsna; adhara-amrta—nectar from the lips; brahma-
adi—by the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma; durlabha—difficult to obtain;
ei—this; nindaye —defeats; amrta—nectar.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, “These are remnants of food that Krsna
has eaten and thus turned to nectar with His lips. It surpasses heavenly nectar,
and even such demigods as Lord Brahma find it difficult to obtain.
TEXT 98
কৃষ্ণের যে ভুক্ত-শেষ, তার (रकल्‌)।-नाम |
তার এক “লব” যে পায়, সেই SIMA ॥ ৯৮ ॥


--- Page 52 ---
Text 100] The Lord Tastes Nectar 49
krsnera ye bhukta-sesa, tara ‘phela’-nama
tara eka ‘lava’ ye paya, sei bhagyavan
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Lord Krsna; ye —whatever; bhukta-sesa—remnants of food; tara—
of that; pheli-nama—the name is phela; tara—of that; eka—one; lava—frag-
ment; ye—one who; pdya—gets; sei—he; bhagyavan—fortunate.
TRANSLATION
‘Remnants left by Krsna are called phela. Anyone who obtains even a small
portion must be considered very fortunate.
TEXT 99
FAY ভাগ্য হৈতে তার প্রাপ্তি নাহি হয়।
Few যাতে পুূর্ণকূপ, সেই তাহ। পায় ॥ >> ॥
samanya bhagya haite tara prapti nahi haya
krsnera yante parna-krpa, sei taha paya
SYNONYMS
samanya—ordinary; bhagya—fortune; haite—from; tara—of that; prapti—at-
tainment; nahi—not; haya—there is; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; ydrte—unto
whom; parna-krpa—full mercy; sei—he; taha—that; paya—can get.
TRANSLATION
“One who is only ordinarily fortunate cannot obtain such mercy. Only per-
sons who have the full mercy of Krsna can receive such remnants.
TEXT 100
“স্কুতি”-শব্দে কহে “কৃষ্ণকূপা-হেতু পুণ্য” |
সেই যার হয়, 'ফেলা” পায় সেই ধন্য ॥ ১০০ ॥
‘sukrti’-sabde kahe ‘krsna-krpa-hetu punya’
sei yanra haya, ‘phela’ paya sei dhanya”
SYNONYMS
sukrti—sukrti (pious activities); sabde —the word; kahe —is to be understood;
krsna-krpa—the mercy of Krsna; hetu—because of; punya—pious activities;
sei—he; yanra—of whom; haya—there is; phelda—the remnants of food; paya—
gets; sei—he; dhanya—very glorious.


--- Page 53 ---
50 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
“The word ‘sukrti’ refers to pious activities performed by the mercy of
Krsna. One who is fortunate enough to obtain such mercy receives the rem-
nants of the Lord’s food and thus becomes glorious.”
TEXT 101
এত বলি' প্রভু তা-সবারে বিদায় দিলা।
উপল-ভ্োগ দেখিয়া প্রভু নিজ-বাস। আইলা ॥১০১॥
eta bali’ prabhu ta-sabare vidaya dila
upala-bhoga dekhiya prabhu nija-vasa aila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ta-sabare—unto all
of them; vidaya dila—bade farewell; upala-bhoga—the next offering of food;
dekhiya—seeing; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nija-vasa—to His place;
aila —returned.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to all the servants.
After seeing the next offering of food to Lord Jagannatha, a function known as
upala-bhoga, He returned to His own quarters.
TEXT 102
susie করিয়। কৈল। ভিক্ষা निर्वीङन ।
কুষ্ণাধরাম্ৃত AG] অন্তরে স্মরণ ॥ ১০২ ॥
madhyahna kariya kaila bhiksa nirvahana
krspadharamrta sada antare smarana
SYNONYMS
madhyahna kariya—after finishing His noon duties; kaila bhiksa nirvahana—
completed His lunch; krsna-adhara-amrta—the nectar from the lips of Krsna;
sada—always; antare —within Himself; smarana —remembering.
TRANSLATION
After finishing His noon duties, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate His lunch, but
He constantly remembered the remnants of Krsna’s food.


--- Page 54 ---
Text 105] The Lord Tastes Nectar 51
TEXT 103
ANY-FSI করেন, প্রেমে গরগর बन |
কষ্টে সন্বরণ করেন, আবেশ जघन ॥ ১০৩ ॥
bahya-krtya karena, preme garagara mana
kaste samvarana karena, avesa saghana
SYNONYMS
bahya-krtya—external activities; karena—performs; preme—in ecstatic love;
garagara—filled; mana—mind; kaste—with great difficulty; samvarana karena—
restricts; dvesa—ecstasy; saghana—very deep.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His external activities, but His mind
was filled with ecstatic love. With great difficulty He tried to restrain His
mind, but it would always be overwhelmed by very deep ecstasy.
TEXT 104
সম্ধ্যা-কৃত্য করি” পুনঃ নিজগণ-সঙ্গে |
নিভৃতে वगिन्‌। নানা-কৃষ্ণকথা-রঙ্গে ॥ ১০৪ ॥
sandhya-krtya kari’ punah nija-gana-sange
nibhrte vasila nana-krsna-katha-rarnge
SYNONYMS
sandhya-krtya—the evening duties; kari’—after performing; punah—again;
nija-gana-sarnge —along with His personal associates; nibhrte —in a solitary place;
vasila—sat down; nana—various; krsna-katha—of topics of Krsna; rarige —in the
jubilation.
TRANSLATION
After finishing His evening duties, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat down with
His personal associates in a secluded place and discussed the pastimes of
Krsna in great jubilation.
TEXT 105
প্রভুর ইঙ্গিতে গোবিন্দ প্রসাদ खोनिन।। |
পুরী-ভারতীরে यङ्‌ কিছু পাঠাইলা ॥ ১০৫ ॥


--- Page 55 ---
52 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
prabhura ingite govinda prasada anila
puri-bharatire prabhu kichu pathaila
SYNONYMS
prabhura ingite—by the indication of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; govinda—
Govinda; prasada anila—brought the remnants of the food of Lord Jagannatha;
puri—to Paramananda Puri; bharatire —to Brahmananda Bharati; prabhu—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kichu—some; pathaila—sent.
TRANSLATION
Following the indications of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Govinda brought the
prasada of Lord Jagannatha. The Lord sent some to Paramananda Puri and
Brahmananda Bharati.
TEXT 106
রামানন্দ-সার্বভৌম-স্বরূপাদি-গণে ।
সবারে প্রসাদ দিল করিয়| বণ্টনে ॥ ১০৬ ॥
ramananda-sarvabhauma-svarapadi-gane
sabare prasada dila kariya bantane
SYNONYMS
ramananda—Ramananda Raya; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
svaripa—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; adi—headed by; gane—unto them;
sabare—unto all of them; prasada—the remnants of the food of Lord Jagannatha;
dila—delivered; kariya bantane—making shares.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then gave shares of the prasada to Ramananda
Raya, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and all the other
devotees.
TEXT 107
প্রসাদের সৌরভ্য-মাধুর্ধ করি” আস্বাদন |
खटलौकि क আ৷স্বাদে সবার বিস্মিত হৈল মন ॥১০৭॥
prasadera saurabhya-madhurya kari’ asvadana
alaukika asvade sabara vismita haila mana


--- Page 56 ---
Text 109] The Lord Tastes Nectar 53
SYNONYMS
prasadera—of the prasada; saurabhya-madhurya—the sweetness and
fragrance; kari’ asvadana—tasting; alaukika—uncommon; asvade —by the taste;
sabara—of everyone; vismita—struck with wonder; haila—became; mana—the
mind.
TRANSLATION
As they tasted the uncommon sweetness and fragrance of the prasada,
everyone’s mind was struck with wonder.
TEXTS 108-109
প্রভু FLT, — “98 जव হয় ‘AIFS कव |
এক্ষব, करू, মরিচ, এলাইচ, লবঙ্গ, भोय ॥ ১০৮ ॥
রসবাস, গুড়ত্বক-আদি যত जव |
“প্রাকৃত” বস্তুর স্বাদ সবার অনুভব ॥ ১০৯ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “ei saba haya ‘prakrta’ dravya
aiksava, karpara, marica, elaica, lavanga, gavya
rasavasa, gudatvaka-adi yata saba
‘prakrta’ vastura 5৮303 sabara anubhava
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; ei—these; saba—all; haya—are;
prakrta—material; dravya—ingredients; aiksava—sugar; karpara—camphor;
marica—black pepper; eldica—cardamom; lavanga—cloves; gavya—butter;
rasavasa—spices; gudatvaka—licorice; adi—and so on; yata saba—each and
every one of them; prakrta—material; vastura—of ingredients; svada—taste;
sabara—everyone’s; anubhava —experience.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘These ingredients, such as sugar, camphor,
black pepper, cardamom, cloves, butter, spices and licorice, are all material.
Everyone has tasted these material substances before.
PURPORT
The word prakrta refers to things tasted for the sense gratification of the condi-
tioned soul. Such things are limited by the material laws. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
wanted to make the point that material things have already been experienced by
materially absorbed persons who are interested only in sense gratification.


--- Page 57 ---
54 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 110
সেই खटवा OT আস্বাদ, গন্ধ লোকাতীত |
আস্বাদ করিয়। দেখ» সবার শ্রভীত ॥ ১১০ ॥
sei dravye eta asvada, gandha lokatita
asvada kariya dekha, ——sabara pratita
SYNONYMS
sei dravye—in such material things; eta—so much; asvada—pleasing taste;
gandha—fragrance; loka-atita—never experienced by any common man; asvada
kariya—tasting; dekha—see; sabara—of everyone; pratita—experience.
TRANSLATION
‘However,’ the Lord continued, “in these ingredients there are extraordi-
nary tastes and uncommon fragrances. Just taste them and see the difference
in the experience.
TEXT 111
আস্বাদ দুরে JG, যার গন্ধে মাতে मन ।
আপনা विन। অন্ত মাধুর্য করায় বিস্মরণ ॥ ১১১ ॥
asvada dare rahu, yara gandhe mate mana
apana vina anya madhurya karaya vismarana
SYNONYMS
asvada—the taste; dare rahu—Ileave aside; yara—of which; gandhe—by the
fragrance; mate —becomes pleased; mana —the mind; apana vina—besides itself;
anya —different; madhurya—sweetness; kardaya vismarana—causes to forget.
TRANSLATION
‘Apart from the taste, even the fragrance pleases the mind and makes one
forget any other sweetness besides its own.
TEXT 112
তাতে এই कटवः কৃষ্ণাধর-স্পর্শ ङ्न |
অধরের গুণ जव ইহাতে সঞ্চারিল ॥ ১১২ ॥
tate ei dravye krspnadhara-sparsa haila
adharera guna saba ihate saicarila


--- Page 58 ---
Text 114] The Lord Tastes Nectar 55
SYNONYMS
tate—therefore; ei dravye—in these ingredients; krsna-adhara—of the lips of
Krsna; sparsa—touch; haila—there was; adharera—of the lips; guna—attributes;
saba—all; ihate—in these ingredients; saficarila—have become transferred.
TRANSLATION
“Therefore, it is to be understood that the spiritual nectar of Krsna’s lips has
touched these ordinary ingredients and transferred to them all their spiritual
qualities.
PURPORT
Since everyone had previously tasted these ingredients, why had they become
extraordinary and spiritually tasteful? This was proof that food, prasada, becomes
uncommonly flavorful and tasteful by touching Krsna's lips.
TEXT 113
অলোকিিক-গদ্ধ-স্বাদ, खच्-विचा)त्तन |
মহা-মাদক হয় এই কৃষ্ণাধরের গুণ ॥ ১১৩ ॥
alaukika-gandha-svada, anya-vismarana
maha-madaka haya ei krspadharera guna
SYNONYMS
alaukika—uncommon; gandha—fragrance; svada—taste; anya-vismarana—
forgetting all others; maha-madaka—highly enchanting; haya—are; ei—these;
krsna-adharera—of the lips of Krsna; guna—attributes.
TRANSLATION
“An uncommon, greatly enchanting fragrance and taste that make one
forget all other experiences are attributes of Krsna’s lips.
TEXT 114
অনেক ‘FHC ठेर] হঞাছে সম্প্রাপ্তি |
ACT এই আস্বাদ কর করি” মহ।ন্ক্তি ॥” ১১৪ ॥
aneka ‘sukrte’ iha hanache samprapti
sabe ei asvada kara kari’ maha-bhakti”


--- Page 59 ---
56 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
aneka—many; sukrte—by pious activities; iha—this; hafache samprapti—has
become available; sabe—all of you; ei—this prasada; asvada kara—taste; kari’
maha-bhakti—with great devotion.
TRANSLATION
“This prasada has been made available only as a result of many pious ac-
tivities. Now taste it with great faith and devotion.”
TEXT 115
হুরিধ্বনি করি' সবে देकल। আস্বাদন |
আস্বাদিতে প্রেমে बड़ হইল সবার मन्‌ ॥ ১১৫ ॥
hari-dhvani kari’ sabe kaila asvadana
asvadite preme matta ha-ila sabara mana
SYNONYMS
hari-dhvani kari’—loudly resounding the holy name of Hari; sabe —all of them;
kaila asvadana—tasted; asvadite—as soon as they tasted; preme—in ecstatic
love; matta—maddened; ha-ila—became; sabara mana—the minds of all.
TRANSLATION
Loudly chanting the holy name of Hari, all of them tasted the prasada. As
they tasted it, their minds became mad in the ecstasy of love.
TEXT 116
প্রেমাবেশে মহাপ্রভু যবে wits! किल |
রামানমন্দ-রায় শ্লোক পড়িতে লাগিলা ॥ ১১৬ ॥
premavese mahaprabhu yabe 2/7 dila
ramananda-raya sloka padite lagila
SYNONYMS
prema-avese —in ecstatic love; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
yabe—when; ajna dila—ordered; ramananda-raya—Ramananda Raya; $loka—
verses; padite lagila—began to recite.
TRANSLATION
In ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Ramananda Riya to
recite some verses. Thus Rimananda Raya spoke as follows.


--- Page 60 ---
Text 118] The Lord Tastes Nectar 57
TEXT 117
স্ুরতবর্নং শোকনাশনং, স্বরিতবেণুন। 33 চুষ্বিতম্‌ ৷
ইতররাগবিস্মারণং gate, বিতর বীর नटखश्षव्रामूखम्‌ ॥১১৭॥
surata-vardhanam $০103-/7353/73/77
svarita-venuna susthu-cumbitam
itara-raga-vismaranam nrpam
vitara vira nas te ‘'dharamrtam
SYNONYMS
surata-vardhanam—which increases the lusty desire for enjoyment; soka-
nasanam—which vanquishes all lamentation; svarita-venuna—by the vibrating
flute; susthu—nicely; cumbitam—touched; itara-raga-vismaranam—which
causes forgetfulness of all other attachment; nrpam—of the human beings;
vitara—please deliver; vira—O hero of charity; nah—unto us; te—Your; adhara-
amrtam —the nectar of the lips.
TRANSLATION
“/O hero of charity, please deliver unto us the nectar of Your lips. That nec-
tar increases lusty desires for enjoyment and diminishes lamentation in the
material world. Kindly give us the nectar of Your lips, which are touched by
Your transcendentally vibrating flute, for that nectar makes all human beings
forget all other attachments.”
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.14).
TEXT 118
শ্লোক শুনি” মহাপ্রভু মহাতুষ্ট হৈল৷ |
রাধার উৎকণ্টা-প্লোক পড়িতে লাগিলা ॥ ১১৮ ॥
Sloka Suni’ mahaprabhu maha-tusta haila
radhara utkantha-sloka padite lagila
SYNONYMS
loka $uni’—hearing the verse; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; maha-
tusta—very satisfied; haili—became; radhara—of $rimati Radharani; utkantha-
Sloka—a verse pertaining to the anxiety; padite lagila—began to recite.


--- Page 61 ---
58 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing Ramananda Raya quote this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was very satisfied. Then He recited the following verse, which had been
spoken by Srimati Radharani in great anxiety.
TEXT 119
ব্রজাতুলকুলাঙ্গনেতর-রসালিতৃষ্ণাহুর-
AN IIRL ©: সুরু তিলভ্য-ফেলা-লবঃ |
সুধাজিদহিবদ্লিক।-সহুদপবীটিক।-চবিতঃ
A মে ম্দনমোহনঃ मनि তনোতি জিহ্ব-স্পৃহাম ॥ ১১৯ ॥
vrajatula-kulanganetara-rasali-trsna-hara-
pradivyad-adharamrtah sukrti-labhya-phela-lavah
sudha-jid-ahivallika-sudala-vitika-carvitah
sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti jihva-sprham
SYNONYMS
vraja—of Vrndavana; atula—incomparable; kulangana—of the gopis; itara—
other; rasa-ali—for tastes or mellows; trspna—desire; hara—vanquishing;
pradivyat—all-surpassing; adhara-amrtah —whose nectar emanating from the lips;
sukrti—after many pious activities; labhya—obtainable; phela—of the nectar of
whose lips; lavah—a small portion; sudha-jit—conquering the nectar;
ahivallika—of the betel plant; su-dala—made from selected leaves; vitika—pan;
carvitah—chewing; sah—He; me—My; madana-mohanah—Madana-mohana;
sakhi—My dear friend; tanoti—increases; jihva—of the tongue; sprham —desire.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear friend, the all-surpassing nectar from the lips of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Krsna, can be obtained only after many, many pious ac-
tivities. For the beautiful gopis of Vrndavana, that nectar vanquishes the
desire for all other tastes. Madana-mohana always chews pan that surpasses
the nectar of heaven. He is certainly increasing the desires of My tongue.’
PURPORT
This verse is found in the Govinda-lilanirta (8.8).
TEXT 120
এত কহি' (नौव्र थं ভাবাবিষ্ট ze ।
তুই শ্লোকের অর্থ করে প্রলাপ করিয়া] ॥ ১২০ ॥


--- Page 62 ---
Text 122] The Lord Tastes Nectar 59
eta kahi’ gaura-prabhu bhavavista hana
dui slokera artha kare pralapa kariya
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; gaura-prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhava-
avista—overwhelmed by ecstatic loving emotions; hana —becoming; dui
slokera—of the two verses; artha—meaning; kare —makes; pralapa kariya—
talking like a madman.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was overwhelmed by ecstatic
loving emotions. Talking like a madman, He began to explain the meaning of
the two verses.
TEXTS 121-122
তঙ্জু-মল করায় (BIS, বাড়ায় স্তবরত-লোত্ড,
र्ब (न्भ क) किरं বিনাশয় |
পাসরায় অন্ত রস, জগৎ করে আত্মবশ,
লজ্জা, ধর্ম, CHE করে ক্ষয় ॥ ১২১ ॥
নাগর, শুন তোমার অধর-চরিত |
মাতায় নারীর মন, জিহ্বা করে আকর্ষণ,
বিচারিতে সব বিপরীত ॥১২২॥ ॐ ॥
tanu-mana karaya ksobha, badaya surata-lobha,
harsa-sokadi-bhara vinasaya
pdasardya anya rasa, jagat kare atma-vasa,
lajja, dharma, dhairya kare ksaya
nagara, suna tomara adhara-carita
mdtaya narira mana, jihva kare akarsana,
vicarite saba viparita
SYNONYMS
tanu—body; mana—mind; karaya—cause; ksobha—agitation; badaya—in-
crease; surata-lobha—lusty desires for enjoyment; harsa—of jubilation; soka—
lamentation; adi—and so on; bhara—burden; vinasaya—destroy; pdasardya—
cause to forget; anya rasa—other tastes; jagat—the whole world; kare —make;
atma-vasa—under their control; lajja—shame; dharma—religion; dhairya—
patience; kare ksaya—vanquish; nagara—O lover; suna—hear; tomara—Your;
adhara—of lips; carita—the characteristics; mataya—madden; narira—of
women; mana—mind; jihvda—tongue; kare akarsana—attract; vicarite—con-
sidering; saba—all; viparita—opposite.


--- Page 63 ---
60 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
“My dear lover,” He said, ‘let Me describe some of the characteristics of
Your transcendental lips. They agitate the mind and body of everyone, they in-
crease lusty desires for enjoyment, they destroy the burden of material happi-
ness and lamentation, and they make one forget all material tastes. The whole
world falls under their control. They vanquish shame, religion and patience,
especially in women. Indeed, they inspire madness in the minds of all women.
Your lips increase the greed of the tongue and thus attract it. Considering all
this, we see that the activities of Your transcendental lips are always perplex-
ing.
TEXT 123
আছুক নারীর কায, কহিতে ales লাজ,
তোমার অধর বড় ধৃষ্ট-রায় |
পুক্ুষে করে আকর্ষণ, আপনা পিয়াইতে মন,
অন্তরস সব পাসরায় ॥ ১২৩ ॥
achuka narira kaya, kahite vasiye laja,
tomara adhara bada dhrsta-raya
puruse kare akarsana, apana piyaite mana,
anya-rasa saba pasaraya
SYNONYMS
achuka—let it be; narira—of women; kaya—the bodies; kahite—to speak;
vasiye—| feel; laja—shame; tomara—Your; adhara—lips; bada—very much;
dhrsta-raya—impudent; puruse —the male; kare akarsana—they attract; apana—
themselves; piyaite—causing to drink; mana—mind; anya-rasa—other tastes;
saba—all; pasaraya—cause to forget.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Krsna, since You are a male, it 15 not very extraordinary that the at-
traction of Your lips can disturb the minds of women. | am ashamed to say
this, but Your lips sometimes attract even Your flute, which is also considered
a male. It likes to drink the nectar of Your lips, and thus it also forgets all other
tastes.
TEXT 124
সচেতন AG দুরে, অচেতন সচেতন করে,
তোমার অধর- বড় বাজিকর |


--- Page 64 ---
Text 125] The Lord Tastes Nectar 61
তোমার (AY শুক্কেম্জন, তার জন্মায় ইলন্দ্রিয়-মন,
তারে আপনা পিয়ায় নিরজ্ভর ॥ ১২৪ ॥
sacetana rahu dare, acetana sacetana kare,
tomara adhara——bada vajikara
tomara venu suskendhana, tara janmaya indriya-mana,
tare apana piyaya nirantara
SYNONYMS
sa-cetana—conscious living beings; rahu dare—leave aside; acetana—un-
conscious; sa-cetana—conscious; kare—make; tomara—Your; adhara—lips;
bada—very great; vdjikara—magicians; tomara—Your; venu—flute; sSuska-in-
dhana—dry wood; tara—of that; janmdaya—creates; indriya-mana—the senses
and mind; tare—the flute; apana—themselves; piydya—cause to drink; niran-
tara—constantly.
TRANSLATION
‘Aside from conscious living beings, even unconscious matter is some-
times made conscious by Your lips. Therefore, Your lips are great magicians.
Paradoxically, although Your flute is nothing but dry wood, Your lips make it
drink their nectar. They create a mind and senses in the dry wooden flute and
give it transcendental bliss.
TEXT 125
धवन ধৃষ্ট-পুকুষ कथ, waited fm পিয়া,
গোপীগণে জানায় निज्-नोन।
“অহেো। শুন, গোপীগণ, বলে পিঙে৷ তোমার ধন,
তোমার यङि থাকে অভিমান ॥ ১২৫ ॥
venu dhrsta-purusa hana, purusadhara piya piya,
gopi-gane janaya nija-pana
‘aho 5८/19, gopi-gana, bale pino tomara dhana,
tomara yadi thake abhimana
SYNONYMS
venu—the flute; dhrsta-purusa—a cunning male; hafa—being; purusa-
adhara—the lips of the male; piya piya—drinking and drinking; gopi-gane —unto
the gopis; janaya—informs; nija-pana—own drinking; aho—oh; suna—hear;
gopi-gana—gopis; bale—says; pino—drink; tomara—your; dhana—property;
tomara—your; yadi—if; thake—there is; abhimana—pride.


--- Page 65 ---
62 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
“That flute is a very cunning male who drinks again and again the taste of
another male’s lips. It advertises its qualities and says to the gopis, ‘O gopis, if
you are so proud of being women, come forward and enjoy your property —
the nectar of the lips of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.’
TEXT 126
তবে মোরে (कोष कत्रि, गच्छ ভয়, ধর্ম, ছাড়ি”,
ছাড়ি” দিমুঃ কর আসি” পান |
নহে পিমু নিরস্তর, তোমায় মোর নাহিক ডর,
खट দেখেঁ৷ তৃণের সমান ॥ ১২৬ ॥
tabe more krodha kari’, lajja bhaya, dharma, chadi’,
chadi’ dimu, kara asi’ pana
nahe pimu nirantara, tomdya mora nahika dara,
anye dekhon trpera samana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereupon; more —at Me; krodha kari’—becoming angry; lajja—shame;
bhaya—fear; dharma—religion; chadi’—giving up; chadi’—giving up; dimu—I
shall give; kara asi’ pana—come drink; nahe—not; pimu—I shall drink; niran-
tara—continuously; tomdya—of You; mora—my; nahika—there is not; dara—
fear; anye—others; dekhon—I see; trnera samana—equal to straw.
TRANSLATION
‘Thereupon, the flute said angrily to Me, ‘Give up Your shame, fear and
religion and come drink the lips of Krsna. On that condition, 1 shall give up
my attachment for them. If You do not give up Your shame and fear, however,
1 shall continuously drink the nectar of Krsna’s lips. | am slightly fearful be-
cause You also have the right to drink that nectar, but as for the others, | con-
sider them like straw.’
TEXT 127
खधत्राञ्चङ নিজ-স্বরে, সঞ্চারিয়। সেই বলে,
আকর্ষয় ত্রিজগৎ-জন |
আমরা ধর্ম-ভয় করি”, রহি' যদি ধৈর্য ধরি”,
LF আমায় করে विुश्लन ॥ ১২৭ ॥


--- Page 66 ---
Text 128] The Lord Tastes Nectar 63
adharamrta nija-svare, sancariya sei bale,
akarsaya trijagat-jana
amara dharma-bhaya kari’, rahi’ yadi dhairya dhari’,
tabe amaya kare vidambana
SYNONYMS
adhara-amrta—the nectar of the lips; nija-svare—with the vibration of the
flute; safncariya—combining; sei—that; bale —by strength; akarsaya —attract; tri-
jagat-jana—the people of the three worlds; amara—we; dharma—religion;
bhaya—fear; kari’—because of; rahi’—remaining; yadi—if; dhairya dhari’—
keeping patient; tabe—then; amaya—us; kare vidambana—criticizes.
TRANSLATION
“The nectar of Krsna’s lips, combined with the vibration of His flute, at-
tracts all the people of the three worlds. However, if we gopis remain patient
out of respect for religious principles, the flute then criticizes us.
TEXT 128
নীবি খসায় গুরু-আগে, লঙ্জা-ধর্ম করায় ত্যাগে,
(८कटम्भे ধরি” যেন লঞ যায় |
আমি” করায় তোমার দাসী, শুনি'লোক করে হাসি”,
এইমত নারীরে AGTH I ১২৮ ॥
nivi khasaya guru-age, lajja-dharma karaya tyage,
kese dhari’ yena lana yaya
ani’ karaya tomara dasi, ৩0771 loka kare hasi’,
ei-mata narire nacaya
SYNONYMS
nivi—the belts; khasaya—cause to loosen; guru-age —before superiors; lajja-
dharma —shame and religion; kardya—induce; tyage—to give up; kese dhari’—
catching by the hair; yena—as if; lana yaya—takes us away; ani’—bringing;
karaya—induce to become; tomara—Your; dasi—maidservants; suni’—hearing;
loka—people; kare hasi’—laugh; ei-mata—in this way; narire—women;
nacaya—cause to dance.
TRANSLATION
“The nectar of Your lips and vibration of Your flute join together to loosen
our belts and induce us to give up shame and religion, even before our


--- Page 67 ---
64 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
superiors. As if catching us by our hair, they forcibly take us away and sur-
render us unto You to become Your maidservants. Hearing of these incidents,
people laugh at us. We have thus become completely subordinate to the flute.
TEXT 129
रच বাশের লাঠিখান, এত করে অপমান,
এই जमन] করিল, (भोजाय |
न সহি” কি করিতে পারি, তাহে রহি মৌন ধরি”,
চোরার মাকে ডাকি” কান্দিতে নাই ॥১২৯॥
Suska bansera lathikhana, eta kare apamana,
ei dasa karila, gosani
na sahi’ ki karite pari, tahe rahi mauna dhari’,
corara make daki’ kandite nai
SYNONYMS
Suska—dry; bansera—of bamboo; lathi-khana—a stick; eta—this; kare
apamana—insults; ei—this; dasa —condition; karila—made; gosani—the master;
na sahi’—not tolerating; ki—what; karite pari—can we do; tahe—at that time;
rahi—we remain; mauna dhari’—keeping silent; corara—of a thief; make —for the
mother; daki’—calling; kandite—to cry; nai—is not possible.
TRANSLATION
“This flute is nothing but a dry stick of bamboo, but it becomes our master
and insults us in so many ways that it forces us into a predicament. What can
we do but tolerate it? The mother of a thief cannot cry loudly for justice when
the thief is punished. Therefore we simply remain silent.
TEXT 130
অধরের এই রীতি, আর শুন কুনীতি,
সে অপর-লনে যার মেলা |
সেই ভক্ষ্য-ভোজ্য-পান, হয় অমৃত-সমান,
নাম তার হয় ‘FR-CFA ॥ ১৩০ ॥
adharera ei riti, ara suna kuniti,
se adhara-sane yara mela
sei bhaksya-bhojya-pana, haya amrta-samana,
nama tara haya ‘krsna-phela’


--- Page 68 ---
Text 132] The Lord Tastes Nectar 65
SYNONYMS
adharera—of the lips; ei—this; riti—policy; ara—other; suna—hear; kuniti—
injustices; se —those; adhara—lips; sane —with; yara—of which; mela —meeting;
sei—those; bhaksya—eatables; bhojya—foods; pana—drink or betel; haya—be-
come; amrta-samana—like nectar; nama—the name; tara—of those; haya—be-
comes; krsna-phela—the remnants of Kisna.
TRANSLATION
“That is the policy of these lips. Just consider the other injustices. Every-
thing that touches those lips —including food, drink or betel —becomes just
like nectar. It is then called krsna-phela, or remnants left by Krsna.
TEXT 131
সে ফেলার এক लवः না পায় দেবতা সব,
এ দস্তে কেবা৷ পাতিয়ায় ?
वक পুণ্য করে, তবে "कड নাম ধরে,
সে ‘RPC’ তার লব পায় ॥ ১৩১ ॥
se phelara eka lava, na paya devata saba,
e dambhe keba patiyaya?
bahu-janma punya kare, tabe ‘sukrti’ nama dhare,
se ‘sukrte’ tara lava paya
SYNONYMS
se phelara—of those remnants; eka—one; lava—small particle; na paya—do
not get; devata—the demigods; saba—all; € dambhe—this pride; keba—who;
patiydya—can believe; bahu-janma—for many births; punya kare —acts piously;
tabe—then; sukrti—one who performs pious activities; nama—the name;
dhare —bears; se —those; sukrte —by pious activities; tara—of that; lava—a frac-
tion; pdya—one can get.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Even after much prayer, the demigods themselves cannot obtain even a
small portion of the remnants of such food. Just imagine the pride of those
remnants! Only a person who has acted piously for many, many births and has
thus become a devotee can obtain the remnants of such food.
TEXT 132
কৃষ্ণ যে খায় তাজ্ব,ল, কহে তার নাহি মুল,
Site আর দজ্ত-পরিপাট্ট।


--- Page 69 ---
66 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
তার যেবা উদগার, তারে কয় “অমৃতসার”,
গোপীর মুখ করে tease ॥ ১৩২ ॥
krsna ye khaya tambdla, kahe tara nahi mala,
tahe ara dambha-paripati
tara yeba udgara, tare kaya ‘amrta-sara’,
gopira mukha kare ‘alabati’
SYNONYMS
krsna—Lord Krsna; ye—what; khaya—chews; tambala—the betel; kahe—it is
said; tara—of it; nahi—there is not; mdala—price; tahe —over and above that;
ara—also; dambha-paripati—complete pride; tara—of that; yeba—whatever;
udgara—coming out; tare—that; kaya—is called; amrta-sara—the essence of the
nectar; gopira—of the gopis; mukha—the mouth; kare —makes; alabati—spit-
toon.
TRANSLATION
“The betel chewed by Krsna is priceless, and the remnants of such chewed
betel from His mouth are said to be the essence of nectar. When the gopis ac-
cept these remnants, their mouths become like His spittoons.
TEXT 133
स्नव--८रोमात् FBG, ছাড় এই পরিপাটী,
বেণুদ্ধারে কহে হর” প্রাণ |
আপনার হাসি লাগি”, नङ्‌ নারীর व्राजः
দেহ” নিজাধরাম্বত-দান 1” ১৩৩ ॥
e-saba——tomara kutinati, chada ei paripati,
venu-dvare kanhe hara’ prana
apanara hasi lagi’, naha narira vadha-bhagi,
deha’ nijadharamrta-dana’
SYNONYMS
e-saba—all these; tomara—Your; kutinati—tricks; chada—give up; ei—these;
paripati—very expert activities; venu-dvare—by the flute; kanhe —why; hara—
You take away; prana—life; apanara—Your own; hasi—laughing; lagi’—for the
matter of; naha—do not be; narira—of women; vadha-bhagi—responsible for
killing; deha’—kindly give; nija-adhara-amrta—the nectar of Your lips; dana—
charity.


--- Page 70 ---
Text 135] The Lord Tastes Nectar 67
TRANSLATION
“Therefore, My dear Krsna, please give up all the tricks You have set up so
expertly. Do not try to kill the life of the gopis with the vibration of Your flute.
Because of Your joking and laughing, You are becoming responsible for the
killing of women. It would be better for You to satisfy us by giving us the
charity of the nectar of Your lips.”
TEXT 134
কহিতে কহিতে প্রভুর মন ফিরি” গেল ।
ক্রোগধ-অংশ শান্ত হৈল, উৎকণ্ঠা বাড়িল ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
kahite kahite prabhura mana phiri’ gela
krodha-amsa santa haila, utkantha badila
SYNONYMS
kahite kahite—talking and talking; prabhura—of ৩1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
mana—mind; phiri’ gela—became changed; krodha-amsa—the part of anger;
santa haila—became pacified; utkantha—agitation of the mind; badila—in-
creased.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was talking like this, His mind changed. His
anger subsided, but His mental agitation increased.
TEXT 135
পরম তুরললভ এই FPIHAITS |
তাহা যেই পায়, তার সফল জীবিত ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
parama durlabha ei krspadharamrta
taha yei paya, tara saphala jivita
SYNONYMS
parama—supremely; durlabha—difficult to obtain; ei—this; krsna—of Krsna;
adhara-amrta—the nectar from the lips; taha—that; yei—one who; paya—gets;
tara—his; sa-phala—successful; jivita—life.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, ‘‘This nectar from Krsna’'s lips is
supremely difficult to obtain, but if one gets some, his life becomes suc-
cessful.


--- Page 71 ---
68 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 136
যোগ্য হঞ। কেহ করিতে না পায় পান ।
তথাপি সে fasion, বৃথা ধরে প্র।ণ ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
yogya hana keha karite na paya pana
tathapi se nirlajja, vrtha dhare prana
SYNONYMS
yogya—competent; hafia—being; keha—anyone; karite—to do; na paya—
does not get; pana—drinking; tathapi—still; se—that person; nirlajja—shame-
less; vrtha—uselessly; dhare prana—continues life.
TRANSLATION
“When a person competent to drink that nectar does not do so, that shame-
less person continues his life uselessly.
TEXT 137
অযোগ্য হুঞ। Sig কেহ সদ। পান FLA ।
যোগ্য জন নাহি পায়, ८नो टर মাত্র মরে ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
ayogya hana (303 keha sada pana kare
yogya jana nahi paya, lobhe matra mare
SYNONYMS
ayogya—unfit; hana—being; taha—that; keha—someone; sada—always;
pana kare—drinks; yogya jana—the competent person; nahi paya—does not get;
lobhe —out of greed; matra—simply; mare —dies.
TRANSLATION
‘There are persons who are unfit to drink that nectar but who nevertheless
drink it continuously, whereas some who are suitable never get it and thus die
of greed.
TEXT 138
তাতে Fifer, — (FIA তপস্তযার আছে यन |
অযোগ্যেরে CF STR কৃষ্ণাধরাষ্বত-ফল ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
tate jani,——kona tapasyara ache bala
ayogyere deoydya krsnadharamrta-phala


--- Page 72 ---
Text 140] The Lord Tastes Nectar 69
SYNONYMS
tate—therefore; jani—I| can understand; kona—some; tapasyara—of austerity;
ache—there is; bala—strength; ayogyere—unto the unfit; deoyaya—delivers;
krsna-adhara-amrta—the nectar of Krsna’'s lips; phala—the result.
TRANSLATION
“It is therefore to be understood that such an unfit person must have ob-
tained the nectar of Krsna’s lips on the strength of some austerity.”
TEXT 139
‘Fg রাম-রায়, কিছু শুনিতে হুয় गन्‌? ।
ভাব জানি' পড়ে রায় গোপীর বচন ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
‘kaha rama-raya, kichu $0171062 haya mana’
bhava jani’ pade raya gopira vacana
SYNONYMS
kaha—speak; rama-raya—Ramananda Raya; kichu—something; sunite—to
hear; haya mana—I| wish; bhava—the situation; jani’—understanding; pade
raya—Ramananda Raya cites; gopira vacana—the words of the gopis.
TRANSLATION
Again Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Raimananda Riya, ‘‘Please say some-
thing. | want to hear.” Understanding the situation, Rimananda Raya recited
the following words of the gopis.
TEXT 140
গোপ্যঃ কিমাচরদয়ং Faas च AL:
দামোদরাধরসুব।মপি গোপিকানাম্‌ ৷
ख टक স্বয়ৎ যদবশিষ্টরসং হ্রদৈন্ঠযো
হৃয্যব্বচোহশ্র মুমু চুস্তরবে৷ যথাযাঃ ॥১৪০॥
gopyah kim acarad ayarn kusalarm sma venur
damodaradhara-sudham api gopikanam
bhunkte svayam yad avasista-rasarin hradinyo
hrsyat-tvaco ‘sru mumucus taravo yatharyah


--- Page 73 ---
70 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS

gopyah—O gopis; kim—what; acarat—performed; ayam—this; kusalam—
auspicious activities; sma—certainly; venuh —flute; damodara—of Krsna; adhara-
sudham —the nectar of the lips; api—even; gopikanam—which is owed to the
gopis; bhunkte —enjoys; svayam—independently; yat—from which; avasista—
remaining; rasam—the taste only; hradinyah—the rivers; hrsyat —feeling jubilant;
tvacah—whose bodies; asru—tears; mumucuh—shed; taravah—the trees;
yatha—exactly like; aryah—old forefathers.

TRANSLATION

‘“My dear gopis, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to
enjoy the nectar of Krsna’s lips independently and leave only a taste for the
gopis for whom that nectar is actually meant. The forefathers of the flute, the
bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. His mother, the river, on whose bank
the bamboo was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her blooming lotus
flowers are standing like hair on her body.”

PURPORT

This is a verse quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.21.9) regarding a discussion
the gopis had among themselves. As the autumn season began in Vrndavana,
Lord Krsna was tending the cows and blowing on His flute. The gopis then began
to praise Krsna and discuss the fortunate position of His flute.

TEXT 141
এই প্লোক खनि, व्य्‌ ভাবাবিষ্ট gel |
উৎকণ্টাতে অর্থ করে প্রলাপ করিম ॥ ১৪১ ॥
ei sloka suni’ prabhu bhavavista hana
utkanthate artha kare pralapa kariya
SYNONYMS

ei $loka—this verse; suni’—hearing; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
bhava-avista—absorbed in ecstatic love; hafa—becoming; utkanthate —in agita-
tion of the mind; artha kare —makes the meaning; pralapa kariya—talking like a
madman.

TRANSLATION

Upon hearing the recitation of this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became
absorbed in ecstatic love, and with a greatly agitated mind He began to ex-
plain its meaning like a madman.


--- Page 74 ---
Text 143] The Lord Tastes Nectar 71
TEXT 142
এতো ত্রজেন্দ্রনন্দন, ACSA কোন কম্ক্যাগণ,
অবশ্য করিব পরিণয় ।
সে-সম্বন্ধে গোপীগণ, যারে মানে নিধন,
সে সুধা TCDA AAS; লয় ॥ ১৪২ ॥
eho vrajendra-nandana, vrajera kona kanya-gana,
avasya kariba parinaya
se-sambandhe gopi-gana, yare mane nija-dhana,
se sudha anyera labhya naya
SYNONYMS
eho—this; vrajendra-nandana—the son of Nanda Maharija; vrajera—of
Vindavana;  kona—any;  kanya-gana—gopis;  avasya—certainly;  kariba
parinaya—will marry; se-sambandhe —in that connection; gopi-gana—the gopis;
yare —which; mane —consider; nija-dhana—the personal property; se sudha—
that nectar; anyera—by others; labhya naya—is not obtainable.
TRANSLATION
‘Some gopis said to other gopis, ‘Just see the astonishing pastimes of
Krsna, the son of Vrajendra! He will certainly marry all the gopis of
Vrndavana. Therefore, the gopis know for certain that the nectar of Krsna’s
lips is their own property and cannot be enjoyed by anyone else.’
TEXT 143
গোপীগণ, কহ जव করিয়া বিচারে ।
(कान्‌ তীর্থ, কোন্‌ न, কোন্‌ সিজ্ধমন্ত্র-জপ,
এই বেণু কৈল জন্মাস্তরে ? ১৪৩ ॥ &F ॥
gopi-gana, kaha saba kariya vicare
kon tirtha, kon tapa, kon siddha-mantra-japa,
ei venu kaila janmantare?
SYNONYMS
gopi-gana—O gopis; kaha—say; saba—all; kariya vicare —after full considera-
tion; kon—what; tirtha—holy places; kon—what; tapa—austerities; kon—what;
siddha-mantra-japa—chanting of a perfect mantra; ei—this; venu—flute; kaila—
did; janma-antare—in his past life.


--- Page 75 ---
72 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘My dear gopis, fully consider how many pious activities this flute per-
formed in his past life. We do not know what places of pilgrimage he visited,
what austerities he performed or what perfect mantra he chanted.
TEXT 144
(कन কৃষ্ণাধর-স্ধা, যে কৈল অমৃত मूष,
যার আশায় গোপী ধরে প্রাণ ।
এই বেণু অযোগ্য অতি, স্থাবর “পুকুষজ্াতি”,
সেই স্থধা সদ। করে পান ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
hena krsnadhara-sudha, ye kaila amrta mudha,
ydra asaya gopi dhare prana
ei venu ayogya ati, sthavara ‘purusa-jati’,
sei sudha sada kare pana
SYNONYMS
hena—such; krsna-adhara—of Krsna’s lips; sudhd—nectar; ye —which; kaila—
made; amrta—nectar; mudha—surpassed; ydra asaya—by hoping for which;
gopi—the gopis; dhare prana—continue to live; ei venu—this flute; ayogya—un-
fit; ati—completely; sthavara—dead; purusa-jati—belonging to the male class;
sei sudha—that nectar; sada—always; kare pana—drinks.
TRANSLATION
‘This flute is utterly unfit because it is merely a dead bamboo stick.
Moreover, it belongs to the male sex. Yet this flute is always drinking the nec-
tar of Krsna’s lips, which surpasses nectarean sweetness of every description.
Only in hope of that nectar do the gopis continue to live.
TEXT 145
যার ধন, Al কহে তারে, পান করে বলাৎকারে,
পিতে তারে ডাকিয়া জানায়।
তার SHIT ফল, দেখ ইহার ভাগ্য-বল,
ইহার উচ্ছিষ্ট মহাজনে খায় ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
yara dhana, na kahe tare, pana kare balatkare,
pite tare dakiya janaya
tara tapasyara phala, dekha ihara bhagya-bala,
ihara ucchista maha-jane khaya


--- Page 76 ---
Text 146] The Lord Tastes Nectar 73
SYNONYMS
yara—of whom; dhana—the property; na kahe —does not speak; tare—to
them; pana kare —drinks; balatkare —by force; pite—while drinking; tare —unto
them; dakiya—calling loudly; janaya—informs; tara—its; tapasyara—of
austerities; phala—result; dekha—see; ihara—its; bhagya-bala—strength of for-
tune; ihara—its; ucchista—remnants; maha-jane —great personalities; khaya—
drink.
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘Although the nectar of Krsna’s lips is the absolute property of the gopis,
the flute, which is just an insignificant stick, is forcibly drinking that nectar
and loudly inviting the gopis to come drink it also. Just imagine the strength
of the flute’s austerities and good fortune. Even great devotees drink the nec-
tar of Krsna’s lips after the flute has done so.
TEXT 146
गानजनेच], कोलिन््ौ, ভুবন-পাবনী নদী,
কৃষ্ণ যদি তাতে করে FIA |
বেণুর ঝকুটাধর-রস, 43] CANS পরবশ,
সেই কালে হর্ষে করে পান ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
manasa-ganga, kalindi, bhuvana-pavani nad,
krsna yadi tate kare snana
venura jhutadhara-rasa, hana lobhe paravasa,
sei kale harse kare pana
SYNONYMS
manasa-ganga—the Ganges of the celestial world; kalindi—the Yamuna;
bhuvana—the world; pavani—purifying; nadi—rivers; krsna—Lord Krsna; yadi—
if; tate—in those; kare snana—takes a bath; venura—of the flute; jhuta-adhara-
rasa—remnants of the juice of the lips; hafa—being; lobhe—by greed;
paravasa—controlled; sei kale—at that time; harse—in jubilation; kare pana—
drink.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘When Krsna takes His bath in universally purifying rivers like the Yamuna
and the Ganges of the celestial world, the great personalities of those rivers
greedily and jubilantly drink the remnants of the nectarean juice from His lips.


--- Page 77 ---
74 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 147
এ-ত নারী TE দুরে, बच्छ সব তার তীরে,
তপ করে পর-উপকারী |
নদীর শেব-রস नाय्य, refed আকৰ্ষিয়,
কেনে পিয়ে, বুঝিতে না পারি ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
e-ta nari rahu dare, vrksa saba tara tire,
tapa kare para-upakari
nadira Sesa-rasa pana, muala-dvare akarsiya,
kene piye, bujhite na pari
SYNONYMS
e-ta nari—these women; rahu dire —leaving aside; vrksa—the trees; saba—all;
tara tire—on their banks; tapa kare — perform austerities; para-upakari—benefac-
tors of all other living entities; nadira—of the rivers; Sesa-rasa—the remnants of
the nectarean juice; pana—getting; mila-dvare—by the roots; akarsiya—
drawing; kene—why; piye—drink; bujhite na pari—we cannot understand.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Aside from the rivers, the trees standing on the banks like great ascetics
and engaging in welfare activities for all living entities drink the nectar of
Krsna’s lips by drawing water from the river with their roots. We cannot
understand why they drink like that.
TEXT 148
নিজাঙ্কুরে পুলকিত, পুণ্পে হাস্ত বিকলিত,
মধু-মিষে বহে অশ্রণ্ধার ।
বেণুরে মানি” নিজ-জাতি, আর্থের যেন পুত্র-নাতি,
“বৈষ্ণব* হৈলে আমন্দ-বিকার ॥ ১৪৮- ॥
nijankure pulakita, puspe hasya vikasita,
madhu-mise vahe asru-dhara
venure mani’ nija-jati, aryera yena putra-nati,
‘vaispava’ haile ananda-vikara
SYNONYMS
nija-arikure —by their buds; pulakita—jubilant; puspe—by flowers; hasya—
smiling; vikasita—exhibited; madhu-mise—by the oozing of honey; vahe—


--- Page 78 ---
Text 149] The Lord Tastes Nectar 75
flows; asru-dhara—showers of tears; venure—the flute; mani’—accepting; nija-
jati—as belonging to the same family; aryera—of forefathers; yena—as if; putra-
nati—son or grandson; vaispava—a Vaisnava; haile—when becomes; ananda-
vikara—transformation of transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION

^“ ‘The trees on the bank of the Yamuna and Ganges are always jubilant.
They appear to be smiling with their flowers and shedding tears in the form of
flowing honey. Just as the forefathers of a Vaisnava son or grandson feel tran-
scendental bliss, the trees feel blissful because the flute is a member of their
family.’

TEXT 149
বেণুর তপ জানি যবে, সেই তপ করি তবে,
এ- অযোগ্য, আমরা।- যোগ্যা নারী |
যা না পাঞ দুঃখে মরি,অযো গ্য Plea সহিতে নারি,
তাহা লাগি” তপস্যা বিচারি ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
venura tapa jani yabe, sei tapa kari tabe,
e——ayogya, amara——yogya nari
ya na pana duhkhe mari, ayogya piye sahite nari,
taha lagi’ tapasya vicari
SYNONYMS

venura—of the flute; tapa—austerities; jani—knowing; yabe —when; sei—
those; tapa—austerities; kari—we perform; tabe —at that time; e—this (flute);
ayogya—unfit; amara—we; yogya nari—fit women; ya—which; na pana—not
getting; duhkhe —in unhappiness; mari—we die; ayogya—the most unfit; piye —
drinks; sahite nari—we cannot tolerate; taha lagi’—for that reason; tapasya—
austerities; vicari—we are considering.

TRANSLATION

“The gopis considered, ‘The flute is completely unfit for his position. We
want to know what kind of austerities the flute executed, so that we may also
perform the same austerities. Although the flute is unfit, he is drinking the
nectar of Krsna’s lips. Seeing this, we qualified gopis are dying of unhappi-
ness. Therefore, we must consider the austerities the flute underwent in his
35111.”


--- Page 79 ---
76 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 150
এতেক প্রলাপ कञ्चि, প্রেমাবেশে গৌরহরি,
সঙ্গে লঞ। স্বরূপ-রামরায় |
কভু নাচে, কভু গায়, ভাবাবেশে Ti যায়,
< दे क्रदं রাত্রি-দিন যায় ॥ ১৫০ ॥
eteka pralapa kari’, premavese gaurahari,
sange lana svarapa-rama-raya
kabhu nace, kabhu gaya, bhavavese marccha yaya,
ei-rape ratri-dina yaya
SYNONYMS
eteka—so much; pralapa kari‘—talking like a crazy man; prema-avese—in
ecstatic love; gaurahari—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sarige lana —taking with Him;
svarapa-rama-raya—Svaraopa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya; kabhu
nace —sometimes dances; kabhu gaya—sometimes sings; bhava-avese—in
ecstatic love; marccha yaya—becomes unconscious; ei-rdpe —in this way; ratri-
dina—the whole night and day; yaya—passes.
TRANSLATION
While thus speaking like a madman, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became full
of ecstatic emotion. In the company of His two friends, Svariipa Damodara
Gosvami and Ramananda Raya, He sometimes danced, sometimes sang and
sometimes became unconscious in ecstatic love. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
passed His days and nights in this way.
TEXT 151
क्रणं, রূপ, সনাতন, রঘুনাথের Ae,
শিরে ধরি” করি যার আশ।
চৈতন্যচরিতাব্ৃত, BTS হৈতে AMY'S,
গায় দীনহীন কৃষ্ণণাস ॥ ১৫১ ॥
svardpa, rapa, sanatana, raghunathera sri-carana,
sire dhari’ kari yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta, amrta haite paramrta,
gaya dina-hina krspadasa


--- Page 80 ---
Text 151] The Lord Tastes Nectar 77
SYNONYMS

svarGpa—Svaripa Damodara CGosvami; rapa —Srila Rapa Gosvami; sanatana—
Sanatana Gosvami; raghunathera—of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; sri-carana—the
lotus feet; sire—on the head; dhari’—taking; kari yara asa—hoping for their
mercy; caitanya-caritaimrta—the book named Caitanya-caritanrta; amrta haite —
than nectar; para-amrta—more nectarean; gaya—chants; dina-hina—the most
wretched; krsnadasa—Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami.

TRANSLATION

Expecting the mercy of Svariipa, Ripa, Sanatana and Raghunatha dasa, and
taking their lotus feet on my head, ॥, the most fallen Krsnadasa, continue
chanting the epic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, which is sweeter than the nectar of
transcendental bliss.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-lila,
Sixteenth Chapter, describing the nectar flowing from Sri Krsna’s lotus lips.


--- Page 81 ---
CHAPTER 17
The Bodily Transformations of
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following summary of this Seventeenth
Chapter in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Absorbed in transcendental ecstasy, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu went out one night without opening the doors to His
room. After crossing over three walls, He fell down among some cows belonging
to the district of Tailanga. There He remained unconscious, assuming the aspect
of a tortoise.
TEXT 1
লিখ্যতে প্রীল-গোৌরেন্দোরত্যস্ু ভমলৌকিকম্‌ |
পা!
বৈদ্ব টং তন্মুখাচ্ছ তত দিব্যোল্মাদ-বিচেষ্টিতম্‌ ॥ > ॥
likhyate srila-gaurendor
atyadbhutam alaukikam
yair drstarn tan-mukhac chrutva
divyonmada-vicestitam
SYNONYMS
likhyate —they are being written; srila—most opulent; gaura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; indoh—moonlike; ati—very; adbhutam—wonderful; alaukikam—
uncommon; yaih—by whom; drstam—personally seen; tat-mukhat—from their
mouths; srutva—after hearing; divya-unmada—in transcendental madness;
vicestitam —activities.
TRANSLATION
| am simply trying to write about Lord Gauracandra’s transcendental ac-
tivities and spiritual madness, which are very wonderful and uncommon. 1
dare to write of them only because | have heard from the mouths of those who
have personally seen the Lord’s activities.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় BReS জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়।ত্বৈতচন্দ্ঞ জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
79


--- Page 82 ---
80 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; $ri-caitanya—to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—to Lord Nityananda; jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to
Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All
glories to Advaitacandra! All glories to all the devotees of the Lord!
TEXT 3
এইমত মহাপ্রভু त्रोलि-णिवटम ।
উদ্মাদের চেষ্টা, প্রলাপ করে প্রেমাবেশে ॥৩ ॥
ei-mata mahdaprabhu ratri-divase
unmadera cesta, pralapa kare premavese
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ratri-divase —
night and day; unmadera—of a madman; cesta —activities; pralapa kare —talks
insanely; prema-avese—in ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Absorbed in ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu acted and talked like a mad-
man day and night.
TEXT 4
একদিন প্রভু স্বরূপ-রামানন্দ-সঙজে |
অধরাত্রি গোঙাইল। কৃষ্ণকথা-রঙ্গে ॥ 8 ॥
eka-dina prabhu svarapa-ramananda-sange
ardha-ratri gonaila krsna-katha-range
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; svarapa-ramananda-
sarge —with Svaripa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya; ardha-ratri—half
the night; gonaila—passed; krsna-katha—of discussing Krsna’s pastimes; range —
in the matter.


--- Page 83 ---
Text 6] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 81
TRANSLATION
In the company of Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu once passed half the night talking about the pastimes of
Lord Krsna.
TEXT 5
যবে যেই ভাব প্রভুর FACT উদয় |
ভাবান্দুরূপ গীত গায় স্বরূপ-মহাশয় ॥ ¢ ॥
yabe yei bhava prabhura karaye udaya
bhavanurdapa gita gaya svarapa-mahasaya
SYNONYMS
yabe —whenever; yei—whatever; bhava—ecstasy; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karaye udaya—rises; bhava-anurapa—befitting the emotion; gita—
song; gdya—sings; svaripa—Svaripa Damodara; mahasaya—the great per-
sonality.
TRANSLATION
As they talked of Krsna, Svariipa Damodara Gosvami would sing songs ex-
actly suitable for 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s transcendental emotions.
TEXT 6
विष्टानि, চণ্ডীদাস, প্রীগীতগে।বিন্দ |
ভাবানুরূপ শ্লোক পড়েন রায়-রামানন্দ ॥ ৬ ॥
vidyapati, candidasa, sri-gita-govinda
bhavanurapa sloka padena raya-ramananda
SYNONYMS
vidyapati—the author Vidyapati; candidasa—the author Candidasa; sri-gita-
govinda—the famous book by jayadeva Gosvami; bhava-anurdpa—according to
the ecstatic emotion; sloka—verses; padena—recites; raya-ramananda—Rama-
nanda Raya.
TRANSLATION
Ramananda Raya would quote verses from the books of Vidyapati and
Candidasa, and especially from the Gita-govinda by Jayadeva Gosvami, to
complement the ecstasy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 84 ---
82 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 7
মধ্যে মধ্যে আপনে প্রভু প্লোক পড়িয়া |
শ্লোকের অর্থ করেন প্রভু বিলাপ করিয়। ॥ ৭ ॥
madhye madhye apane prabhu sloka padiya
Slokera artha karena prabhu vilapa kariya
SYNONYMS
madhye madhye—at intervals; apane—personally; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sloka—a verse; padiya—reciting; slokera—of the verse; artha—
meaning; karena—gives; prabhu—S$r Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vilapa kariya—
lamenting.
TRANSLATION
At intervals, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would also recite a verse. Then, in
great lamentation, He would explain it.
TEXT 8
এইমতে নানাভাবে অধরাত্রি হৈল |
গোসাঞ্চিরে শয়ন করাই” তু'হে ঘরে গেল ॥ ৮ ॥
ei-mate nana-bhave ardha-ratri haila
gosanire sayana karai’ durhe ghare gela
SYNONYMS
ei-mate —in this way; nana-bhave—in varieties of emotions; ardha-ratri—half
the night; haila—passed; gosanire—S$r Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sayana karai’'—
making Him lie down; durnhe—both; ghare gela—went home.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed half the night experiencing varieties of
emotions. Finally, after making the Lord lie down on His bed, both Svariapa
Damodara and Ramananda Raya returned to their homes.
TEXT 9
গম্ভীরার দারে গোবিন্দ করিল শয়ন ।
সবরাত্রি প্রভু করেন উচ্চসন্কীর্তন ॥ > ॥


--- Page 85 ---
Text 11] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 83
gambhirara dvare govinda karila sayana
saba-ratri prabhu karena ucca-sankirtana
SYNONYMS
gambhirara—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s room; dvare—at the door; go-
vinda—His personal servant; karila sayana—lay down; saba-ratri—all night;
prabhu—Sr1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karena—performs; wucca-sankirtana—loud
chanting.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s personal servant, Govinda, lay down at the door
of His room, and the Lord very loudly chanted the Hare Krsna maha-mantra all
night.
TEXT 10
আচন্দিতে শুনেন প্রভু কৃষ্ণবেণু গান |
ভাবাবেশে প্রভু তাই করিলা প্রয়াণ ॥ ১০ ॥
acambite sunena prabhu krspa-venu-gana
bhavavese prabhu tahar karila prayana
SYNONYMS
acambite—suddenly; sunena—hears; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
krspa-venu —of Krsna's flute; gana—the vibration; bhava-avese —in ecstatic emo-
tion; prabhu —S$riCaitanya Mahaprabhu; taharn —there; karila prayapna—departed.
TRANSLATION
Suddenly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard the vibration of Krsna’s flute.
Then, in ecstasy, He began to depart to see Lord Krsna.
TEXT 11
তিনদ্বারে কপাট এছে আছে © লাগিয়া |
ভাবাবেশে প্রভু গেলা বাহির zai ॥ ১১ ॥
tina-dvare kapata aiche ache ta’ lagiya
bhavavese prabhu gela bahira hana


--- Page 86 ---
84 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
tina-dvare—in three doorways; kapata—the doors; aiche—as previously;
ache —are; ta’ lagiya—being closed; bhava-avese —in ecstatic emotion; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gelda—went; bahira—out; hana —being.
TRANSLATION
All three doors were fastened as usual, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in
great ecstasy, nevertheless got out of the room and left the house.
TEXT 12
সিংহুত্বার-দক্ষিণে আছে তৈলজী-গাভীগণ।
তাহা যাই” পড়িল৷ প্রভু 9] অচেতন ॥ ১২ ॥
sirhha-dvara-daksine ache (3//৭/7781-836/1-8903
tahan yai’ padila prabhu hana acetana
SYNONYMS
sirhha-dvara—of the gate named Sirhha-dvara; daksine —on the southern side;
ache —there are; tailangi-gabhi-gana—cows belonging to the Tailanga district;
tahan—there; yai’—going; padila—fell down; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hana acetana—becoming unconscious.
TRANSLATION
He went to > cow shed on the southern side of the Sirnha-dvara. There the
Lord fell down unconscious among cows from the district of Tailanga.
TEXT 13
এথা গোবিন্দ মহাপ্রভুর শব্দ না পাঞ। ।
স্বরূপেরে বোলাইল কপাট খুলিয়া ॥ ১৩ ॥
etha govinda mahaprabhura sabda na pana
svarapere bolaila kapata khuliya
SYNONYMS
etha—here; govinda—Govinda; mahaprabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
Sabda—sound; na pana—not getting; svarapere —Svarapa Damodara Gosvami;
bolaila—called for; kapata—the doors; khuliya—opening.


--- Page 87 ---
Text 16] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 85
TRANSLATION
Meanwhile, not hearing any sounds from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Go-
vinda immediately sent for Svariipa Damodara and opened the doors.
TEXT 14
তবে স্বরূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞি ATH नग ভক্তগণ ।
(नणि জ্বালিয়া করেন প্রভুর TTT ॥ ১৪ ॥
tabe 5৮3/0/23-8০537/ sange lana bhakta-gana
deuti jvaliya karena prabhura anvesana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; svaripa-gosani—SvarGpa Damodara Cosvami; sarge —with
him; lana—taking; bhakta-gana—the devotees; deuti—lamp; jvaliya—burning;
karena—does; prabhura—for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; anvesana —searching.
TRANSLATION
Then Svariipa Damodara Gosvami lit a torch, and went out with all the
devotees to search for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 15
ইতি-উতি অস্বেষিয়। সিংহত্বারে গেলা |
গাজীগণ-মধ্যে যাই” শ্রভুরে পাইলা ॥ ১৫ ॥
iti-uti anvesiya simha-dvare gela
gabhi-gana-madhye yai’ prabhure paila
SYNONYMS
iti-uti—here and there; anvesiya—searching; simha-dvare —to the gate named
Sirmha-dvara; gela—went; gabhi-gana-madhye—among the cows; yai’—going;
prabhure paila—found 311 Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
After searching here and there, they finally came to the cow shed near the
Sirmhha-dvara. There they saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lying unconscious
among the cows.
TEXT 16
পেটের ভিতর হস্ত-পদ-_কুর্মের আকার ।
মুখে CF, পুলকাঙ্গ, নেত্রে खल्वां त्र ॥ ১৬ ॥


--- Page 88 ---
86 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
petera bhitara hasta-pada——karmera akara
mukhe phena, pulakanga, netre asru-dhara
SYNONYMS
petera—the abdomen; bhitara—within; hasta-pada—the arms and legs; kar-
mera akara—ijust like a tortoise; mukhe —in the mouth; phena—foam; pulaka-
anga—eruptions on the body; netre—in the eyes; asru-dhara—a flow of tears.
TRANSLATION
His arms and legs had entered the trunk of His body, exactly like those of a
tortoise. His mouth was foaming, there were eruptions on His body, and tears
flowed from His eyes.
TEXT 17
অচেতন পড়িয়াছেন,-_ যেন কুষ্মাণ্ড-ফল |
বাহিরে জড়িমা, অন্তরে আনম্দ-বিহবল ॥ ১৭ ॥
acetana padiyachena, — yena kusmanda-phala
bahire jadima, antare ananda-vihvala
SYNONYMS
acetana—unconscious; padiyachena—was lying down; yena—as if; kusman-
da-phala—a pumpkin; bahire—externally; jadima—complete inertia; antare—
within; dnanda-vihvala—overwhelmed with transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
As the Lord lay there unconscious, His body resembled a large pumpkin.
Externally He was completely inert, but within He felt overwhelming tran-
scendental bliss.
TEXT 18
গাভী जव চৌদিকে "टक প্রভুর Aww ।
দুর কৈলে নাহি ছাড়ে প্রভুর প্রীঅঙ্গ-সঙ্গ ॥ ১৮ ॥
gabhi saba caudike sunke prabhura sri-anga
dara kaile nahi chade prabhura sri-anga-sanga
SYNONYMS
gabhi—cows; saba—all; cau-dike —around; sunke—sniff; prabhura—of Sn
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sri-anga—the transcendental body; dara kaile—if they


--- Page 89 ---
Text 20] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 87
are taken away; nahi chade—they do not give up; prabhura—of 51 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sri-ariga-sarga—association with the transcendental body.
TRANSLATION
All the cows around the Lord were sniffing His transcendental body. When
the devotees tried to check them, they refused to give up their association
with the transcendental body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 19
অনেক করিলা TG, না হয় চেতন |
প্রভুরে Toten! ঘরে खां निनो Sate ॥ ১৯ ॥
aneka karila yatna, na haya cetana
prabhure uthana ghare anila bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
aneka—many; karilai—made; yatna—endeavors; na haya—there was not;
cetana—consciousness; prabhure—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; uthaia—lifting;
ghare—home; anila—brought; bhakta-gana—the devotees.
TRANSLATION
The devotees tried to rouse the Lord by various means, but His conscious-
ness did not return. Therefore they all lifted Him and brought Him back home.
TEXT 20
উচ্চ করি” শ্রবণে করে নামসঙ্কীর্তন |
অনেকক্ষণে মহাপ্রভু পাইলা চেতন ॥ ২০ ॥
ucca kari’ sravane kare nama-sankirtana
aneka-ksane mahaprabhu paila cetana
SYNONYMS
ucca kari’—very loudly; Ssravane—in the ears; kare—perform; nama-
sankirtana—chanting of the holy name; aneka-ksane—after a considerable time;
mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; paila cetana—returned to conscious-
ness.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees began to chant the Hare Krsna mantra very loudly, and
after a considerable time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regained consciousness.


--- Page 90 ---
88 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 21
চেতন হইলে হস্ত-পাদ বাহিরে আইল |
পূর্ববৎ যথাযোগ্য শরীর হুইল ॥ ২১ ॥
cetana ha-ile hasta-pada bahire aila
parvavat yatha-yogya sarira ha-ila
SYNONYMS
cetana ha-ile—when there was consciousness; hasta-pada—the arms and legs;
bahire—outside; aila—came; ptrvavat—as before; yatha-yogya—in complete
order; Sarira—the body; ha-ila—was.
TRANSLATION
When He regained consciousness, His arms and legs came out of His body,
and His whole body returned to normal.
TEXT 22
উঠিয়া বসিলেন প্রভু, চাহেন ইতি-উতি |
স্বরূপে কহেন, “তুমি আমা আনিলা কতি ? ২২ ॥
uthiya vasilena prabhu, cahena iti-uti
svarape kahena, — “tumi ama anila kati?
SYNONYMS
uthiya—getting up; vasilena—sat down; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
cahena—Ilooks; iti-uti—here and there; svardgpe—to Svaripa Damodara;
kahena—says; tumi—you; ama—Me; anila—have brought; kati—where.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up, and then sat down again. Looking here
and there, He inquired from Svaripa Damodara, “Where have you brought
Me?
TEXT 23
বেণু শব্দ শুলি' আমি গেলাঙ বৃন্দাবন |
(कनि, - গোষ্ঠে বেণু বাজায় ব্রজ্ঞবেন্জ্নন্দল ॥ ২৩ ॥
venu-sabda Suni’ ami gelana vrndavana
dekhi,—gosthe ৮০০0 bajaya vrajendra-nandana


--- Page 91 ---
Text 25] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 89
SYNONYMS
venu-sabda—the vibration of the flute; suni’—after hearing; ami—I; gelana—
went; vrndavana—to Vindavana; dekhi—I| saw; gosthe—in the pasturing field;
venu—the flute; bajaya—played; vrajendra-nandana—Krsna, the son of Nanda
Maharaja.
TRANSLATION
‘‘/After hearing the vibration of a flute, | went to Vrndavana, and there I saw
that Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda, was playing on His flute in the
pasturing grounds.
TEXT 24
जटकख-८वनु-नांटमं রাধা আনি কুঞ্জঘরে ।
FCT एनिन। কৃষ্ণ कषु] করিবারে ॥ २8 ॥
sariketa-venu-nade radha ani’ kunja-ghare
kurijere calila krspa krida karibare
SYNONYMS
sanketa-venu-nade —by the signal of the vibration of the flute; radha —Srimati
Radharani; ani’—bringing; kufja-ghare—to a bower; kunjere —within the bower;
calila—went; krspa—Lord Krsna; krida karibare—to perform pastimes.
TRANSLATION
“He brought Srimati Radharani to a bower by signaling with His flute. Then
He entered within that bower to perform pastimes with Her.
TEXT 25
তার পাচ্ছে পাছে আমি sy গমম।
তার ভুষা-ধ্বনিতে আমার হুরিল শ্রবণ ॥ ২৫ ॥
tanra pache pache ami karinu gamana
tanra bhasa-dhvanite amara harila sravana
SYNONYMS
tarra pache pache —just behind Him; ami—I; karinu gamana—went; tarnra—
His; bhasa-dhvanite—by the sound of ornaments; amara—My; harila—became
captivated; sravana—ears.
TRANSLATION
41 entered the bower just behind Krsna, My ears captivated by the sound of
His ornaments.


--- Page 92 ---
90 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 26
গোপীগণ-সহ বিহার, হাস, পরিহাস ।
কণ্টধ্বনি-উক্তি' শুনি” মোর কর্ণোল্লাস ॥ ২৬ ॥
gopi-gana-saha vihara, hasa, parihasa
kantha-dhvani-ukti suni’ mora karnpollasa
SYNONYMS
gopi-gana-saha—with the gopis; vihdra—pastimes; hasa—laughing; pari-
hasa —joking; kantha-dhvani-ukti—vocal expressions; suni’—hearing; mora—
My; karpa-ullasa—jubilation of the ears.
TRANSLATION
“1 saw Krsna and the gopis enjoying all kinds of pastimes while laughing
and joking together. Hearing their vocal expressions enhanced the joy of My
ears.
TEXT 27
হেনকালে তুমি-সব কোলাহল করি”।
আমা दे ड। sel আইলা বলাৎকার করি” ॥ ২৭ ॥
hena-kale tumi-saba kolahala kari’
ama inha lana aila balatkara kari’
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; tumi-saba—all of you; kolahala kari’—making a
tumultuous sound; ama —Me; inha—here; lafia aila—brought back; balatkara
kari’—by force.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Just then, all of you made a tumultuous sound and brought Me back here
by force.
TEXT 28
শুনিতে না #118 সেই অনৃতসম বাণী |
শুনিতে না পাইন ভুষণ-মখুরলীর:ধ্বনি ॥” ২৮ ॥
Sunite na painu sei amrta-sama vani
Sunite na painu bhasana-muralira dhvani”


--- Page 93 ---
Text 30] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 91
SYNONYMS
Sunite na painu—I| could not hear; sei—those; amrta-sama—exactly like nec-
tar; vani—voices; sunite na painu—I| could not hear; bhsana—of ornaments;
muralira—of the flute; dhvani—vibration.
TRANSLATION
‘Because you brought Me back here, ॥ could no longer hear the nectarean
voices of Krsna and the gopis, nor could | hear the sounds of their ornaments
or the flute.”
TEXT 29
ভাবাবেশে স্ব ক্মপে কহেন গদগদ-বাণী ।
“কর্ণ তৃষ্ণায় মরে, পড় রসায়ন, শুনি ॥” ২৯ ॥
bhavavese svarape kahena gadgada-vani
‘karpa trsndya mare, pada rasayana, Suni’
SYNONYMS
bhava-avese—in great ecstasy; svaripe—to Svarapa Damodara; kahena—
says; gadgada-vani—in a faltering voice; karna—the ears; trsnaya—because of
thirst; mare —dies; pada—recite; rasa-ayana—something relishable; suni’—let
Me hear.
TRANSLATION
In great ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Svariipa Damodara in a
faltering voice, “My ears are dying of thirst. Please recite something to
quench this thirst. Let me hear it.”
TEXT 30
স্বরূপ-গোসাঞ্ও প্রভুর ভাব खो निञ्च] |
ভাগবতের শ্লোক পড়ে মধুর FAT ॥ ৩০ ॥
5৮৭/0/23-8০0537/ prabhura bhava janiya
bhagavatera sloka pade madhura kariya
SYNONYMS
svarapa-gosani—Svarapa Damodara 0০531; prabhura—of ৩1 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhava—the emotion; janiya—understanding; bhagavatera—of
Srimad-Bhagavatam; sloka—a verse; pade —recites; madhura kariya—in a sweet
voice.


--- Page 94 ---
92 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
Understanding the ecstatic emotions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Svariipa
Damodara, in a sweet voice, recited the following verse from Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
TEXT 31
কাস্ত্র্যঙ্গ তে FAARITSCIINS-
সম্মোহিতার্যচরিতান্ন চলে জ্বিলোক্যাম্‌ ।
ত্রৈলোক্য-সৌভগ মিদঞ্চ নিরীক্ষ্য রূপং
যদ্গোদ্বিজদ্রমমৃগাঃ পুলকান্য বিভ্রন্‌ ॥ ৩১ ॥
ka stry anga te kala-padamrta-venu-gita-
sammohitarya-caritan na calet trilokyam
trailokya-saubhagam idam ca niriksya rapam
yad go-dvija-druma-migah pulakany abibhran
SYNONYMS
ka—what; stri—woman; ariga—O Krsna; te—of You; kala-pada—by the
rhythms; amrta-venu-gita—of the sweet songs of the flute; sammohita—being
captivated; arya-caritat—from the path of chastity according to Vedic civilization;
na—not; calet—would wander; tri-lokyam—in the three worlds; trai-lokya-
saubhagam—which is the fortune of the three worlds; idam—this; ca—and;
niriksya—by observing; rapam—beauty; yat—which; go—the cows; dvija—
birds; druma—trees; mrgah—forest animals like the deer; pulakani—transcen-
dental jubilation; abibhran —manifested.
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘My dear Lord Krsna, where is that woman within the three worlds who
cannot be captivated by the rhythms of the sweet songs coming from Your
wonderful flute? Who cannot fall down from the path of chastity in this way?
Your beauty is the most sublime within the three worlds. Upon seeing Your
beauty, even cows, birds, animals and trees in the forest are stunned in jubila-
tion.”
PURPORT
This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.29.40).
TEXT 32
ofr প্রভু গোপীভাবে wife হইলা |
ভাগবতের শ্লোকের অর্থ করিতে লাগিলা ॥ ৩২ ॥


--- Page 95 ---
Text 33] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 93
Suni’ prabhu gopi-bhave avista ha-ila
bhagavatera slokera artha karite lagila
SYNONYMS

$uni’—hearing; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gopi-bhave—in the emo-
tion of the gopis; avista ha-ila—became overwhelmed; bhagavatera—of Srimad-
Bhagavatam; slokera—of the verse; artha—the meaning; karite lagila—began to
explain.

TRANSLATION

Upon hearing this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, overwhelmed with the

ecstasy of the gopis, began to explain it.
TEXT 33
হৈল গোপী-ভাবাবেশ, বকৈল রাসে পরবেশ,
কৃষ্ণের শুনি” উপেক্ষা-বচন।
কৃষ্ণের মুখ-হাত্য-বাণী, ত্যাগে তাহা সত্য মানি”,
CATH কৃষ্ণে দেন ওলাহুন ॥ ৩৩ ॥
haila gopi-bhavavesa, kaila rase paravesa,
krsnera Suni’ upeksa-vacana
krsnera mukha-hasya-vani, tyage taha satya mani’,
rose krspe dena olahana
SYNONYMS

haila—there was; gopi—of the gopis; bhava-avesa—ecstatic emotion; kaila—
did; rase —in the rasa dance; paravesa—entrance; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; suni’—
hearing; upeksa-vacana—the words of negligence; krspnera—of Lord Krsna;
mukha—face; hasya—smiling; vani—talking; tyage —renounce; taha —that; satya
mani’—taking as a fact; rose—in anger; krsne—to Lord Krsna; dena—give;
olahana—chastisement.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘The gopis entered the arena of the rasa
dance in ecstasy, but after hearing Krsna’s words of negligence and detach-
ment, they understood that He was going to renounce them. Thus they began
to chastise Him in anger.


--- Page 96 ---
94 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 34
“নাগর, কহ, ভুমি করিয়৷ নিশ্চয় |
এই ত্রিজগৎ ভরি”, আছে যত যোগ্য নারী,
তোমার বেণু কাই না আক্র্ষয় ? ৩৪ ॥ ऋ ॥
“nagara, kaha, tumi kariya niscaya
ei trijagat bhari’, ache yata yogya nari,
tomara venu kahan na akarsaya?
SYNONYMS
nagara—QO lover; kaha—say; tumi—You; kariya—making; niscaya—certain;
ei—these; tri-jagat—three worlds; bhari’—filling; ache—there are; yata—as
many; yogya—suitable; nari—women; tomara—Your; venu—flute; kahan—
where; na—not; akarsaya—attracts.
TRANSLATION
^^ ^© dear lover,” they said, ‘ ‘please answer just one question. Who
among all the youthful women within this universe is not attracted by the
sound of Your flute?
TEXT 35
বৈলা জগতে বেণুধ্বনি, লিজ্ঞমন্ত্র। যে निनो,
দুতী zl মোহে নারী-মন 1
মহোৎকণ্ঠা বাড়াঞ, fe ছাড়াঞা,
আমি” তোমায় করে সমর্পণ ॥ ৩৫ ॥
kaila jagate venu-dhvani, siddha-mantra yogini,
dati hana mohe nari-mana
mahotkantha badana, arya-patha chadana,
ani’ tomaya kare samarpana
SYNONYMS
kaila—You have made; jagate—in the world; venu-dhvani—the vibration of
the flute; siddha-mantra—perfected in chanting mantras; yogini—a female
mystic; dati—a messenger; hana—being; mohe—enchants; nari-mana—the
minds of women; maha-utkantha—great anxiety; badana—increasing; arya-
patha—the regulative principles; chadana—inducing to give up; ani’—bringing;
tomaya—to You; kare samarpana—delivers.


--- Page 97 ---
Text 371 The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 95
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘When You play Your flute, it acts like a messenger in the form of a yogini
perfect in the art of chanting mantras. This messenger enchants all the women
in the universe and attracts them to You. Then she increases their great anxiety
and induces them to give up the regulative principle of obeying superiors.
Finally, she forcibly brings them to You to surrender in amorous love.
TEXT 36
भर्ग ছাড়ায় বেণুদ্বারে, হানে কটাক্ষ-কামশরে,
লজ্জা, ভয়, সকল ছাড়ায় |
এবে আমায় করি” রোষ, কহি” পতিত্যাগে “দোষ”,
ধার্মিক হঞা ধর্ম শিখায় ! ৩৬ ॥
dharma chadaya venu-dvare, hane kataksa-kama-sare,
lajja, bhaya, sakala chadaya
ebe amaya kari’ rosa, kahi’ pati-tyage ‘dosa’,
dharmika hana dharma sikhaya!
SYNONYMS
dharma —religious principles; chadaya—induces to reject; venu-dvare—
through the flute; hane —pierces; kataksa—glancing; kama-sare —by the arrows
of lust; lajja—shame; bhaya—fear; sakala—all; chadaya—induces to give up;
ebe—now; amdya—at us; kari’ rosa—becoming angry; kahi’—saying; pati-
tyage—to give up one’s husband; dosa—fault; dharmika—very religious; hana—
becoming; dharma—religious principles; sikhaya—You teach.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘The vibration of Your flute, accompanied by Your glance, which pierces
us forcibly with the arrows of lust, induces us to ignore the regulative princi-
ples of religious life. Thus we become excited by lusty desires and come to
You, giving up all shame and fear. But now You are angry with us. You are
finding fault with our violating religious principles and leaving our homes and
husbands. And as You instruct us about religious principles, we become help-
1655.
TEXT 37
CYT, SDAA, বাহিরে অন্ত আচরণ,
এই সব শঠ-পরিপটা।
তুমি জান পরিহাস, হয় নারীর সর্বনাশ,
ছাড় এই जव THB ॥ ৩৭ ॥


--- Page 98 ---
96 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
anya-katha, anya-mana, bahire anya acarana,
ei saba satha-paripati
tumi jana parihasa, haya narire sarva-nasa,
chada ei saba kutinati
SYNONYMS
anya—different; katha —words; anya—different; mana—mind; bahire —exter-
nally; anya—different; acarana—behavior; ei—these; saba—all; satha-paripati—
well-planned cheating behavior; tumi—You; jana—know; parihasa—joking;
haya—there is; narira—of women; sarva-nasa—total annihilation; chada—please
give up; ei—these; saba—all; kutinati—clever tricks.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘We know that this is all a well-planned trick. You know how to make
jokes that cause the complete annihilation of women, but we can understand
that Your real mind, words and behavior are different. Therefore please give
up all these clever tricks.
TEXT 38
CRT অনৃত-খোলে» অন্বৃত-সমান মিঠা বোলে,
অন্ৃত-সমান ভূষণ-শিক্জিত |
তিন অনস্বতে হরে কাণ, হরে মন, হরে প্রাণ,
কেমনে নারী ধরিবেক চিত ?” ৩৮ ॥
venu-nada amrta-ghole, amrta-samana mitha bole,
amrta-samana bhasana-siijita
tina amrte hare kana, hare mana, hare prana,
kemane nari dharibeka cita?”’
SYNONYMS
venu-nada—the vibration of the flute; amrta-ghole —like nectarean buttermilk;
amrta-samana—equal to nectar; mitha bole —sweet talking; amrta-samana—ex-
actly like nectar; bhasana-siAjita—the vibration of ornaments; tina—three;
amrte —nectars; hare —attract; kapna—the ear; hare —attract; mana—the mind;
hare —attract; prana—the life; kemane—how; nari—women; dharibeka—will
keep; cita—patience or consciousness.
TRANSLATION
‘“ ‘The nectarean buttermilk of Your flute’s vibration, the nectar of Your
sweet words and the nectarean sound of Your ornaments mix together to at-
tract our ears, minds and lives. In this way You are killing 05.


--- Page 99 ---
Text 40] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 97
TEXT 39
এত FR ক্রোধাবেশে, ভাবের তরঙ্গে ভাসে,
উৎকণ্ঠা-সাগরে ডুবে मन |
রাধার উৎকণ্টা-বাণী, পড়ি” আপনে বাখানি,
FRAY করে আস্বাদন ॥ ৩৯ ॥
eta kahi’ krodhavese, bhavera tarange bhase,
utkantha-sagare dube mana
radhara utkantha-vani, padi’ apane vakhani,
krsna-madhurya kare asvadana
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; krodha-avese —in the mood of anger; bhavera tarange—
in the waves of ecstatic love; bhase —floats; utkantha —of anxieties; sagare —in
the ocean; dube mana—merges the mind; radhara—of Srimati Radharani;
utkantha-vani—words of anxiety; padi’—reciting; apane—personally; vakhani—
explaining; krsna-madhurya—the sweetness of Krsna; kare dsvadana—tastes.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke these words in a mood of anger as He
floated on waves of ecstatic love. Merged in an ocean of anxiety, He recited a
verse spoken by Srimati Radharani expressing the same emotion. Then He
personally explained the verse and thus tasted the sweetness of Krsna.
TEXT 40
Ansgar fama: শ্রবণকষি সচ্ছি ব্রিতঃ
সনমরসসফ্চকাক্ষরপদার্থভঙ্গুক্তিকঃ |
রমাদিক-বরাঙ্গনা-হৃদয়হারি-বংশীকলঃ
স মে মদনমোহনঃ সখি তনোতি কর্পস্পৃহাম্‌ ॥৪০ ॥
nadaj-jalada-nisvanah sravana-karsi-sac-chifjitah
sanarma-rasa-sticakaksara-padartha-bhangy-uktikah
ramadika-varangana-hrdaya-hari-varnsi-kalah
sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti karpa-sprham
SYNONYMS
nadat—resounding; jalada—the cloud; nisvanah—whose voice; sravana—the
ears; karsi —attracting; sat-sifijitah —the tinkling of whose ornaments; sa-narma—


--- Page 100 ---
98 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
with deep meaning; rasa-sucaka—joking; aksara—letters; pada-artha—meanings;
bhangi—indications; uktikah—whose talk; rama-adika—beginning with the god-
dess of fortune; vara-angana—of beautiful women; hrdaya-hari—attracting the
hearts; varnsi-kalah—the sound of whose flute; sah —that; me —My; madana-
mohanah —Madana-mohana; sakhi—My dear friend; tanoti—expands; karna-
sprham—the desire of the ears.
TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, ‘ ‘My dear friend, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Krsna, has a voice as deep as a cloud resounding in the
sky. With the tinkling of His ornaments, He attracts the ears of the gopis, and
with the sound of His flute He attracts even the goddess of fortune and other
beautiful women. That Personality of Godhead, known as Madana-mohana,
whose joking words carry many indications and deep meanings, is increasing
the lusty desires of My ears.’

PURPORT
This verse is found in the Govinda-l/ilamrta (8.5).
TEXT 41
“FTA গম্ভীর ধ্বনি, নবঘন-ধ্বনি किनि",
যার গুণে কোকিল লাজায় ৷
তার এক শুঙ্তি-কণে, GAT জগতের কাণে,
পুনঃ কাণ বাছড়ি” না আয় ॥ ৪১ ॥
“kanthera gambhira dhvani, navaghana-dhvani jini’,
yara gune kokila lajaya
tara eka sruti-kane, dubaya jagatera kane,
punah kana bahudi’ na aya
SYNONYMS

kanthera—of the throat; gambhira—deep; dhvani—sound; nava-ghana—of
new clouds; dhvani—the resounding; jini’—conquering; yara—of which; gune—
the attributes; kokila—the cuckoo; ldjaya—put to shame; tara—of that; eka—
one; sruti-kane—particle of sound; dubaya—inundates; jagatera—of the whole
world; kane—the ear; punah—again; kana—the ear; bahudi’—getting out; na
aya—cannot come.

TRANSLATION

‘’Krsna’s deep voice is more resonant than newly arrived clouds, and His

sweet song defeats even the sweet voice of the cuckoo. Indeed, His song is so


--- Page 101 ---
Text 43] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 99
sweet that even one particle of its sound can inundate the entire world. If such
a particle enters one’s ear, one is immediately bereft of all other types of
hearing.
TEXT 42
কহ, সখি, कि করি উপায় ?
কৃষ্ণের সে শব্দ-গুণে, হরিলে আমার कोटनः
এতে না পায়, তৃষ্ণায় মরি” যায় ॥ ৪২ nN
kaha, sakhi, ki kari upaya?
krsnera se sabda-gune, harile amara kane,
ebe na paya, trspndya mari’ yaya
SYNONYMS
kaha—please say; sakhi—My dear friend; ki—what; kari—can | do; upaya—
means; krsnera—of Krsna; se—that; sabda—of the sound; gune—the qualities;
harile —having attracted; amara—My; kane —ears; ebe—now; na paya—do not
get; trsnaya—from thirst; mari’ yaya—I am dying.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear friend, please tell me what to do. My ears have been plundered by
the qualities of Krsna’s sound. Now, however, | cannot hear His transcenden-
tal sound, and | am almost dead for want of it.
TEXT 43
নুপুর-কিন্কিণী-ধ্বনি, হুংস-সারস किनि",
কন্ধণ-ধবনি চটকে লাজায়।
একবার যেই শুনলে, ব্যাপি রহে” তার কাণে,
«PY শব্দ সে-কাণে না যায় ॥ ৪৩ ॥
napura-kinkini-dhvani, harisa-sarasa jini’,
kankana-dhvani catake lajaya
eka-bara yei sune, vyapi rahe’ tara kane,
anya sabda se-kane na yaya
SYNONYMS
napura—of the ankle bells; kinkini—tinkling; dhvani—the sound; harhsa—
swans; sdrasa—cranes; jini’—conquering; kankana-dhvani—the sound of


--- Page 102 ---
100 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
bangles; catake —the cataka bird; lajaya—puts to shame; eka-bara—once; yei—
one who; sune—hears; vyapi—expanding; rahe’—remains; tara kane —in his ear;
anya—other; sabda—sound; se-kane—in that ear; na yaya—does not go.
TRANSLATION
“The tinkling of Krsna’s ankle bells surpasses the songs of even the swan
and crane, and the sound of His bangles puts the singing of the cataka bird to
shame. Having allowed these sounds to enter the ears even once, one cannot
tolerate hearing anything else.
TEXT 44
সে জীমুখ-ভাষিত, SIS হৈতে AAT,
স্রিত-কপূর তাহ।তে মিশ্রিত |
শব্দ, অর্থ,--তুইশক্তি, নান-রস করে ব্যক্তি,
প্রত্যক্ষর - নর্ম-বিভুষিত ॥ ৪৪ ॥
se sri-mukha-bhasita, amrta haite paramrta,
smita-karpara tahate misrita
5260012, artha, —dui-$akti, nana-rasa kare vyakti,
pratyaksara——narma-vibhasita
SYNONYMS
se—that; $ri—beautiful; mukha—by the mouth; bhasita—spoken; amrta—
nectar; haite—than; para-amrta—more nectarean; smita—smiling; karpara—
camphor; tahate—in that; misrita—mixed; sabda—sound; artha—meaning; dui-
Sakti—two energies; nana —various; rasa—mellows; kare vyakti—express; prati-
aksara—every word; narma-vibhasita—full of meaning.
TRANSLATION
‘’Krsna’s speech is far sweeter than nectar. Each of His jubilant words is full
of meaning, and when His speech mixes with His smile, which is like
camphor, the resultant sound and the deep meaning of Krsna’s words create
various transcendental mellows.
TEXT 45
সে অম্বৃতের এক-কণ, কর্ণ-চকোর-জীবন,
কর্ণ-চকোর জীয়ে সেই আশে!
ভাগ্যবশে कड्‌ পায়, |STAN কভু না পায়,
না পাইলে মরয়ে পিয়াসে ॥ se ॥


--- Page 103 ---
Text 46] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 101
se amrtera eka-kana, karna-cakora-jivana,
karna-cakora jiye sei ase
bhagya-vase kabhu paya, abhagye kabhu na paya,
na paile maraye piyase
SYNONYMS
se amrtera—of that nectar; eka-kana—one particle; karna-cakora—of the ear,
which is like a cakora bird; jivana—the life; karna—the ear; cakora—the cakora
bird; jiye—lives; sei ase—with that hope; bhagya-vase—by good fortune;
kabhu—sometimes; paya—gets; abhagye —by misfortune; kabhu—sometimes;
na paya—does not get; na paile—if does not get; maraye—dies; piyase—from
thirst.
TRANSLATION
“One particle of that transcendental, blissful nectar is the life and soul of
the ear, which is like a cakora bird that lives in hope of tasting that nectar.
Sometimes, by good fortune, the bird can taste it, but at other times he unfor-
tunately cannot and therefore almost dies of thirst.
TEXT 46
যেবা ८वनू-कनश्चवनि, একবার তাহা শুনি,
জগল্লারী-চিত্ত আউলায় ।
নীবি-বন্ধ পড়ে «Hw, বিনা-মূলে হয় দাসী,
বাউলী হঞ। কৃষ্ণ-পাশে ধায় ॥ ৪৬ ॥
yeba venu-kala-dhvani, eka-bara (303 suni’,
jagan-nari-citta duldya
nivi-bandha pade khasi’, vina-male haya dasi,
bauli hana krsna-pase dhaya
SYNONYMS
yeba—whoever; venu—of the flute; kala-dhvani—the sweet vibration; eka-
bara—once; taha—that; suni’—hearing; jagat—of the universe; nari—of the
women; citta—hearts; aulaya—become disturbed; nivi-bandha—the fastened
belts; pade—fall; khasi’—becoming loosened; vina-male—without a price;
haya—they become; dasi—maidservants; bauli—mad; hana —becoming; krsna-
pase—after Krsna; dhaya—run.
TRANSLATION
“The transcendental vibration of Krsna’s flute disturbs the hearts of women
all over the world, even if they hear it only once. Thus their fastened belts


--- Page 104 ---
102 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
become loose, and these women become the unpaid maidservants of Krsna.
Indeed, they run toward Krsna exactly like madwomen.
TEXT 47
যেবা লঞজ্জজী-ঠাকুরাণী, তেঁহো যে কাকলী শুনি”,
কৃষ্ণ-পাশ আইসে প্রত্যাশায় |
না পায় FCF সঙ্গ, ATT তৃষ্ণা-তরঙ্গ,
তপ করে, তবু নাহি পায় ॥ ৪৭ ॥
yeba laksmi-thakurani, tenho ye kakali suni’,
krsna-pasa aise pratyasaya
na paya krsnera sanga, bade trsna-taranga,
tapa kare, tabu nahi paya
SYNONYMS
yeba—even; laksmi-thakurani—the goddess of fortune; tenho—she; ye—
which; kakali—vibration of the flute; suni’—hearing; krsna-pasa—to Lord Krsna;
aise—comes; pratyasaya—with great hope; na paya—does not get; krsnera
sanga—association with Krsna; bade—increase; trsna—of thirst; taranga—the
waves; tapa kare—undergoes austerity; tabu—still; nahi paya—does not get.
TRANSLATION
“When she hears the vibration of Krsna’s flute, even the goddess of fortune
comes to Him, greatly hoping for His association, but nevertheless she does
not get it. When the waves of thirst for His association increase, she performs
austerities, but still she cannot meet Him.
TEXT 48
এই শব্দাম্বত চারি, যার হয় ভাগ্য ভারি,
সেই কর্ণে ইহা করে পান ।
ইহা যেই নাহি শুনে, সে कोम जग्िन কেনে,
কাণাকড়ি-সম সেই कान्‌ ॥” ৪৮ ॥
ei sabdamrta cari, yara haya bhagya bhari,
sei karne iha kare pana
iha yei nahi sune, se kana janmila kene,
kanakadi-sama sei kana”


--- Page 105 ---
Text 49] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 103
SYNONYMS
ei—these; sabda-amrta—nectarean sound vibrations; cari—four; yara—of
whom; haya—there is; bhagya bhari—great fortune; sei—such a person; karne —
by the ears; iha—these sounds; kare pana—drinks; iha—these sounds; yei—any-
one who; nahi sSune—does not hear; se—those; kana—ears; janmila—took birth;
kene—why; kanakadi—a hole in a small conchshell; sama—just like; sei kana—
those ears.
TRANSLATION
“Only the most fortunate can hear these four nectarean sounds—Krsna’'s
words, the tinkling of His ankle bells and bangles, His voice and the vibration
of His flute. If one does not hear these sounds, his ears are as useless as small
conchshells with holes.”
TEXT 49
করিতে এঁছে বিলাপ, উঠিল উদ্বেগ, ভাব,
মনে কাহো নাহি আলম্বন ।
উদ্বেগ, বিষাদ, মতি, ॐ< खक, ত্রাস, ধৃতি, স্বৃতে,
নানা-ভাবের হইল মিলন ॥ ৪৯ ॥
karite aiche vilapa, uthila udvega, bhava,
mane kaho nahi alambana
udvega, visada, mati, autsukya, trasa, dhrti, smrti,
nana-bhavera ha-ila milana
SYNONYMS
karite—doing; aiche—such; vildpa—Ilamentation; uthila—there arose; ud-
vega—agitation; bhava—ecstasy; mane—in the mind; kaho—anywhere; nahi—
there is not; alambana—shelter; udvega—anxiety; visada—lamentation; mati —
attention; autsukya—eagerness; trasa—fear; dhrti—determination; smrti—
remembrance; nana-bhavera—of various ecstasies; ha-ila—there was; milana—
combining.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lamented in this way, agitation and ecstasy
awoke in His mind, and He became very restless. Many transcendental
ecstasies combined in Him, including anxiety, lamentation, attention, eager-
ness, fear, determination and remembrance.


--- Page 106 ---
104 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 50
ভাবশাবলেোয রাধার উক্তি, नोनं टक হৈল স্ফুতি,
সেই ভাবে পড়ে এক শ্লোক |
উদ্মাদের সামর্থ্যে, সেই প্লোকের করে অর্থে,
যেই অর্থ নাছি জানে লোক ॥ ৫০ ॥
bhava-sabalye radhara ukti, lila-suke haila spharti,
sei bhave pade eka sloka
unmadera samarthye, sei slokera kare arthe,
yei artha nahi jane loka
SYNONYMS
bhava-sabalye—in the aggregate of all ecstasies; radhara—of Srimati
Radharani; ukti—statement; lila-suke—in Bilvamangala Thakura; haila—there
was; spharti—awakening; sei bhave—in that ecstasy; pade—recites; eka—one;
Sloka—verse; unmadera—of madness; samarthye —in the capacity; sei slokera—
of that verse; kare arthe —describes the meaning; yei artha—which meaning;
nahi—do not; jane—know; loka—people.
TRANSLATION
The aggregate of all these ecstasies awoke a statement by Srimati Radharani
in the mind of Bilvamangala Thakura [Lila-sukal. In the same ecstatic mood,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu now recited that verse, and on the strength of mad-
ness, He described its meaning, which is unknown to people in general.
TEXT 51
কিমিহ $I कछ ক্রমঃ Fe কৃতমাশয়া
কথয়ত কথা মন্যাং ধন্যামহে। হৃদয়েশয়ঃ |
মধুরমধুরস্মেরাকারে মনোনয়নোৎসবে
FAIFAN कुटः তৃষ্ণ। চিরৎ বত লম্বতে ॥ ৫১ ॥
kim 103 krpumah kasya bramah krtar krtam asaya
kathayata katham anyarih dhanyam aho hrdaye sayah
madhura-madhura-smerakare mano-nayanotsave
krpana-krpana krspe trsna cirar bata lambate
SYNONYMS
kim—what; iha—here; krnumah—shall | do; kasya—to whom; brumah —shall
| speak; krtam—what is done; krtam—done; asaya—in the hope; kathayata—


--- Page 107 ---
Text 52] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 105
please speak; katham—words; anyam—other; dhanyam—auspicious; aho —alas;
hrdaye —within My heart; sayah—lying; madhura-madhura—sweeter than
sweetness; smera—smiling; akare—whose form; manah-nayana—to the mind
and eyes; utsave—who gives pleasure; krpana-krpana—the best of misers;
krsne —for Krsna; trsna —thirst; ciram—at every moment; bata—alas; lambate —is
increasing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, * ‘Alas, what shall 1 do? To whom shall |
speak? Let whatever | have done in hopes of meeting Krsna be finished now.
Please say something auspicious, but do not speak about Krsna. Alas, Krsna is
lying within My heart like Cupid; therefore how can I possibly give up talking
of Him? | cannot forget Krsna, whose smile is sweeter than sweetness itself
and who gives pleasure to My mind and eyes. Alas, My great thirst for Krsna is
increasing moment by moment!’
PURPORT
This statement by $Srimati Radharani is quoted from Krsna-karpamrta (42).
TEXT 52
“এই কৃষ্ণের বিরহে, উদ্বেগে মন স্থির নহে,
প্রান্তপায়-চিস্তন না যায়।
যেবা তুমি সখীগণ, বিষাদে বাউল मन,
কারে YTB) কে কহে উপায় १ ৫২ ॥
“ei krspera virahe, udvege mana sthira nahe,
prapty-updya-cintana na yaya
yeba tumi sakhi-gana, visade baula mana,
kare puchon, ke kahe upaya?
SYNONYMS
ei—this; krspera—of Krsna; virahe—in separation; udvege—in anxiety;
mana—mind; sthira—patient; nahe—is not; prapti-upadya—the means for ob-
taining; cintana na yaya—I cannot think of; yeba—all; tumi—you; sakhi-gana—
friends; visade—in lamentation; baula—maddened; mana—minds; kare—
whom; puchon—shall | ask; ke —who; kahe —will speak; upaya—the means.
TRANSLATION
“The anxiety caused by separation from Krsna has made Me impatient, and
॥ can think of no way to meet Him. O My friends, you are also deranged by
lamentation. Who, therefore, will tell Me how to find Him?


--- Page 108 ---
106 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 53
হাহা সখি, कि করি উপায় !
कड] করেৌ, कोद] यां, TE গেলে FR गो,
কৃষ্ণ বিন। প্রাণ মোর যায় ॥” ৫৩ ॥ ॐ ॥
ha ha sakhi, ki kari upaya!
kanha karon, kahan yana, kahan gele krsna pana,
krspa vina prana mora yaya”
SYNONYMS
ha ha—O; sakhi—friends; ki—what; kari—shall | do; upaya—means; kanha
karon—what shall | do?; kahan yana—where shall | go; kahan gele—where
going; krspa pana—I| can get Krsna; krspa vina—without Krsna; prana—life;
mora—My; yaya—is leaving.
TRANSLATION
““O My dear friends, how shall I find Krsna? What shall 1 do? Where shall 1
go? Where can | meet Him? Because | cannot find Krsna, My life is leaving
Me.”
TEXT 54
ক্ষণে মন স্থির হয়, टव মনে বিচারয়,
বলিতে হইল ভাবোদ্গম |
Prom বচন-স্মৃতি, করাইল ভাব-মতি,
তাতে করে অর্থ-নিধারণ ॥ ৫৪ ॥
ksane mana sthira haya, tabe mane vicaraya,
balite ha-ila bhavodgama
pingalara vacana-smrti, karaila bhava-mati,
tate kare artha-nirdharana
SYNONYMS
ksane—in a moment; mana—the mind; sthira haya—becomes patient; tabe —
at that time; mane —within the mind; vicaraya—He considers; balite—to speak;
ha-ila—there was; bhava-udgama—awakening of ecstasy; pingalara—of Pingala;
vacana-smrti—remembering the words; karaila—caused; bhava-mati—ecstatic
mind; tate—in that; kare—does; artha-nirdharana—ascertaining the meaning.


--- Page 109 ---
Text 56] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 107
TRANSLATION
Suddenly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became calm and considered His state
of mind. He remembered the words of Pingala, and this aroused an ecstasy
that moved Him to speak. Thus He explained the meaning of the verse.
PURPORT
Pingala was a prostitute who said, “To hope against hope produces only misery.
Utter hopelessness is the greatest happiness.” Remembering this statement, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu became ecstatic. The story of Pingala is found in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Eleventh Canto, Eighth Chapter, verses 22-44, as well as in
Mahabharata, Santi-parva, Chapter 174.
. TEXT 55
“দেখি এই উপায়ে, কুষ্ণ-আশ। ছাড়ি” দিয়ে,
আশা ছাড়িলে স্থখী হয় মন ।
ছাড়” কৃষ্ণকথা खर्च; কহ TFT 4,
যাতে হয় কৃষ্ণ-বিস্মরণ ॥” ৫৫ ॥
“dekhi ei upaye, krspna-asa chadi’ diye,
asa chadile sukhi haya mana
chada’ krsna-katha adhanya, kaha anya-katha dhanya,
yate haya krsna-vismarana”
SYNONYMS
dekhi—I see; ei upaye —this means; krsna-asa—hope for Krsna; chadi’ diye —I
give up; asa—hope; chadile—if | give up; sukhi—happy; haya—becomes;
mana—the mind; chada’—give up; krspa-katha—talks of Krsna; adhanya—most
inglorious; kaha—speak; anya-katha—other topics; dhanya—glorious; yate —by
which; haya—there is; krspa-vismarana—forgetfulness of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ^“ ‘If ॥ give up hope of meeting Krsna, 1 shall
then be happy. Therefore, let us stop this most inglorious discussion of Krsna.
1t would be better for us to talk of glorious topics and forget Him.’
TEXT 56
কহিতেই হইল স্মৃতি, চিত্তে হৈল कका,
সখীরে কহে হুঞ। বিস্মিতে |


--- Page 110 ---
108 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
“যারে চাহি ছাড়িতে, সেই wel আছে চিত্তে,
কোন রীতে না नौति ছাড়িতে 1” ৫৬ ॥
kahitei ha-ila smrti, citte haila krsna-spharti,
sakhire kahe hana vismite
“yare cahi chadite, sei Suna ache citte,
kona rite na pari chadite”
SYNONYMS
kahitei—while speaking; ha-ila—there was; smrti—remembrance; citte—in
the heart; haila—there was; krsna-spharti—the appearance of Krsna; sak hire —to
the friends; kahe —said; hana vismite—being very astonished; yare —He whom;
cahi chadite—I| want to give up; sei—that person; Suna ache—is lying; citte—in
the heart; kona rite—by any process; na pari—I| am not able; chadite—to give up.
TRANSLATION
““While speaking in this way, Srimati Radharani suddenly remembered
Krsna. Indeed, He appeared within Her heart. Greatly astonished, She told Her
friends, ‘The person | want to forget is lying in My heart.’
TEXT 57
রাধাভাবের স্বভাব खान, FCP করায় “কাম”-জ্ঞান,
কাম-জ্ঞানে ত্রাস হৈল চিত্তে |
কহছে-- “যে জগৎ মারে, সে পশিল অন্তরে,
এই বৈরী না দেয় পাসরিতে ॥” ৫৭ ॥
radha-bhavera svabhava ana, (८5/16 karaya ‘kama’-jAana,
kama-jAane trasa haila citte
kahe—— "ye jagat mare, se pasila antare,
ei \/2117 na deya pasarite”
SYNONYMS
radha-bhavera —of the ecstasy of SAmati Radharani; sva-bhava—characteristic;
ana—another; krsne—to Krsna; kardya—causes Her to do; kama-jAana—under-
standing as Cupid; kama—as Cupid; jidane—in the understanding; trasa—fear;
haila—was; citte—in the mind; kahe—She says; ye —the person who; jagat—the
whole world; mare —conquers; se —that person; pasila—entered; antare —within
My heart; ei vairi—this enemy; na deya—does not allow; pasarite—to forget.


--- Page 111 ---
Text 59] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 109
TRANSLATION
“Srimati Radharani’s ecstasy also made Her think of Krsna as Cupid, and
this understanding frightened Her. She said, ‘This Cupid, who has conquered
the whole world and entered My heart, is My greatest enemy, for He does not
allow Me to forget Him.’
TEXT 58
ওওস্থক্যের প্রাবীণ্যে, জিতি' खच ভাব-সৈন্ত্যে,
উদয় হৈল নিজ-রাজ্য-মনে |
মনে হইল লালস, না হয় আপন-বশ,
তুঃখে মনে করেন SHAH ॥ ৫৮ ॥
autsukyera pravinye, jiti” anya bhava-sainye,
udaya haila nija-rajya-mane
mane ha-ila lalasa, na haya apana-vasa,
duhkhe mane karena bhartsane
SYNONYMS
autsukyera—of eagerness; pravinye —because of high development; jiti’—con-
quering; anya—other; bhava-sainye —soldiers of ecstasy; udaya—arising; haila—
there was; nija-rajya-mane —within the kingdom of Her own mind; mane —with-
in the mind; ha-ila—there was; lalasa—greed; na—not; haya—becomes; apana-
vasa—within Her own control; duhkhe —in unhappiness; mane —to the mind;
karena—does; bhartsane—chastisement.
TRANSLATION
“Then great eagerness conquered all the other soldiers of ecstasy, and an
uncontrollable desire arose in the kingdom of Srimati Radharani’s mind.
Greatly unhappy, She then chastised Her own mind.
TEXT 59
“মন মোর বাম-দীন, জল বিনা যেন মীন,
কৃষ্ণ বিনা ক্ষণে মরি” যায় ।
মধ্তুব্র-হাস্য-বদনে, মন-নেত্র-রসায়নে,
কৃষ্ণতৃষ্ণা দ্বিগুণ বাড়ায় ॥ ৫৯ ॥
“mana mora vama-dina, jala vina yena mina,
krsna vina ksane mari’ yaya


--- Page 112 ---
110 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
madhura-hasya-vadane, mana-netra-rasayane,
krspa-trsna dviguna badaya
SYNONYMS
mana mora—My mind; vama-dina—unagreeably poor; jala—water; vina—
without; yena—as if; mina—a fish; krspa—Lord Krsna; vina—without; ksane —in
a moment; mari’ yaya—dies; madhura—sweet; hasya—smiling; vadane —face;
mana—the mind; netra—the eyes; rasa-ayane —very pleasing to; krsna-trspna—
the thirst for Krsna; dvi-guna—twice as much; badaya—increases.
TRANSLATION
“If 1 do not think of Krsna, My impoverished mind will die within a
moment like a fish out of water. But when | see Krsna’s sweetly smiling face,
My mind and eyes are so pleased that My desire for Him redoubles.
TEXT 60
হা হা কৃষ্ণ প্রাণধন, হা হা পছ্মলোচন,
হাহা দিব্য সদ্গুণ-লাগর !
হাহাম্যামস্দুন্দর, হা হা পীতাম্বরধর,
হা হা রাসবিলাস নাগর ॥ ৬০ ॥
ha ha krsna prana-dhana, ha ha padma-locana,
ha ha divya sad-guna-sagara!
ha ha syama-sundara, ha ha pitambara-dhara,
ha ha rasa-vilasa nagara
SYNONYMS
ha ha—alas; krspa—O Krsna; prana-dhana—the treasure of My life; ha ha—
alas; padma-locana—the lotus-eyed one; ha ha—alas; divya—divine; sat-guna-
sagara—ocean of transcendental attributes; ha ha—alas; Syama-sundara—the
beautiful, blackish youth; ha ha—alas; pita-ambara-dhara—one who wears
yellow garments; ha ha—alas; rasa-vilasa—of the rasa dance; nagara—the hero.
TRANSLATION
^“ “Alas! Where is Krsna, the treasure of My life? Where is the lotus-eyed
one? Alas! Where is the divine ocean of all transcendental qualities? Alas!
Where is the beautiful, blackish youth dressed in yellow garments? Alas!
Where is the hero of the rasa dance?


--- Page 113 ---
Text 62] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 111
TEXT 61
का] গেলে তোমা পাই, তুমি कङ्‌, - তাহ যাই”,
এত কহি” চলিলা ural |
স্বরূপ উঠি' কোলে করি” প্রভুরে আনিল ধরি”,
निज्डाटन বসাইল! লৈঞ। ॥ ৬১ ॥
kahan gele toma pai, tumi kaha, —tahan yai”,
eta kahi’ calila dhana
svardpa uthi’ kole kari’, prabhure anila dhari’,
nija-sthane vasaila 12175
SYNONYMS
kahan—where; gele —going; toma—You; pai—I can get; tumi—You; kaha—
please tell; tahan—there; yai—I| shall go; eta kahi’—saying this; calila dhana—
began to run; svardpa—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; uthi’—getting up; (<€
kari’—taking on His lap; prabhure—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; anila—brought
back; dhari’—catching; nija-sthane—in His own place; vasaila—sat down;
laina—taking.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Where shall 1 go? Where can 1 find You? Please tell Me. I shall go there.’ ^“
Speaking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began running. Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami, however, stood up, caught Him and took Him on his lap.
Then Svarapa Damodara brought Him back to His place and made Him sit
down.
TEXT 62
ক্ষণেকে প্রভুর वांछ टेन? স্বরূপেরে আস্ত! দিল,
“স্বরূপ, কিছু কর মধুর গান ।”
क्रणं গায় विष्ठांनेडि গীতগোএবিন্দ-গীতি,
শুনি প্রভুর জুড়াইল কাণ ॥ ৬২ ॥
ksaneke prabhura bahya haila, svarapere 3/ল3 dila,
“svarapa, kichu kara madhura gana”
svartpa gaya vidyapati, gita-govinda-giti,
Suni’ prabhura judaila kana


--- Page 114 ---
112 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
ksapeke —within a moment; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bahya—
external consciousness; haila—there was; svardpere 3/33 dila—He ordered
ऽवा Damodara Cosvami; svardpa—My dear Svarapa; kichu—some; kara—
make; madhura—sweet; gana—songs; svardpa—Svaripa Damodara; gaya—
sings; vidyapati—songs by Vidyapati; gita-govinda-giti—songs from Gita-go-
vinda; suni’—hearing; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; judadila—became
satisfied; kana—ears.
TRANSLATION
Suddenly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to external consciousness and
said to Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, ‘“My dear Svaripa, please sing some
sweet songs.” The Lord's ears were satisfied when He heard Svarapa
Damodara sing songs from Gita-govinda and those by the poet Vidyapati.
TEXT 63
এইমত মহাপ্রভু প্রতি-রাত্রি-দিনে |
উদ্মাদ চেষ্টিত হয় প্রলাপ-বচনে ॥ ৬৩ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu prati-ratri-dine
unmada cestita haya pralapa-vacane
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prati-ratri-
dine—every night and day; unmada—mad; cestita—activities; haya—are;
pralapa-vacane —talking like a madman.
TRANSLATION
Each day and night, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would become deranged in
this way and talk like a madman.
TEXT 64
একদিনে যত হয় ভাবের বিকার ।
সহজযুখে বর্ণে यजति, নাহি পায় পার ॥ ৬৪ ॥
eka-dine yata haya bhavera vikara
sahasra-mukhe varne yadi, nahi pdya para


--- Page 115 ---
Text 66] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 113
SYNONYMS
eka-dine—in one day; yata haya—as many as there are; bhavera—of ecstasy;
vikara—transformations; sahasra-mukhe—possessing thousands of mouths;
varne yadi—if describes; nahi padya—cannot reach; para—the limit.
TRANSLATION
Even Anantadeva, who possesses thousands of mouths, cannot fully de-
scribe the ecstatic transformations that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu experienced
in a single day.
TEXT 65
জীব पौन কি করিবে তাহার বর্ণন ?
শাখা-চন্দ্র-ভ্যায় করি” দিগ্দরশন ॥ ৬৫ ॥
jiva dina ki karibe tahara varpana?
sakha-candra-nyaya kari’ dig-darasana
SYNONYMS
jiva—a living entity; dina—very poor; ki—what; karibe—will do; tahara—of
that; varpnana—description; sakha-candra-nyaya—the logic of showing the moon
through the branches of a tree; kari’—| make; dik-darasana—seeing the direction.
TRANSLATION
What can a poor creature like me describe of those transformations? | can
give only a hint of them, as if showing the moon through the branches of a
tree.
TEXT 66
ইহ যেই শুনে, তার জুড়ায় মন-কাণ |
AN
অলোকিক গুঢ়ঞ্রেম-চেষ্টা হয় Si ॥ ৬৬ ॥
103 yei sune, tara judaya mana-kana
alaukika gadha-prema-cesta haya jana
SYNONYMS
iha—this; yei sune—anyone who hears; tara—his; judiya—become satisfied;
mana-kana—mind and ears; alaukika—uncommon; gadha-prema—of deep
ecstatic love for Krsna; cesta—activities; haya jiana—he can understand.


--- Page 116 ---
114 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
This description, however, will satisfy the mind and ears of anyone who
hears it, and he will be able to understand these uncommon activities of deep
ecstatic love for Krsna.
TEXT 67
=e Ss निश প্রেমের মাধুর্ব-মহিমা |
আপনি আস্বাদি” প্রভু দেখাইলা जोम। ॥ ৬৭ ॥
adbhuta nigadha premera madhurya-mahima
apani asvadi’ prabhu dekhaila sima
SYNONYMS
adbhuta—wonderful; nigadha—deep; premera—of ecstatic love for Krsna;
madhurya-mahima—the glories of the sweetness; apani—personally; asvadi’'—
tasting; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhaili—showed; simia—the ex-
treme limit.
TRANSLATION
Ecstatic love for Krsna is wonderfully deep. By personally tasting the
glorious sweetness of that love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed us its ex-
treme limit.
TEXT 68
GETTY চৈতন্য OGD |
এঁছে দয়াল্দু দাতা লোকে নাহি শুনি खच ॥ ৬৮ ॥
adbhuta-dayalu caitanya——adbhuta-vadanya!
aiche dayalu data loke nahi Suni anya
SYNONYMS
adbhuta—wonderfully; dayalu—merciful; caitanya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
adbhuta-vadanya—wonderfully magnanimous; aiche—such; dayalu—merciful;
data—charitable person; loke —within this world; nahi—not; suni—we have
heard of; anya—other.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is wonderfully merciful and wonderfully mag-
nanimous. We have heard of no one else within this world so merciful and
charitable.


--- Page 117 ---
Text 711 The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 115
TEXT 69
সর্বভাবে BF, লোক, চৈতন্ত-চরণ |
যাহা হৈতে পাইব। কৃষ্ণপ্রেমাম্ৃত-ধন ॥ ৬৯ ॥
sarva-bhave bhaja, loka, caitanya-carana
yaha haite paiba krsna-premamrta-dhana
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhave —in all respects; bhaja—worship; loka—O entire world; caitanya-
carana—the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yaha haite—by which;
paiba—you will get; krspa-prema—of love of Krsna; amrta—of the nectar;
dhana—the treasure.
TRANSLATION
Worship the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in all respects. Only in
this way will you achieve the nectarean treasure of ecstatic love for Krsna.
TEXT 70
এই ऊ' Fg “কুর্মাকৃ তি”-অনুভাব |
छश्रान-८एषटिङ তাতে छश्राण-व्यनाशं ॥ १० ॥
ei ta’ kahilun “darmakrti-anubhava
unmdada-cestita tate unmada-pralapa
SYNONYMS
ei ta’ kahilunn—thus | have described; karma-akrti—of becoming like a tortoise;
anubhava—the ecstatic symptom; unmada-cestita—enacted in madness; tate —
in that; unmada-pralapa—talking like a madman.
TRANSLATION
Thus 1 have described Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s ecstatic transformation of
becoming like a tortoise. In that ecstasy, He talked and acted like a madman.
TEXT 71
এই লীলা স্বগ্রন্থে রঘুনাথ-দাস |
গোৌরাঙগস্তবকল্পবৃক্ষে কৈরাছেন প্রকাশ ॥ ৭১ ॥
ei lila sva-granthe raghunatha-dasa
gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse kairachena prakasa


--- Page 118 ---
116 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
ei lila—this pastime; sva-granthe —in his book; raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha
dasa Gosvami; gauranga-stava-kalpa-vrkse —named Cauranga-stava-kalpavrksa;
kairachena prakasa—has fully described.
TRANSLATION
Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami has fully described this pastime in his book
Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa.
TEXT 72
অনুদঘ।ট্য দ্বারত্রয়মুরু চ ভিত্তিত্রয়মহো
বিলচ্ছ্যোদ্চৈঃ কালিঙ্গিক-স্থরভিমধ্যে নিপতিতঃ |
অনুষ্যৎসসন্কোচাৎ কমঠ ইব ক্বষ্ণোরুবিরহাদ্‌
বিরাজন্‌ গৌরাঙ্গ হৃদয় Sagas মদয়তি ॥ ৭২ ॥
anudghatya dvara-trayam uru ca bhitti-trayam aho
vilanghyoccaih kalingika-surabhi-madhye nipatitah
tanadyat-sankocat kamatha iva krsnoru-virahad
virdjan gaurango hrdaya udayan marin madayati
SYNONYMS
anudghatya—without opening; dvara-trayam—the three doors; uru—strong;
ca—and; bhitti-trayam —three walls; aho —how wonderful; vilannghya—crossing
over; uccaih—very high; kalingika—of Kalinga-desa, which is in the district of
Tailanga; surabhi-madhye—among the cows; nipatitah—fallen down; tanu-
udyat-sankocat—by contracting within the body; kamathah—a tortoise; iva—
like; krspa-uru-virahdt—because of strong feelings of separation from Krsna; vira-
jan —appearing; gaurangah—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hrdaye—in my
heart; udayan—rising; mam —me; madayati—maddens.
TRANSLATION
“How wonderful it is! Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left His residence without
opening the three strongly bolted doors. Then He crossed over three high
walls, and later, because of strong feelings of separation from Krsna, He fell
down amidst the cows of the Tailanga district and retracted all the limbs of
His body like a tortoise. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who appeared in that way,
rises in my heart and maddens me.”’


--- Page 119 ---
Text 73] The Lord’s Bodily Transformations 117
TEXT 73
জীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদ্ে যার আশ |
চেতন্তচরিতাম্বত কহে FAIA ॥ ৭৩ ॥
Sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—>Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; ydra—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Riipa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-fila,
Seventeenth Chapter, describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s pastime of retracting
His limbs like a tortoise.


--- Page 120 ---
CHAPTER 18
Rescuing the Lord from the Sea
A summary of the Eighteenth Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. On an autumn evening when the moon was full, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu walked along the seashore near the Aitota temple.
Mistaking the sea for the Yamuna River, He jumped into it, hoping to see the
water pastimes of Krsna and तावति Radharani and the other gopis. As He floated
in the sea, however, He was washed away to the Konarka temple, where a fisher-
man, thinking that the Lord's body was a big fish, caught Him in his net and
brought Him ashore. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was unconscious, and His body
had become unusually transformed. As soon as the fisherman touched the Lord's
body, he became mad in ecstatic love of Krsna. His own madness frightened him,
however, because he thought that he was being haunted by a ghost. As he was
about to seek a ghost charmer, he met Svartpa Damodara Gosvami and the other
devotees on the beach, who had been looking everywhere for the Lord. After
some inquiries, Svaripa Damodara could understand that the fisherman had
caught Lord ৩1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu in his net. Since the fisherman was afraid of
being haunted by a ghost, Svarapa Damodara gave him a slap and chanted Hare
Krsna, which immediately pacified him. Thereafter, when the devotees chanted
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra loudly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to His exter-
nal consciousness. Then they brought Him back to His own residence.
TEXT 1
শরেজ্জাওৎস্সা-সিজ্ধোরবকলনয়া জাতযমুনা-
ভ্রমান্ধাবন্‌ যোহস্মিন্‌ হরিবিরহতাপার্ণব ইব ।
নিমগ্যে skies পয়সি নিবসল্‌ রাত্রিমখিলাং
স্রভাতে প্রাপ্তঃ স্ব্রৈবভুস RL CED नः॥>॥
saraj-jyotsna-sindhor avakalanaya jata-yamuna-
bhramad dhavan yo ’smin hari-viraha-taparpava iva
nimagno marcchalah payasi nivasan ratrim akhilarm
prabhate praptah svair avatu sa saci-stanur iha nah
119


--- Page 121 ---
120 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
Sarat-jyotsna—in the moonlight of autumn; sindhoh—of the sea;
avakalanaya—by sight; jata—appeared; yamuna—the River Yamuna; bhramat—
by mistake; dhavan—running; yah—He who; asmin—in this; hari-viraha—due to
separation from Hari; tdpa—of suffering; arnave —in the ocean; iva—as if; nimag-
nah —dove; marcchalah—unconscious; payasi—in the water; nivasan—staying;
ratrim—the night; akhilam—whole; prabhate—in the morning; praptah—was
gotten; svaih—by His personal associates; avatu—may protect; sah—He; saci-
sanuh —the son of mother Saci; iha—here; nah—us.
TRANSLATION
In the brilliant autumn moonlight, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhumistook the sea
for the River Yamuna. Greatly afflicted by separation from Krsna, He ran and
dove into the sea and remained unconscious in the water the entire night. In
the morning, He was found by His personal devotees. May that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the son of mother Saci, protect us by His transcendental
pastimes.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় Ase জয় forester |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ २ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; $ri-caitanya—to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—to Nityananda Prabhu; jaya —all glories; advaita-candra—to
Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityananda Prabhu!
All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to all the devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 3
এইমতে মহাপ্রভু নীলাচলে বৈসে।
রাত্রি-দিনে কৃষ্ণবিচ্ছেদার্ণবে ভাসে ॥ ৩ ॥


--- Page 122 ---
Text 5] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 121
ei-mate mahaprabhu nilacale vaise
ratri-dine krsna-vicchedarnave bhase
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nilacale—at
Jagannatha Puri; vaise —resides; ratri-dine—night and day; krsna-viccheda—of
separation from Krsna; arnave —in the ocean; bhase —floats.
TRANSLATION
While thus living at Jagannatha Puri, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu floated all
day and night in an ocean of separation from Krsna.
TEXT 4
শরঙকালের রাত্রি, जव চক্দ্রিকা-উচ্জ্বল |
लङ्‌ নিজগণ লঞ। বেড়ান রাত্রি-সকল 18 ॥
Sarat-kalera ratri, saba candrika-ujjvala
prabhu nija-gana lana bedana ratri-sakala
SYNONYMS
Sarat-kalera—of autumn; ratri—night; saba—all; candrika-ujjvala—brightened
by the moonlight; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nija-gana—His own asso-
ciates; lana —taking; bedana—walks; ratri-sakala—the whole night.
TRANSLATION
During a night of the autumn season when a full moon brightened every-
thing, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wandered all night long with His devotees.
TEXT 5
উত্যানে উদ্যানে ভ্রমেন কৌতুক দেখিতে |
রাসলীলার গীত-শ্লোক পড়িতে শুনিতে ॥ ৫ ॥
udyane udyane bhramena kautuka dekhite
rasa-lilara gita-sloka padite sunite
SYNONYMS
udyane udyane—from garden to garden; bhramena—He walks; kautuka
dekhite —seeing the fun; rasa-lilara—of the rasa dance; gita-sloka—songs and
verses; padite sunite —reciting and hearing.


--- Page 123 ---
122 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
He walked from garden to garden, seeing the pastimes of Lord Krsna and
hearing and reciting songs and verses concerning the rasa-lila.
TEXT 6
প্রভু প্রেমাবেশে করেন গান, नरन |
কভু ভাবাবেশে त्राजनौलां स्‌ ॥ ৬ ॥
prabhu premavese karena gana, nartana
kabhu bhavavese rasa-lilanukarana
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; karena—
does; gana—singing; nartana—dancing; kabhu—sometimes; bhava-avese—in
ecstatic emotion; rasa-lila—the rasa-lila dance; anukarana—imitating.
TRANSLATION
He sang and danced in ecstatic love and sometimes imitated the rasa dance
in emotional ecstasy.
TEXT 7
কভু छाटवाच्राटण প্রভু ইতি-উতি ধায়।
ट्म পড়ি” क्क्‌ यल, क्क्‌ গড়ি' যায় ॥ ৭ ॥
kabhu bhavonmade prabhu iti-uti dhaya
bhame padi’ kabhu marccha, kabhu gadi’ yaya
SYNONYMS
kabhu—sometimes; bhava-unmade—in the madness of ecstatic love;
prabhu —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; iti-uti—here and there; dhaya—runs; bhame
padi’—falling on the ground; kabhu marccha —sometimes unconscious; kabhu—
sometimes; gadi’ yaya—rolls on the ground.
TRANSLATION
He sometimes ran here and there in the madness of ecstasy and sometimes
fell and rolled on the ground. Sometimes He became completely unconscious.
TEXT 8
রাসলীলার এক শ্লোক যবে পড়ে, শুনে |
পূর্ববৎ তবে অর্থ করেন আপনে ॥ ৮ ॥


--- Page 124 ---
Text 10] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 123
rasa-lilara eka sloka yabe pade, sune
parvavat tabe artha karena apane
SYNONYMS
rasa-lilara—of the rasa-lila; eka—one; sloka—verse; yabe—when; pade—
recites; sune—hears; pdarva-vat—as previously; tabe —then; artha karena—ex-
plains; dpane —personally.
TRANSLATION
When He heard Svarapa Damodara recite a verse concerning the rasa-lila or
He Himself recited one, He would personally explain it, as He had previously
done.
TEXT 9
এইমত রাসলীলায় হয় যত শ্লোক |
সবার অর্থ করে, পায় কভু হর্য-শোক ॥ > ॥
ei-mata rasa-lilaya haya yata sloka
sabara artha kare, paya kabhu harsa-soka
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; rasa-lilaya—in the pastimes of the rasa-lila; haya—there
are; yata sloka—as many verses; sabara—of all of them; artha kare —He explains
the meaning; paya—gets; kabhu—sometimes; harsa-soka—happiness and lam-
entation.
TRANSLATION
In this way, He explained the meaning of all the verses concerning the rasa-
lila. Sometimes He would be very sad and sometimes very happy.
TEXT 10
সে जव শ্লোকের অর্থ, সে সব “বিকার” ।
সে সব বণিতে গ্রন্থ হয় অতি-বিস্তার ॥ ১০ ॥
se saba slokera artha, se saba ‘vikara’
se saba varnite grantha haya ati-vistara
SYNONYMS
se saba—all those; slokera—of verses; artha—meanings; se —those; saba—all;
vikara—transformations; se saba—all of them; varnite—to describe; grantha
haya—the book becomes; ati-vistaira—very, very large.


--- Page 125 ---
124 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
To explain fully all those verses and all the transformations that took place
in the Lord’s body would require a very large volume.
TEXT 11
দ্বাদশ বৎসরে যে যে नौन। ক্ষণে-ক্ষণে।
অতিবাহুল্য-ভয়ে গ্রন্থ না কৈল্দযু' লিখনে ॥ >> ॥
dvadasa vatsare ye ye lila ksane-ksane
ati-bahulya-bhaye grantha na kailun likhane
SYNONYMS
dvadasa vatsare—in twelve years; ye ye—whatever; lila—pastimes; ksane-
ksane —moment after moment; ati-bahulya—too abundant; bhaye —being afraid
of; grantha—book; na—not; kailun likhane —I have written.
TRANSLATION
So as not to increase the size of this book, 1 have not written about all the
Lord’s pastimes, for He performed them every moment of every day for twelve
years.
TEXT 12
পূর্বে ষেই (कथा गं ष्टि দিগ্দরশন।
তৈছে জানিহ “বিকার” “প্রলাপ” वर्मन ॥ ১২ ॥
parve yei dekhanachi dig-darasana
taiche janiha ‘vikara’ ‘pralapa’ varpana
SYNONYMS
parve—previously; yei—as; dekhafachi—| have shown; dik-darasana—only
an indication; taiche—similarly; janiha—you may know; vikara—transformations;
pralapa—crazy talks; varpana—description.
TRANSLATION
As ॥ have previously indicated, | am describing the mad speeches and
bodily transformations of the Lord only in brief.


--- Page 126 ---
Text 15] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 125
TEXT 13
সহমস্ব-বদলে যবে কহয়ে ‘TRE’ |
একদিনের লীলার তবু নাহি পায় অন্ত ॥ ১৩ ॥
sahasra-vadane yabe kahaye ‘ananta’
eka-dinera lilara tabu nahi paya anta
SYNONYMS
sahasra-vadane —in thousands of mouths; yabe—when; kahaye —says; an-
anta—Lord Ananta; eka-dinera—of one day; lilara—of pastimes; tabu —still;
nahi —does not; paya—reach; anta—the limit.
TRANSLATION
If Ananta, with His one thousand hoods, tried to describe even one day's
pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He would find them impossible to de-
scribe fully.
TEXT 14
ক্োটিযুগ পর্যন্ত যদি লিখয়ে গণেশ ।
একদিনের লীলার তবু নাহি পায় শেষ ॥ ১৪ ॥
koti-yuga paryanta yadi likhaye ganesa
eka-dinera lilara tabu nahi paya sesa
SYNONYMS
koti-yuga—miillions of millenniums; paryanta—to the extent of; yadi—if;
likhaye —writes; ganesa—the demigod Ganesa (son of Lord Siva); eka-dinera—of
one day; lilara—of pastimes; tabu—still; nahi paya—cannot reach; sesa—the
limit.
TRANSLATION
If Ganesa, Lord Siva’s son and the expert scribe of the demigods, tried for
millions of millenniums to fully describe one day of the Lord’s pastimes, he
would be unable to find their limit.
TEXT 15
ভক্তের প্রেম-বিকার দেখি” কৃষ্ণের চমৎকার |
কৃষ্ণ যার না পায় खख, (FA ছার আর ? ১৫ ॥


--- Page 127 ---
126 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
bhaktera prema-vikara dekhi’ krspera camatkara!
krsna yara na pdya anta, keba chara ara?
SYNONYMS
bhaktera—of a devotee; prema-vikara—transformations of ecstatic emotion;
dekhi’—seeing; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; camatkara—wonder; krsna—Lord Krsna;
yara—of which; na paya—cannot get; anta—the limit; keba—who; chara—insig-
nificant; dra—others.
TRANSLATION
Even Lord Krsna is struck with wonder at seeing the transformations of
ecstasy in His devotees. If Krsna Himself cannot estimate the limits of such
emotions, how could others?
TEXTS 16-17
ভক্ত-প্রেমার যত দশা, যে গতি প্রকার ।
যত দুঃখ, যত FY, ACSF বিকার ॥ ১৬ ॥
কৃষ্ণ তাহ ANF না পারে জানিতে |
ভক্তভাব অঙ্গীকরে ত।হু। আস্ব।দিতে ॥ ১৭ ॥
bhakta-premara yata dasa, ye gati prakara
yata duhkha, yata sukha, yateka vikara
krsna taha samyak na pare janite
bhakta-bhava angikare taha asvadite
SYNONYMS
bhakta-premara—of the ecstatic emotion of the devotee; yata—all; dasa—
conditions; ye—which; gati prakara—mode of progress; yata—all; duhkha—
unhappiness; yata—all; sukha—happiness; yateka—all; vikara—transformation;
krspa—Lord Krsna; taha—that; samyak—fully; na pare janite—cannot under-
stand; bhakta-bhava—the mood of a devotee; angikare—He accepts; taha—
that; asvadite—to taste.
TRANSLATION
Krsna Himself cannot fully understand the conditions, the mode of
progress, the happiness and unhappiness, and the moods of ecstatic love of
His devotees. He therefore accepts the role of a devotee to taste these emo-
tions fully.


--- Page 128 ---
Text 20] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 127
TEXT 18
কৃষ্ণেরে নাচায় প্রেমা, ভক্তেরে নাচায়।
আপনে নাচয়ে,_ তিনে নাচে একঠাণি ॥ ১৮ ॥
krsnere nacaya prema, bhaktere nacaya
dpane nacaye, —tine nace eka-thani
SYNONYMS
krsnere —Krsna; nacdya—causes to dance; prema—Ilove of Krsna; bhaktere —
the devotee; nacaya—causes to dance; apane—personally; nacaye—dances;
tine—all three; nace—dance; eka-thani—in one place.
TRANSLATION
Ecstatic love of Krsna makes Krsna and His devotees dance, and it also
dances personally. In this way, all three dance together in one place.
TEXT 19
শপ্রেমার বিকার বর্ণিতে চাহে যেই जन ।
চান্দ ধরিতে চাহে, যেন হঞা AH ॥ >> ॥
premadra vikara varnite cahe yei jana
canda dharite cahe, yena hana ‘vamana’
SYNONYMS
premara—of ecstatic love of Krsna; vikara—transformations; varnite —to de-
scribe; cahe—wants; yei jana—which person; canda dharite—to catch the
moon; cahe—he wants; yena—as if; hana —being; vamana—a dwarf.
TRANSLATION
One who wants to describe the transformations of ecstatic love of Krsna is
like a dwarf trying to catch the moon in the sky.
TEXT 20
বায়ু যৈছে লসিম্ধু-জলের হুরে এক “कन? |
কৃষ্ণণ্রেম-কণ তৈছে জীবের স্পর্শন ॥ ২০ ॥
vdyu yaiche sindhu-jalera hare eka ‘kana’
krspa-prema-kana taiche jivera sparsana


--- Page 129 ---
128 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
vayu—the wind; yaiche —as; sindhu-jalera—of the water of the ocean; hare —
takes away; eka kana—one particle; krsna-prema-kana—one particle of love of
Krsna; taiche —similarly; jivera sparsana—a living entity can touch.
TRANSLATION
As the wind can carry away but a drop of the water in the ocean, a living en-
tity can touch only a particle of the ocean of love of Krsna.
TEXT 21
ক্ষণে ক্ষণে উঠে (AMT তরঙ্গ অনন্ত |
জীব ছার কাই তার পাইবেক অন্ত? ২১ ॥
1:$306 ksane uthe premara taranga ananta
jiva chara kahan tara paibeka anta?
SYNONYMS
ksane ksane —moment after moment; uthe —rise; premara—of love of Krsna;
taranga—waves; ananta—unlimited; jiva—a living entity; chara—insignificant;
kahan—where; tara—of that; paibeka—will get; anta—the limit.
TRANSLATION
Endless waves arise moment after moment in that ocean of love. How could
an insignificant living entity estimate their limits?
TEXT 22
জীকুষ্ণচৈতন্য৷ যাহা করেন আস্বাদন |
जटव এক জানে তাহা স্বরূপাদি “গণ”॥ ২২ ॥
$ri-krsna-caitanya yaha karena asvadana
sabe eka jane taha svarapadi ‘gana’
SYNONYMS
$ri-krsna-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yaha —whatever; karena—
does; asvadana—tasting; sabe —fully; eka—one; jane—knows; taha—that;
svardpa-adi gana —devotees like Svarapa Damodara Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Only a person on the level of Svarapa Damodara Gosvami can fully know
what Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tastes in His love for Krsna.


--- Page 130 ---
Text 25] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 129
TEXT 23
জীব হুঞা করে যেই তাহার वर्नन |
আপনা শোধিতে তার ছেয়ে এক Tel ॥ ২৩ ॥
jiva hana kare yei tahara varnana
apana sodhite tara chonye eka ‘kana’
SYNONYMS
jiva hana—being an ordinary living entity; kare —makes; yei—whoever;
tahara—of that; varnana—description; apana—himself; sodhite—to purify;
tara—of that; chonye—touches; eka kana—one particle.
TRANSLATION
When an ordinary living entity describes the pastimes of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, he purifies himself by touching one drop of that great ocean.
TEXT 24
এইমত রাসের (शै क-जकलनरे পড়িলা।
শেষে জলক্কেলির শ্লোক পড়িতে লাগিল! ॥ ২৪ ॥
ei-mata rasera sloka-sakala-i padila
Sese jala-kelira sloka padite lagila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; rasera—of the rasa dance; sloka—verses; sakala-i—all;
padila—recited; sese—at the end; jala-kelira—of pastimes in the water; sloka—
verse; padite lagila—began to recite.
TRANSLATION
Thus all the verses about the rasa-lila dance were recited. Then finally the
verse concerning the pastimes in the water was recited.
TEXT 25
তাভিযুতিঃ শ্রমমপে! হিতুমঞ্গ সঙ্গ-
BES: म কুচকুষ্কুমরণিতায়:!
গন্ধর্বপালিভিরহদ্রুত खाविम्‌व्‌।ः
্রান্তো৷ গঙজীভিরিভ্রাড়িব ভিন্নসেতুঃ॥ ২৫ ॥


--- Page 131 ---
130 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
tabhir yutah sramam apohitum anga-sanga-
ghrsta-srajah sa kuca-kunkuma-ranjitayah
gandharva-palibhir anudruta avisad vah
sranto gajibhir ibha-rad iva bhinna-setuh
SYNONYMS
tabhih—by them (the gopis); yutah—accompanied; sramam—fatigue;
apohitum—to remove; ariga-sanga—by touching of the bodies; ghrsta—crushed;
srajah—from the flower garland; sah—He; kuca-kurikuma—by kurikuma on the
breasts; ranjitayah—colored; gandharva-pa—like celestial beings of Gandhar-
valoka; alibhih—by bees; anudrutah—followed; avisat—entered; vah—the
water; srantah —being fatigued; gajibhih —by she-elephants; ibha—of elephants;
rat—the king; iva—like; bhinna-setuh —beyond the Vedic principles of morality.
TRANSLATION
‘“As an independent leader among elephants enters the water with its
female elephants, Krsna, who is transcendental to the Vedic principles of
morality, entered the water of the Yamuna with the gopis. His chest had
brushed against their breasts, crushing His flower garland and coloring it with
red kunkuma powder. Attracted by the fragrance of that garland, humming
bumblebees followed Krsna like celestial beings of Gandharvaloka. In this
way, Lord Krsna mitigated the fatigue of the rasa dance.”
PURPORT
This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.23).
TEXT 26
এইমত মহাপ্রভু ভ্রমিতে জ্রমিতে |
আইটেট। হৈতে সমুদ্র দেখেন আচন্দিতে ॥ ২৬ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhramite bhramite
aitota haite samudra dekhena acambite
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhramite
bhramite —while wandering; aitota haite —from the temple of Aitota; samudra—
the sea; dekhena—sees; acambite—suddenly.
TRANSLATION
While thus wandering near the temple of Aitota, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
suddenly saw the sea.


--- Page 132 ---
Text 29] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 131
TEXT 27
FH कां ट ख} छनि তরঙ্গ উভ্জ্বল |
ঝলমল HCA, — যেন ‘RATA ऊनः ॥ ২৭ ॥
candra-kantye uchalita taranga ujjvala
jhalamala kare, — yena ‘yamunara jala’
SYNONYMS
candra-kantye —by the shining of the moon; uchalita—swollen high; tarariga—
waves; ujjvala—very bright; jhalamala kare —glitter; yena—as if; yamunara jala—
the water of the River Yamuna.
TRANSLATION
Brightened by the shining light of the moon, the high waves of the sea glit-
tered like the waters of the River Yamuna.
TEXT 28
যমুনার eT প্রভু ধাঞ। एनिन। 1
অলক্ষিতে যাই” সিদ্ধু-জলে ঝাপ দিল৷ ॥ ২৮ ॥
yamundra bhrame prabhu 00373 calila
alaksite yai’ sindhu-jale jhanpa dila
SYNONYMS
yamunara bhrame—by mistaking for the Yamuna; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dhana calilai—began to run very swiftly; alaksite —without being
seen; yai’—going; sindhu-jale—into the water of the sea; jhanpa dila—He
jumped.
TRANSLATION
Mistaking the sea for the Yamuna, the Lord ran swiftly and jumped into the
water, unseen by the others.
TEXT 29
পড়িতেই হৈল মুচর্ছা, কিছুই না৷ জানে |
FY ডুবায়, কভু ভাসায় তরঙ্গের ATA ॥ ২৯ ॥
paditei haila marccha, kichui na jane
kabhu dubaya, kabhu bhasaya tarangera gane


--- Page 133 ---
132 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
paditei—falling down; haila marccha—He became unconscious; kichui—any-
thing; na jane —did not understand; kabhu—sometimes; dubaya—cause to sink;
kabhu—sometimes; bhasaya—float; tararnigera gane —the waves.
TRANSLATION
Falling into the sea, He lost consciousness and could not understand where
He was. Sometimes He sank beneath the waves, and sometimes He floated
above them.
TEXT 30
তরঙ্গে বহিয়। ফিরে, যেন ow कोर ।
কে বুঝিতে পারে এই SLIT নাট ? ৩০ ॥
tarange vahiya phire, —yena suska kastha
ke bujhite pare ei caitanyera nata?
SYNONYMS
tarange—the waves; vahiya phire—carry here and there; yena—like; suska
kastha—a piece of dry wood; ke —who; bujhite pare —can understand; ei —this;
caitanyera nata—dramatic performance of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The waves carried Him here and there like a piece of dry wood. Who can
understand this dramatic performance by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
TEXT 31
ক্োণার্কের দিকে প্রভুরে তরঙ্গে न> যায়!
Fg ডুবাঞা রাখে, TF ভাসাঞ। লঞ যায় ॥ ৩১ ॥
konarkera dike prabhure tarange lana yaya
kabhu dubana rakhe, kabhu bhasana lana yaya
SYNONYMS
konarkera dike—toward the Konarka temple; prabhure—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tararige —the waves; lana yaya—take away; kabhu—sometimes;
dubana—causing to sink; rakhe—keep; kabhu—sometimes; bhasana—floating;
lana yaya—take away.


--- Page 134 ---
Text 33] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 133
TRANSLATION
Keeping the Lord sometimes submerged and sometimes afloat, the waves
carried Him toward the Konarka temple.
PURPORT
Konarka, generally known as Arka-tirtha, is a temple of Lord Surya, the sun-god.
It is situated on the seashore, nineteen miles north of Jagannatha Puri. It was con-
structed of black stone in the beginning of the thirteenth century of the Saka Era,
and it shows expert craftsmanship and architecture.
TEXT 32
যষমুনাতে জলক্কেলি গোপীগণ-সঙ্গে |
কৃষ্ণ করেন - মহাপ্রভু মগ্ন (AL রঙ্গে ॥ ৩২ ॥
yamunate jala-keli gopi-gana-sange
krsna karena——mahaprabhu magna sei range
SYNONYMS
yamunate —in the River Yamuna; jala-keli—pastimes in the water; gopi-gana-
sange—with the gopis; krspa karena—Krsna performs; mahaprabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; magna —fully merged; sei range—in those pastimes.
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna performed pastimes with the gopis in the waters of the Yamuna,
and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fully merged in those pastimes.
TEXT 33
ইহ স্বরূপ।দিগণ eg না দেখিয়া ৷
“কাহ। গেলা প্রভু ?” কহে एगकिङ হুঞ॥ ৩৩ ॥
ihan svarapadi-gana prabhu na dekhiya
‘kahan gela prabhu?’ kahe camakita hana
SYNONYMS
ihan—here; svarapa-adi-gana—the devotees headed by Svariipa Damodara;
prabhu -5प Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na dekhiya—not seeing; kahan—where;
gela—has gone; prabhu —$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahe —say; camakita hana—
being astonished.


--- Page 135 ---
134 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Meanwhile, all the devotees, headed by Svariipa Damodara, lost sight of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Astonished, they began searching for Him, asking,
“Where has the Lord gone?”
TEXT 34
মনোবেগে গেলা প্রভু, দেখিতে নারিল৷ ।
প্রভুরে न দেখিয়৷ সংশয় করিতে লাগিল ॥ ৩৪ ॥
mano-vege gela prabhu, dekhite narila
prabhure na dekhiya sarhsaya karite lagila
SYNONYMS
manah-vege—at the speed of mind; geli—went; prabhu—S$r Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dekhite narili—no one could see; prabhure—the Lord; na
dekhiya—not seeing; sarmsaya—doubts; karite lagila—began to feel.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had run off at the speed of mind. No one could see
Him. Thus everyone was puzzled as to His whereabouts.
TEXT 35
“জগন্নাথ দেখিতে কিবা দেবালয়ে গেলা ?
= উদ্যানে কিবা উদ্মাদে পড়িল ? ৩৫ ॥
‘jaganndtha dekhite kiba devalaye gela?
anya udyane kiba unmade padila?
SYNONYMS
jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; dekhite —to see; kiba—whether; devalaye —to
the temple; gela—went; anya—other; udyane—in a garden; kiba—or; un-
made —in madness; padila—fell down.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Has the Lord gone to the temple of Jagannatha, or has He fallen down in
madness in some garden?


--- Page 136 ---
Text 38] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 135
TEXT 36
efesl-afmea গেলা, foal নরেন্ছেরে ?
চটক-পর্বতে গেল, किव। কোণার্কেরে ¢ ৩৬ ॥
gundica-mandire gela, kiba narendrere?
cataka-parvate gela, kiba konarkere?’
SYNONYMS
gundica-mandire—to the Gundica temple; geld—has gone; kiba—or;
narendrere —to the Narendra Lake; cataka-parvate —to Cataka-parvata; geld —has
gone; kiba—or; konarkere-—to the Konarka temple.
TRANSLATION
‘Perhaps He went to the Gundica temple, or to Lake Narendra, or to the
Cataka-parvata. Maybe He went to the temple at Konarka.”
TEXT 37
এত বলি” সবে ফিরে প্রভুরে ए ङ्श ।
সমুদ্রের তীরে আইল কত জন ल<3। ॥ ৩৭ ॥
eta bali’ sabe phire prabhure cahiya
samudrera tire aila kata jana lana
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; sabe—all of them; phire —wander; prabhure cahiya—
looking for ना Caitanya Mahaprabhu; samudrera tire—on the seashore; dila—ar-
rived; kata—many; jana—people; lafna—accompanied by.
TRANSLATION
Talking like this, the devotees wandered here and there looking for the
Lord. Finally they came to the shore, accompanied by many others.
TEXT 38
চাহিয়ে বেড়াইতে এঁছে রাত্রি-শেষ दङ्न |
'অন্তর্ধান হইলা প্রভু”, নিশ্চয় করিল ॥ ৩৮ ॥
cahiye bedaite aiche ratri-sesa haila
‘antardhana ha-ila prabhu’,——niscaya karila


--- Page 137 ---
136 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
cahiye—looking; bedaite—wandering; aiche—in this way; ratri-Sesa haila—
the night ended; antardhana ha-ila—has disappeared; prabhu—the Lord; niscaya
karila—they decided.
TRANSLATION
While they were searching for the Lord, the night ended, and thus they all
decided, “1010 $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has now disappeared.’
TEXT 39
প্রভুর বিচ্ছেদে কার দেহে নাহি প্রাণ ।
SER wl विन। কার মনে নাহি আন ॥ <> ॥
prabhura vicchede kara dehe nahi prana
anista-sanka vina kara mane nahi ana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—from the Lord; vicchede—due to separation; kara—of all of them;
dehe—in the body; nahi prana—there was practically no life; anista-sanka—
doubts of some mishap; vina—besides; kara—of all of them; mane—in the mind;
nahi ana—there is nothing else.
TRANSLATION
In separation from the Lord, everyone felt as though he had lost his very life.
They concluded that there must have been some mishap. They could not
think of anything else.
TEXT 40
“অনিষ্টাণন্কীনি বন্ধুহৃদ়ানি ভবস্তি হি 1” se ॥
“anista-sankini bandhu-hrdayani bhavanti hi”
SYNONYMS
anista—of some mishap; sarikini—possessing doubts; bandhu—of friends or
relatives; hrdayani—hearts; bhavanti —become; hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
“A relative or intimate friend is always fearful of some injury to his
beloved.”
PURPORT
This is a quotation from the AbhijAdna-sakuntala-nataka.


--- Page 138 ---
Text 43] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 137
TEXT 41
সমুদ্রের তীরে আসি” যুকতি করিলা |
চিরাম়ুংপর্বত-দিকে কতজন গেল৷ ॥ ৪১ ॥
samudrera tire asi’ yukati karila
cirdyu-parvata-dike kata-jana gela
SYNONYMS
samudrera tire—on the seashore; asi’—coming; yukati karila—they consulted
among themselves; cirayu-parvata—of Cataka-parvata; dike—in the direction;
kata-jana—some of them; gela —went.
TRANSLATION
When they arrived at the seashore, they conferred among themselves. Then
some of them sought out Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Cataka-parvata.
TEXT 42
পুূর্ব-দিশায় চলে স্বরূপ লঞ। কত कन |
সিজ্ধৃ-তভীরে-নীরে করেন প্রভুর অন্বেষণ ॥ ৪২ ॥
puarva-disdya cale svarapa lana kata jana
sindhu-tire-nire karena prabhura anvesana
SYNONYMS
parva-disdya—in the eastern direction; cale—goes; svarapa—Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami; lana —taking; kata jana—some persons; sindhu-tire—on the
seashore; nire—in the water; karena—does; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; anvesana—searching.
TRANSLATION
Svarapa Damodara proceeded east with others, looking for the Lord on the
beach or in the water.
TEXT 43
বিষাদে বিহ্বল जटव, নাহিক “চেতন” |
তবু প্রেমে বুলে করি” প্রভুর অন্বেষণ ॥ ৪৩ ॥
visade vihvala sabe, nahika ‘cetana’
tabu preme bule kari’ prabhura anvesana


--- Page 139 ---
138 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
visade—in great moroseness; vihvala—overwhelmed; sabe—in everyone;
nahika—there was not; cetana—consciousness; tabu —still; preme—in love;
bule—wander; kari’—doing; prabhura—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; anvesana—
searching for.
TRANSLATION
Everyone was overwhelmed with moroseness and almost unconscious, but
out of ecstatic love they continued to wander here and there, searching for the
Lord.
TEXT 44
দেখেন — क জালিয়। আইসে कटक জাল কর্পি”।
হাসে, কান্দে, নাচে, গায়, বলে “হরি” =f ॥ 88 ॥
dekhena—— eka jaliya aise kandhe jala kari’
hase, kande, nace, gaya, bale ‘hari’ ‘hari’
SYNONYMS
dekhena—they see; eka jaliya—one fisherman; aise—comes; kandhe—on the
shoulder; jala kari’—carrying a net; hase—laughs; kande—cries; nace —dances;
gaya—sings; bale—says; hari hari—Hari, Hari.
TRANSLATION
Passing along the beach, they saw a fisherman approaching with his net
over his shoulder. Laughing, crying, dancing and singing, he kept repeating
the holy name ‘/Hari, Hari.”
TEXT 45
জালিয়ার চেষ্টা দেখি” সবার চমৎকার |
স্বরূপ-গোস।খি তারে পুছেন সমাচার ॥ ৪৫ ॥
jaliyara cesta dekhi’ sabara camatkara
svarapa-gosani tare puchena samacara
SYNONYMS
jaliyara—of the fisherman; cesta—activity; dekhi’—seeing; sabara—of every-
one; camatkara—astonishment; svarapa-gosani —Svarapa Damodara (0501;
tare —unto him; puchena—inquires; samacara—news.


--- Page 140 ---
Text 47] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 139
TRANSLATION
Seeing the activities of the fisherman, everyone was astonished. Svaripa
Damodara Gosvami, therefore, asked him for information.
TEXT 46
“কহ, कालि स्न, এই দিকে ८नयिन। একজন ?
তোমার এই দশা কেমনে,--কহত'” কারণ ?” ৪৬ ॥
“kaha, jaliya, ei dike dekhila eka-jana?
tomdara ei dasa kene, —kahata’ karana?”
SYNONYMS
kaha—please say; jaliya—O fisherman; ei dike —in this direction; dekhila—did
you see; eka-jana—someone; tomara—your; ei—this; dasa—condition; kene —
why; kahata’—kindly speak; karapna—the cause.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear fisherman,” he said, “why are you behaving like this? Have you
seen someone hereabouts? What is the cause of your behavior? Please tell
us.”
TEXT 47
জালিয়। কহে,-“ইহ। এক wg না দেখিল।
জাল বাহিতে এক IST মোর জালে खादेन ॥ ৪৭ ॥
jaliya kahe,—“ihan eka manusya na dekhila
jala vahite eka mrtaka mora jale ila
SYNONYMS
jaliya kahe—the fisherman said; ihan—here; eka—one; manusya—man; na
dekhila—I| did not see; jala vahite—while | was working with the net; eka—one;
mrtaka—dead body; mora jale—in my net; dila—came.
TRANSLATION
The fisherman replied, “1 have not seen a single person here, but while
casting my net in the water, | captured a dead body.


--- Page 141 ---
140 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 48
বড় sey বলি” আমি উঠাইল্ু' Tse |
JSF দেখিতে মোর ভয় হেল মনে ॥ ৪৮ ॥
bada matsya bali’ ami uthailun yatane
mrtaka dekhite mora bhaya haila mane
SYNONYMS
bada—great; matsya—fish; bali’—thinking to be; ami—I; uthailun—Ilifted;
yatane—with care; mrtaka—the dead body; dekhite—seeing; mora—my;
bhaya—fear; haila—there was; mane—in the mind.
TRANSLATION
“1 lifted it with great care, thinking it a big fish, but as soon as | saw that it
was a corpse, great fear arose in my mind.
TEXT 49
জ।ল খস।ইতে তার অঙ্গ-স্পর্শ হুইল |
স্পর্শমাত্রে সেই ভুত হুদয়ে পশিল ॥ ৪৯ ॥
jala khasaite tara anga-sparsa ha-ila
sparsa-matre sei bhata hrdaye pasila
SYNONYMS
jala—the net; khasaite —releasing; tara—his; anga-sparsa—touch of the body;
ha-ila—there was; sparsa-matre—as soon as | touched it; sei—that; bhata—
ghost; hrdaye—in my heart; pasila—entered.
TRANSLATION
“As | tried to release the net, | touched the body, and as soon as | touched
it, a ghost entered my heart.
TEXT 50
ভয়ে কম্প হৈল, মোর নেত্রে বহে ऊन |
গদগদ বাণী, cAI উঠিল সকল ॥ ৫০ ॥
bhaye kampa haila, mora netre vahe jala
gadgada vani, roma uthila sakala


--- Page 142 ---
Text 52] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 141
SYNONYMS
bhaye —out of fear; kampa—shivering; haila—there was; mora—my; netre —
in the eyes; vahe—flow; jala—tears; gadgada—faltering; vani—voice; roma—
body hair; uthila—stood up; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
“| shivered in fear and shed tears. My voice faltered, and all the hairs on my
body stood up.
TEXT 51
কিবা ত্রহ্মদৈত্য, কিবা ©, কহনে না যায়।
দর্শনম।ত্রে NLDA পৈশে সেই কায় ॥ ৫১ ॥
kiba brahma-daitya, kiba bhata, kahane na yaya
darsana-matre manusyera paise sei kaya
SYNONYMS
kiba—whether; brahma-daitya—a brahmana ghost; kiba—or; bhata—an or-
dinary ghost; kahane na yaya—I cannot say; darsana-madtre —as soon as one sees;
manusyera—of a man; paise —enters; sei kaya—that body.
TRANSLATION
‘1 do not know whether it was the ghost of a dead brahmana or an ordinary
man, but as soon as one looks upon it, it enters his body.
TEXT 52
শরীর দীঘল ত।র হাত পঁচ-মাত।
একেক-হস্ত-পদ তার, তিন তিন হাত ॥ ८२ ॥
Sarira dighala tara——hata parnca-sata
ekeka-hasta-pada tara, tina tina hata
SYNONYMS
sarira—body; dighala—long; tara—his; hata—cubits (one cubit approximately
equals a foot and a half); panca-sata—five to seven; ekeka—each and every;
hasta-pada—arm and leg; tara—of that; tina—three; tina—three; hata—cubits.
TRANSLATION
“The body of this ghost is very long, five to seven cubits. Each of its arms
and legs is as much as three cubits long.


--- Page 143 ---
142 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 53
অস্থি-সন্ধি চুটিলে চর্ম করে নড়-বড়ে |
তাহ। দেখি” te Fa নাহি রহে ধড়ে ॥ ৫৩ ॥
asthi-sandhi chutile carma kare nada-bade
taha dekhi’ prana ka’ra nahi rahe dhade
SYNONYMS
asthi-sandhi—the joints of the bones; chutile—being separated; carma—the
skin; kare —does; nada-bade—hanging; taha—that; dekhi’—seeing; prana—life;
ka’ra—whose; nahi—does not; rahe—remain; dhade—in the body.
TRANSLATION
‘Its joints are all separated beneath the skin, which is completely slack. No
one could see it and remain alive in his body. ति
TEXT 54
মড়া-স্ূপ ধরি” রহে উত্ত।ন-নয়ন |
কভু গো-গেঁ। করে, কভু ACT অচেতন ॥ ৫৪ ॥
mada-rapa dhari’ rahe uttana-nayana
kabhu gon-gon kare, kabhu rahe acetana
SYNONYMS
mada —of a dead body; ripa—the form; dhari’—accepting; rahe —remains; ut-
tana-nayana—with open eyes; kabhu—sometimes; gon-gon—the sound gon-
gon; kare—makes; kabhu—sometimes; rahe —remains; acetana—unconscious.
TRANSLATION
“That ghost has taken the form of a corpse, but he keeps his eyes open.
Sometimes he utters the sounds ‘gon-gon,” and sometimes he remains un-
conscious.
TEXT 55
সাক্ষাৎ (कटदष्टं1, — (मोटन পাইল সেই TS |
মুই মৈলে মোর বকৈছে জীবে छषौ शरू ॥ ৫৫ ॥
saksat dekhechon,—— more paila sei 60013
mui maile mora kaiche jive stri-put


--- Page 144 ---
Text 57] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 143
SYNONYMS
saksat—directly; dekhechon—I| have seen; more —me; paila—has entered;
sei—that; bhata—ghost; mui maile —if | die; mora—my; kaiche —how; jive —will
live; stri-put—wife and children.
TRANSLATION
‘I have seen that ghost directly, and he is haunting me. But if | die, who will
take care of my wife and children?
TEXT 56
সেই ত' ভুতের কথা कङ्न না AW |
ওঝা-ঠাঞ্ি যাইছে।,--যদি সে ভুত ছাড়ায় ॥ ৫৬ ॥
sei ta’ bhatera katha kahana na yaya
ojha-thani yaichorn, —yadi se bhata chadaya
SYNONYMS
sei—that; ta’—certainly; bhatera—of the ghost; katha—topics; kahana—to
speak; na yaya—is not possible; ojha-thani—to the exorcist; yaichon—I am
going; yadi—if; se—that; bhata—the ghost; chadaya—he can cause to leave.
TRANSLATION
‘The ghost is certainly very difficult to talk about, but ॥ am going to find an
exorcist and ask him if he can release me from it.
TEXT 57
একা রাত্র্যে বুলি” মৎস্য মারিয়ে নির্জনে ।
ভুত-প্রেত আমার না লাগে মৃঙ্িংহু-স্যরণে nea
eka ratrye buli’ matsya mariye nirjane
bhata-preta amara na lage ‘nrsirmnha’-smarane
SYNONYMS
eka—alone; ratrye—at night; buli’—wandering; matsya—fish; mariye —1 kill;
nirjane —in solitary places; bhata-preta—ghosts; amara—me; na lage —cannot
touch; nrsimha-smarane —by remembering Nrsimha.


--- Page 145 ---
144 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
“८1 wander alone at night killing fish in solitary places, but because | remem-
ber the hymn to Lord Nrsimha, ghosts do not touch me.
TEXT 58
এই ভূত নৃসিংহ-নামে চাপয়ে দ্বিগুণে |
তাহার আকার দেখিতে ভয় লাগে মনে ॥ ৫৮ ॥
ei bhata nrsirhha-name capaye dvigune
tahara akara dekhite bhaya lage mane
SYNONYMS
ei bhata—this ghost; nrsirhnha-name—by the holy name of Lord Nrsirhha;
capaye—comes over me; dvi-gune—with doubled strength; tahara—his; akara—
form; dekhite —seeing; bhaya—fear; lage mane —arises in the mind.
TRANSLATION
“This ghost, however, overcomes me with redoubled strength when I chant
the Nrsirmha mantra. When | even see the form of this ghost, great fear arises
in my mind.
TEXT 59
ওথা না যাইহ, আমি নিষেধি তোমারে ।
তাহ গেলে সেই ভুত লাগিবে সবারে ॥” ৫৯ ॥
otha na yaiha, ami nisedhi tomare
tahan gele sei bhata lagibe sabare”
SYNONYMS
otha—there; na yaiha—do not go; ami—I; nisedhi—forbid; tomare—you;
tahan—there; gele—if you go; sei bhata—that ghost; lagibe—will catch;
sabare —all of you.
TRANSLATION
‘’Do not go near there. ॥ forbid you. If you go, that ghost will catch you all.”
TEXT 60
এত खनिः স্বক্ূপ-গোসাণ जव তত্ব FAH ।
জালিয়ারে কিছু কয় স্মধুর বাণী ॥ ৬০ ॥


--- Page 146 ---
Text 62] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 145
eta suni’ svaripa-gosani saba tattva jani’
jaliyare kichu kaya sumadhura vani
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; svardpa-gosani—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; saba—
all; tattva—truth; jani’—understanding; jaliyare—unto the fisherman; kichu—
some; kaya—said; su-madhura—sweet; vani—words.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Svariippa Damodara could understand the full truth of the mat-
ter. He spoke sweetly to the fisherman.
TEXT 61
“আমি--বড় ওঝা জানি ভুত ছাড়াইতে”।
মন্ত্র পড়ি' প্রীহস্ত দিল৷ তাহার মাথাতে ॥ ৬১ ॥
‘ami——bada ojha jani bhata chadaite’
mantra padi’ sri-hasta dila tahara mathate
SYNONYMS
ami—I; bada—big; ojha—exorcist; jani—I| know; bhata—ghost; chadaite—
how to exorcise; mantra padi’—chanting hymns; sri-hasta—his hand; dila—
placed; tahara mathate—on his head.
TRANSLATION
“I am a famous exorcist,” he said, ‘‘and | know how to rid you of this
ghost.” He then chanted some mantras and placed his hand on the top of the
fisherman's head.
TEXT 62
তিন চাপড় মারি” weg, — gs পলাইল |
ভয় না পাইহ”- वनि' স্বস্থির করিল ॥ ৬২ ॥
tina capada mari’ kahe, — ‘bhata palaila
bhaya na paiha’——bali’ susthira karila
SYNONYMS
tina capada mari’—slapping three times; kahe—says; bhiata—the ghost;
palaila—has gone away; bhaya na paiha—do not be afraid; bali’—saying; su-
sthira karila—pacified him.


--- Page 147 ---
146 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
He slapped the fisherman three times and said, ‘Now the ghost has gone
away. Do not be afraid.”” By saying this, he pacified the fisherman.
TEXT 63
একে প্রেম, আরে ভয়,-_ দ্বিগুণ অস্থির |
ভয়-অংশ (नेन, সে হৈল কিছু ধীর ॥ ৬৩ ॥
eke prema, are bhaya, —dviguna asthira
bhaya-armsa gela,——se haila kichu dhira
SYNONYMS
eke—on one hand; prema—ecstatic love; are—on the other hand; bhaya—
fear; dvi-guna—doubly; asthira—agitated; bhaya-arhsa—the fear part; gela—dis-
appeared; se —he; haila—became; kichu—somewhat; dhira—sober.
TRANSLATION
The fisherman was affected by ecstatic love, but he was also fearful. He had
thus become doubly agitated. Now that his fear had subsided, however, he
had become somewhat normal.
TEXT 64
क्रणं কহে,-_“যারে তুমি কর “ভুত”-ভ্ঞান |
ভুত নহে-_তেঁহে। ক্বষ্ণচৈতন্তয৷ ভগবাল্‌ ॥ ৬৪ ॥
$৮৪/0/03 kahe, —"yanre tumi kara ‘bhata’-jiana
bhata nahe —tenho krsna-caitanya bhagavan
SYNONYMS
svarapa kahe —Svaripa Damodara Gosvami said; yanre—the person whom;
tumi—you; kara bhata-jiana—consider a ghost; 80003 nahe—is not a ghost;
tenho—He; krsna-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara said to the fisherman, “My dear sir, the person whom
you are thinking a ghost is not actually a ghost but the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, $ri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 148 ---
Text 67] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 147
TEXT 65
প্রেমাবেশে পড়িল৷ ঙেঁহো সমুদ্রের জলে |
তারে তুমি উঠাইলা আপনার জালে ॥ ৬৫ ॥
premavese padila tenho samudrera jale
tanre tumi uthaila apanara jale
SYNONYMS
prema-avese—out of ecstatic emotion; padila—fell down; tenho—He;
samudrera jale—in the water of the sea; tanre—Him; tumi—you; uthaila—
brought out; apanara jale—in your net.
TRANSLATION
‘Because of ecstatic love, the Lord fell into the sea, and you have caught
Him in your net and rescued Him.
TEXT 66
তার স্পর্শে হইল তোমার কৃষ্ণঙ্রেমোদয় |
ভুত-প্রেত-জ্ঞানে তোমার হৈল মহাতভয় ॥ ৬৬ ॥
tanra sparse ha-ila tomara krspa-premodaya
bhata-preta-jiane tomara haila maha-bhaya
SYNONYMS
tanra sparse —by His touch; ha-ila—there was; tomara—your; krspa-prema-
udaya—awakening of ecstatic love for Krsna; bhata-preta-jiane—by thinking to
be a ghost; tomara—your; haila—there was; maha-bhaya—great fear.
TRANSLATION
“Simply touching Him has awakened your dormant love of Krsna, but be-
cause you thought Him a ghost, you were very much afraid of Him.
TEXT 67
এবে ভয় গেল, তোমার मन হৈল স্ছিরে।
কাহ। তারে উঠাঞাছ, WAZ আমারে ॥” ৬৭ ॥
ebe bhaya gela, tomara mana haila sthire
kahan tanre uthanacha, dekhaha amare”


--- Page 149 ---
148 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
ebe —now; bhaya—fear; gela—has gone; tomara—your; mana—mind; haila—
has become; sthire—pacified; kahan—where; tanre—Him; uthanacha—have
you lifted; dekhaha—please show; amare —me.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Now that your fear has gone and your mind is peaceful, please show me
where He is.”
TEXT 68
জালিয়া কহে,-_“প্রভুরে দেখ্যাছে বারবার ।
ঙেঁহো৷ নহেন, এই অতিবিক্বৃত আকার ॥ ৬৮ ॥
jaliya (८2/1९, --- “prabhure dekhyachor bara-bara
tenho nahena, ei ati-vikrta akara”
SYNONYMS
jaliya kahe—the fisherman said; prabhure—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dekhyachornn—I| have seen; bdra-bara—many times; tertho—He; nahena—it is
not; ei—this; ati-vikrta—very deformed; akara—body.
TRANSLATION
The fisherman replied, “I have seen the Lord many times, but this is not He.
This body is very deformed.’’
TEXT 69
স্বরূপ কহে,-_“তার হয় প্রেমের বিকার ।
অস্থথি-সন্ধি ছাড়ে, হয় অতি RGR ॥ ৬৯ ॥
svardpa kahe,—“tanra haya premera vikara
asthi-sandhi chade, haya ati dirghakara”
SYNONYMS
svarapa kahe —Svariipa Damodara said; tarra—of Him; haya—there are; pre-
mera—of love of Godhead; vikara—transformations of the body; asthi-sandhi—
the joints of the bones; chide—become separated; haya—there is; ati—very;
dirgha-akara —elongated body.


--- Page 150 ---
Text 21] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 149
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara said, “11162 Lord’s body becomes transformed in His love
for God. Sometimes the joints of His bones separate, and His body becomes
very elongated.”
TEXT 70
শুনি” সেই জালিয়। আনন্দিত হইল
जव] लग গেল, মহাপ্রভুরে দেখাইল ॥ ৭০ ॥
Suni’ sei jaliya anandita ha-ila
saba 127 gela, mahaprabhure dekhaila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; sei—that; jaliya—fisherman; anandita ha-ila—became very
happy; saba lana—taking everyone; gela—went; mahaprabhure—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dekhaila—showed.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, the fisherman was very happy. He brought all the devotees
with him and showed them the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 71
ভূমিতে পড়ি” আছে প্রভু দীর্ঘ সব কায় ।
জলে শে ত-তন্দু, বাল্দু লাগিয়াছে গায় ॥ ৭১ ॥
bhamite padi’ ache prabhu dirgha saba kaya
jale $veta-tanu, valu lagiyache gaya
SYNONYMS
bhamite—on the ground; padi‘—lying; dche—was; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dirgha—elongated; saba kdya—the whole body; jale—by the
water; $veta-tanu —white body; valu—sand; lagiyache gaya—was smeared over
the body.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was lying on the ground, His body elongated and bleached white
by the water. He was covered from head to foot with sand.


--- Page 151 ---
150 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 72
অতভিদীর্থ শিথিল তন্দু-চর্ম নটূকায়।
দুর পথ উঠাঞ। ঘরে আনান না যায় ॥ ৭২ ॥
ati-dirgha 51100115 tanu-carma natkaya
dara patha uthana ghare anana na yaya
SYNONYMS
ati-dirgha—very elongated; Ssithila—slackened; tanu—body; carma—skin;
natkaya—hanging; dara patha—long distance; uthana—lifting; ghare —home;
anana—bringing; na yaya—was not possible.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s body was stretched, and His skin was slack and hanging loose.
To lift Him and take Him the long distance home would have been impossible.
TEXT 73
আর্দ্র কৌপীন দুর করি” ws Aiea! |
বহির্বাসে শোয়াইলা वालुक] Biola ॥ ৭৩ ॥
ardra kaupina dara kari’ ৪0453 parana
bahirvase soyaila valuka chadana
SYNONYMS
ardra—wet; kaupina—underwear; dara kari’—removing; suska—dry; parana—
putting on; bahirvase—on a covering cloth; soyaila—put down; valuka—sand;
chadana —removi ng.
TRANSLATION
The devotees removed His wet undergarment and replaced it with a dry
one. Then, laying the Lord on an outer cloth, they cleaned the sand from His
body.
TEXT 74
সব্বে মেলি” উচ্চ করি” করেন সমন্ধীর্তনে |
উচ্চ করি” FRAT কহেন প্রভুর কাণে ॥ ৭৪ ॥
sabe meli’ ucca kari’ karena sankirtane
ucca kari’ krsna-nama kahena prabhura kane


--- Page 152 ---
Text 76] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 151
SYNONYMS
sabe meli’—all together; wucca kari’—very loudly; karena—performed;
sankirtane —chanting of the holy name; ucca kari’—loudly; krsna-nama—the
holy name of Krsna; kahena—said; prabhura kane—in the ear of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
They all performed sankirtana, loudly chanting the holy name of Krsna into
the Lord's ear.
TEXT 75
কতক্ষণে প্রভুর কাণে শব্দ পরশিল |
TRE করিয়। প্রভু তবহি উঠিল ॥ १९ ॥
kata-ksane prabhura kane sabda parasila
hunkara kariya prabhu tabahi uthila
SYNONYMS
kata-ksane—after some time; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kane —
within the ear; sabda—the sound; parasila—entered; hunkara kariya—making a
loud sound; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tabahi—immediately; uthila—
got up.
TRANSLATION
After some time, the sound of the holy name entered the ear of the Lord,
who immediately got up, making a great noise.
TEXT 76
উঠিতেই অস্থি সব न तिन নিজ-স্থানে |
‘oq ইতি-উতি করেন দরশনে ॥ ৭৬ ॥
uthitei asthi saba lagila nija-sthane
‘ardha-bahye’ iti-uti karena darasane
SYNONYMS
uthitei—as soon as He got up; asthi—bones; saba—all; lagila—contracted;
nija-sthane—in their own places; ardha-bahye—in half-external consciousness;
iti-uti—here and there; karena darasane —looks.


--- Page 153 ---
152 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
As soon as He got up, His bones assumed their proper places. With half-
external consciousness, the Lord looked here and there.
TEXT 77
*তিন-দশায় মহ।প্রভু-রহেন সর্বকাল |
“অন্তর্দশা”, “ব।হৃদশ।”, ‘THAR’ অর ॥ ৭৭ ॥
tina-dasaya mahaprabhu rahena sarva-kala
‘antar-dasa’, ‘bahya-dasa’, ‘ardha-bahya’ ara
SYNONYMS
tina-dasdaya—in three conditions; mahaprabhu —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
rahena—remains; sarva-kala—at all times; antah-dasa—internal condition;
bahya-dasa —external condition; ardha-bdhya —half-external consciousness;
ara—and.
TRANSLATION
The Lord remains in one of three different states of consciousness at all
times: internal, external, and half-external.
TEXT 78
অন্তর্দশার কিছু খোর, কিছু বাহুৃ-ভ্ঞান |
সেই দশ কহে ভক্ত “অর্ধবাহৃ-নাম ॥ ৭৮ ॥
antar-dasara kichu ghora, kichu 03/0/3-/৭73/73
sei dasa kahe bhakta ‘ardha-bahya’-nama
SYNONYMS
antah-dasara—of the internal condition; kichu—some; ghora—deep state;
kichu—some; bahya-jidana—external consciousness; sei dasa —that condition;
kahe—say; bhakta—devotees; ardha-bahya—half-external consciousness;
nama—name.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord is deeply absorbed in internal consciousness but He
nevertheless exhibits some external consciousness, devotees call His condi-
tion ardha-bahya, or half-external consciousness.


--- Page 154 ---
Text 81] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 153
TEXT 79
“অর্ধবাহ্ে” কহেন প্রভু প্রলাপ-বচনে।
আকাশে কহেন প্রভু, শুনেন ভক্তগণে ॥ ৭৯ ॥
‘ardha-bahye’ kahena prabhu pralapa-vacane
akase kahena prabhu, sunena bhakta-gane
SYNONYMS
ardha-bahye—in half-external consciousness; kahena—says; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pralapa-vacane—crazy words; 3dkase—to the sky;
kahena—speaks; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sunena—hear; bhakta-
gane—the devotees.
TRANSLATION
In this half-external consciousness, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu talked like a
madman. The devotees could distinctly hear Him speaking to the sky.
TEXT 80
“কালিন্দী (कंचिन्न) আমি গেলাঙ বৃন্দাবন ।
CV, FAG] করেন RCTS ॥ ৮০ ॥
“kalindi dekhiya ami gelana vrndavana
dekhi,—jala-krida karena vrajendra-nandana
SYNONYMS
kalindi—River Yamuna; dekhiya—seeing; ami—I; gelana—went; vrndavana—
to Vrndavana; dekhi—I| see; jala-krida—pastimes in the water; karena—per-
forms; vrajendra-nandana—Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja.
TRANSLATION
‘Seeing the River Yamuna,’” He said, “| went to Vrndavana. There | saw the
son of Nanda Maharaja performing His sporting pastimes in the water.
TEXT 81
রাধিকাদি গোপীগণ-সঙ্গে একত্র মেলি” ।
[IATA জলে মহারঙ্গে করেন কেলি ॥ ৮১ ॥
radhikadi gopi-gana-sange ekatra meli’
yamunara jale maha-range karena keli


--- Page 155 ---
154 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
radhika-adi—headed by Srimati Radharani; gopi-gana-sarge —with the gopis;
ekatra meli’—meeting together; yamunara—of the River Yamuna; jale—in the
water; maha-range —in a great sporting attitude; karena keli—performs pastimes.
TRANSLATION
“Lord Krsna was in the water of the Yamuna in the company of the gopis,
headed by Srimati Radharani. They were performing pastimes in a great
sporting manner.
TEXT 82
তীরে রহি” দেখি আমি সখীগণ-সঙ্গে 1
একসংখী সখীগণে দেখায় সেই রঙ্গে ॥ ৮২ ॥
tire rahi’ dekhi ami sakhi-gana-sange
eka-sakhi sakhi-gane dekhaya sei range
SYNONYMS
tire—on the bank; rahi’—standing; dekhi—see; ami—\; sakhi-gana-sarge —
with the gopis; eka-sakhi—one gopi; sakhi-gane—to other gopis; dekhaya—
shows; sei range —that pastime.
TRANSLATION
‘I saw this pastime as | stood on the bank of the Yamuna in the company of
the gopis. One gopi was showing some other gopis the pastimes of Radha and
Krsna in the water.
TEXT 83
পট্টবন্ত্র, অলঙ্কারে, সমগপিয়া সখী-করে,
সঅূজ্মম-শুক্লবস্তর-পরিধান |
কৃষ্ণ লঞা কান্তাগণ, Sel জলাবগাহন,
জলক্কেলি রচিলা সুঠাম ॥ ৮৩ ॥
patta-vastra, alankare, samarpiya sakhi-kare,
staksma-sukla-vastra-paridhana
krspa lana kanta-gana, kaila jalavagahana,
jala-keli racila suthama


--- Page 156 ---
Text 85] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 155
SYNONYMS

patta-vastra—silk garments; alarikdre—ornaments; samarpiya —entrusting;
sakhi-kare —in the hands of their gopi friends; sdksma—very fine; sukla-vastra—
white cloth; paridhana—putting on; krsna—Lord Krsna; lana—taking; kanta-
gana—the beloved gopis; kaila—performed; jala-avagahana—bathing in the
water; jala-keli—pastimes in the water; racila—planned; su-thama—very nice.

TRANSLATION

‘‘All the gopis entrusted their silken garments and ornaments to the care of
their friends and then put on fine white cloth. Taking His beloved gopis with
Him, Lord Krsna bathed and performed very nice pastimes in the water of the
Yamuna.

TEXT 84
সখি হে, দেখ কৃষ্ণের জলক্েকেলি-রঙ্গে |
কৃষ্ণ মত্ত করিবর, চঞ্চল কর-পুকষ্কর,
গোপীগণ করিণীর সঙ্গে ॥ ৮৪ ॥ প্রন ॥
sakhi he, dekha krsnera jala-keli-range
(5/2 matta kari-vara, cafcala kara-puskara,
gopi-gana karinira sarge
SYNONYMS

sakhi he—O my dear friends; dekha—just see; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; jala-
keli—of the pastimes in the water; range—the sporting mood; krsna—Lord
Krsna; matta—maddened; kari-vara—chief elephant; cafcala—restless; kara-
puskara—lotus palms; gopi-gana—the gopis; karinira—of the she-elephants;
sarge —in the company.

TRANSLATION

‘My dear friends, just see Lord Krsna’s sporting pastimes in the water.
Krsna's restless palms resemble lotus flowers. He is just like a chief of mad
elephants, and the gopis who accompany Him are like she-elephants.

TEXT 85
আরম্তিল| जनट्कनि, wwe जन ফেলাফেলি,
ছড়াহুড়ি, বর্ষে জলধার |


--- Page 157 ---
156 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
সবে জয়-পরাজয়, নাহি কিছু নিশ্চয়,
জলযুদ্ধ বাড়িল অপার ॥ ৮৫ ॥
arambhila jala-keli, anyo’nye jala phelapheli,
hudahudi, varse jala-dhara
sabe jaya-parajaya, nahi kichu niscaya,
jala-yuddha badila apara
SYNONYMS
arambhili—began; jala-keli—pastimes in the water; anyo’nye—at one
another; jala—water; phelapheli—throwing back and forth; hudahudi—
tumultuous activities; varse —in rains; jala-dhara—showers of water; sabe —all of
them; jaya-parajaya—victory and defeat; nahi—not; kichu—any; niscaya—cer-
tainty; jala-yuddha—the fight in the water; badila—increased; apara—un-
limitedly.
TRANSLATION
‘The sporting pastimes in the water began, and everyone started splashing
water back and forth. In the tumultuous showers of water, no one could be
certain which party was winning and which was losing. This sporting water
fight increased unlimitedly.
TEXT 86
বর্ষে স্থির তড়িদ্গণ, face শ্যাম নবঘন,
ঘন বর্ষে তড়িৎ-উপরে ।
সখীগণের নয়ন, তৃষিত slew,
সেই অন্বৃত FCA পান করে ॥ ৮৬ |
varse sthira tadid-gana, since syama nava-ghana,
ghana varse tadit-upare
sakhi-ganera nayana, trsita cataka-gana,
sei amrta sukhe pana kare
SYNONYMS
varse —in that shower; sthira—fixed; tadit-gana—streaks of lightning; sirice —
sprinkle; syama—blackish; nava-ghana—new cloud; ghana—the cloud; varse —
rains; tadit-upare —upon the streaks of lightning; sakhi-ganera—of the gopis;
nayana—the eyes; trsita—thirsty; cataka-gana—cataka birds; sei amrta—that
nectar; sukhe—in happiness; pana kare—drink.


--- Page 158 ---
Text 88] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 157
TRANSLATION
“The gopis were like steady streaks of lightning, and Krsna resembled a
blackish cloud. The lightning began sprinkling water upon the cloud, and the
cloud upon the lightning. Like thirsty cataka birds, the eyes of the gopis
joyously drank the nectarean water from the cloud.
TEXT 87
ত্রথমে सूक सनानि", তবে যুদ্ধ “করাকরি*,
তার পাছে যুদ্ধ FAY |
তবে যুদ্ধ “শুদাৎুদি”, তবে হৈল “রদারদি”,
তবে হৈল যুদ্ধ 'নখানখি” ॥ ৮৭ ॥
prathame yuddha ‘jalajali’, tabe yuddha ‘karakari’,
tara pache yuddha ‘mukhamukhi’
tabe yuddha ‘hrdahrdi’, tabe haila ‘radaradi’,
tabe haila yuddha ‘nakhanakhi’
SYNONYMS
prathame —in the beginning; yuddha—the fight; jalajali—throwing water upon
one another; tabe —thereafter; yuddha—the fight; karakari—hand to hand; tara
pache—after that; yuddha—the fight; mukhamukhi—face to face; tabe—
thereafter; yuddha—the fight; hrdahrdi—chest to chest; tabe—thereafter;
haila—was; radaradi—teeth to teeth; tabe —thereafter; haila—there was; yud-
dha—the fight; nakhanakhi—nail to nail.
TRANSLATION
“As the fight began, they splashed water on one another. Then they fought
hand to hand, then face to face, then chest to chest, teeth to teeth and finally
nail to nail.
TEXT 88
जङ्ख-कटन्र জল (ACTF, जङ्खख নেত্রে গোপী দেখে,
সহজ্ব-পদে নিকট গমনে |
সহলজ্বমুখ-চুম্বনে, সহজ্ববপু:সঙ্গমে,
গোপীনর্ম শুনে সহঅ-কাণে ॥ ৮৮ ॥
sahasra-kare jala seke, sahasra netre gopi dekhe,
sahasra-pade nikata gamane


--- Page 159 ---
158 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
sahasra-mukha-cumbane, sahasra-vapu-sangame,
gopi-narma Sune sahasra-kane
SYNONYMS
sahasra—thousands; kare—with hands; jala—water; seke —throw; sahasra—
thousands; netre—with eyes; gopi—the gopis; dekhe—see; sahasra—thou-
sands; pade—with legs; nikata—near; gamane—in going; sahasra—thousands;
mukha—faces; cumbane —kissing; sahasra—thousands; vapu—bodies;
sangame —in embracing; gopi—the gopis; narma—joking; sune —hear; sahasra—
thousands; kane—in ears.
TRANSLATION
‘Thousands of hands splashed water, and the gopis saw Krsna with thou-
sands of eyes. With thousands of legs they came near Him and kissed Him
with thousands of faces. Thousands of bodies embraced Him. The gopis heard
His joking words with thousands of ears.
TEXT 89
কৃষ্ণ রাধা न] বলে, গেল। करणश्च জলে,
ছাড়িল। তাহ योङ] অগাধ পানী ।
তেঁহে। কৃষ্ণকণ্ঠ ধরি”, ভাসে জলের উপরি,
গজ্োৎখাতে যৈছে কমলিনী ॥ ৮৯ ॥
krsna radha lana bale, gela kantha-daghna jale,
chadila tahan, yahar agadha pani
tenho krsna-kantha dhari’, bhase jalera upari,
gajotkhate yaiche kamalini
SYNONYMS
krspa—Lord Krsna; radha—Srimati Radharani; lana—taking; bale —forcibly;
gela—went; kantha-daghna—up to the neck; jale—in water; chadila—let go;
tahan—there; yahan—where; agadha—very deep; pani—water; tenho—She;
krsna-kantha—the neck of Krsna; dhari’—capturing; bhase —floats; jalera upari—
on the water; gaja-utkhate —plucked by an elephant; yaiche—as; kamalini—a
lotus flower.
TRANSLATION
‘Krsna forcibly swept Radharani away and took Her into water up to Her
neck. Then He released Her where the water was very deep. She grasped


--- Page 160 ---
Text 91] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 159
Krsna’s neck, however, and floated on the water like a lotus flower plucked by
the trunk of an elephant.
TEXT 90
যত গোপ-স্দন্দ্রী, কৃষ্ণ তত क्रणं ধরি”,
সবার वच्छ FF হরণে ।
যমুনা-জল নির্মল, অঙ্গ করে ঝলমল,
[CA কৃষ্ণ করে দরশনে ॥ ৯০ ॥
yata gopa-sundari, krsna tata rapa dhari’,
sabara vastra karila harane
yamuna-jala nirmala, anga kare jhalamala,
sukhe krsna kare darasane
SYNONYMS
yata—as many; gopa-sundari—beautiful gopis; krsna—Lord Krsna; tata—that
many; rapa—forms; dhari’—accepting; sabara—of all; vastra—covering cloths;
karila harane —took away; yamuna-jala—the water of the Yamuna; nirmala—very
clear; anga—bodies; kare jhalamala—glitter; sukhe —happily; krsna—Lord Krsna;
kare darasane—sees.
TRANSLATION
‘Krsna expanded Himself into as many forms as there were gopis and then
took away all the garments that covered them. The water of the River Yamuna
was crystal clear, and Krsna saw the glittering bodies of the gopis in great
happiness.
TEXT 91
गद्रिनोनङ] - जनौ, বকৈল কারে সহায়,
তরঙ্গ-হস্তে পত্র সমপ্পিল |
কেহ মুক্ত-কেশপাশ, আগে So অধ্যেবাস,
হস্তে কেহ কঞ্চ,লে ধরিল ॥ >> ॥
padmini-lata—sakhi-caya, kaila karo sahaya,
taranga-haste patra samarpila
keha mukta-kesa-pasa, age kaila adhovasa,
haste keha kanculi dharila


--- Page 161 ---
160 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
padmini-lata—the stems of lotus flowers; sakhi-caya—friends of the gopis;
kaila—gave; karo—to some of the gopis; sahdaya—help; tarariga-haste —by the
waves of the Yamuna, which are compared to hands; patra—the lotus leaves;
samarpila—supplied;  keha—someone; mukta—released; kesa-pasa—the
bunches of hair; age—in front; kaila—made; adhovasa—a lower dress; haste—
the hands; keha—some; kanculi—as a top dress; dharila—held.
TRANSLATION
‘The lotus stems were friends of the gopis and therefore helped them by
offering them lotus leaves. The lotuses pushed their large, round leaves over
the surface of the water with their hands, the waves of the Yamuna, to cover
the gopis’ bodies. Some gopis undid their hair and kept it in front of them as
dresses to cover the lower portions of their bodies and used their hands as
bodices to cover their breasts.
TEXT 92
FLT কলহ রাধা-সনে, গোপীগণ সেইক্ষণে,
হেমাজ্জ-বনে গেলা লুকাইতে |
অআকণ্ঠ-বপু জলে দপৈশে, মুখমাত্র জলে ভাসে,
পদঞ্থে-নুখে না পারি চিনিতে ॥ ৯২ ॥
krsnera kalaha radha-sane, gopi-gana sei-ksane,
hemabja-vane gela lukaite
akantha-vapu jale paise, mukha-matra jale bhase,
padme-mukhe na pari cinite
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Krsna; kalaha—quarrel; radha-sane —with Radha; gopi-gana—the
gopis; sei-ksane—at that moment; hema-abja—of white lotus flowers; vane—in
the forest; gela—went; lukaite—to hide; akantha—up to the neck; vapu—body;
jale—into the water; paise —enter; mukha-matra—only the lotus flowers and the
faces; jale—in the water; bhase—float; padme-mukhe —between the lotus
flowers and the faces; na pari—not able; cinite—to discern.
TRANSLATION
‘Then Krsna quarreled with Radharani, and all the gopis hid themselvesina
cluster of white lotus flowers. They submerged their bodies up to their necks
in the water. Only their faces floated above the surface, and the faces were in-
distinguishable from the lotuses.


--- Page 162 ---
Text 94] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 161
TEXT 93
এথা কৃষ্ণ রাধা-সনে, কৈলা যে আছিল মনে,
গোপীগণ অস্বেষিতে গেলা ।
তবে রাধা সূজ্জমমমতি, निश्च সখীর স্থিতি,
সখী-মধ্যে আসিয়৷ মিলিল। ॥ >< ॥
etha krsna radha-sane, kaila ye achila mane,
gopi-gana anvesite gela
tabe radha saksma-mati, janiya sakhira sthiti,
sakhi-madhye asiya milila
SYNONYMS
etha—here; krspa—Lord Krsna; radha-sane—with Srimati Radharani; kaila—
performed; ye—what; achila—was; mane—in the mind; gopi-gana—all the
gopis; anvesite—to search out; gela—went; tabe—at that time; radha —Srimati
Radharani; saksma-mati—very finely intelligent; janiya—knowing; sakhira—of
the gopis; sthiti—situation; sakhi-madhye —among the friends; asiya—coming;
milila—mixed.
TRANSLATION
“In the absence of the other gopis, Lord Krsna behaved with Srimati
Radharani as freely as He desired. When the gopis began searching for Krsna,
Srimati Radharani, being of very fine intelligence and thus knowing the situ-
ation of Her friends, immediately mingled in their midst.
TEXT 94
যত (ZAG জলে ভাসে, তত AIF তার পাশে,
আসি” আসি” করয়ে মিলন ।
RNC (ZACH ঠেকে, যুদ্ধ হয় প্রত্যেকে,
ক্পৌতুকে দেখে তীরে সখীগণ ॥ ৯৪ ॥
yata hemabja jale bhase, tata nilabja tara pase,
asi’ asi’ karaye milana
nilabje hemabje theke, yuddha haya pratyeke,
kautuke dekhe tire sakhi-gana
SYNONYMS
yata—as many as there were; hema-abja—white lotus flowers; jale—on the
water; bhase—float; tata—that many; nila-abja—bluish lotus flowers; tara


--- Page 163 ---
162 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
pase—by their side; asi’ asi’—coming closer; karaye milana—they meet; nila-
abje—the bluish lotus flowers; hema-abje—with the white lotus flowers;
theke —collide; yuddha—a fight; haya—there is; prati-eke —with one another;
kautuke —in great fun; dekhe —see; tire—on the bank; sakhi-gana—the gopis.
TRANSLATION
‘“Many white lotus flowers were floating in the water, and as many bluish
lotus flowers came nearby. As they came close together, the white and blue
lotuses collided and began fighting with one another. The gopis on the bank
of the Yamuna watched with great amusement.
TEXT 95
চত্রুবাক-মণ্ডল, JAF পৃথকূ যুগল,
জল হৈতে করিল Tai |
উঠিল পণ্মমণ্ডল, JAF পৃথক্‌ যুগল,
চক্রবাকে देकन আচ্ছাদন ॥ ৯৫ ॥
cakravaka-mandala, prthak prthak yugala,
jala haite karila udgama
uthila padma-mandala, prthak prthak yugala,
cakravake kaila acchadana
SYNONYMS
cakravaka-mandala—the globes of cakravaka birds; prthak prthak —separate;
yugala—couples; jala haite—from the water; karila—made; udgama—ap-
pearance; uthila—arose; padma-mandala—the circle of lotus flowers; prthak
prthak —separate; yugala—couples; cakravake—the cakravaka birds; kaila—did;
acchadana —covering.
TRANSLATION
“When the raised breasts of the gopis, which resembled the globelike
bodies of cakraviaka birds, emerged from the water in separate couples, the
bluish lotuses of Krsna’s hands rose to cover them.
TEXT 96
উঠিল ag बट] < नैन, नुक्‌ পৃথক্‌ যুগল,
পদ্মগণের কৈল নিবারণ |


--- Page 164 ---
Text 97] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 163
পদ্ম” চাহে gfe’ নিতে, “উৎপল” চাহে রাখিতে”,
“চক্রবাক” লাগি” দু'হার রণ ॥ ৯৬ ॥
uthila bahu raktotpala, prthak prthak yugala,
padma-ganera kaila nivarana
‘padma’ cahe luti’ nite, ‘utpala’ cahe rakhite’,
‘cakravaka’ lagi’ dunhara rana
SYNONYMS
uthila—arose; bahu—many; rakta-utpala—red lotus flowers; prthak prthak —
separate; yugala—couples; padma-ganera—of the bluish lotus flowers; kaila—
did; nivarana—obstruction; padma—the blue lotus flowers; cahe —want; luti’'—
stealing; nite—to take; utpala—the red lotus flowers; cahe rakhite’—wanted to
protect; cakravaka lagi’—for the cakravaka birds; durnhara—between the two,
(the red and blue lotus flowers); rana—fight.
TRANSLATION
‘The hands of the gopis, which resembled red lotus flowers, arose from the
water in pairs to obstruct the bluish flowers. The blue lotuses tried to plunder
the white cakravaka birds, and the red lotuses tried to protect them. Thus
there was a fight between the two.
TEXT 97
পজ্মেোগৎপল -_অচেতনম, চত্রবাক -সচেতন,
চক্রবাকে পদ্ম আস্বাদয় ।
231 gw উপ্টা স্থিতি, ধর্ম হৈল বিপরীতি,
কৃষ্ণের রাজেয এঁছে JIT হয় ॥ ৯৭ ॥
padmotpala—acetana, cakravaka——sacetana,
cakravake padma asvadaya
ihan dunhara ulta sthiti, dharma haila vipariti,
krsnera rajye aiche nydya haya
SYNONYMS
padma-utpala—the blue and red lotus flowers; acetana—unconscious;
cakravaka—the cakravaka birds; sa-cetana—conscious; cakravake —the
cakravaka birds; padma—the blue lotus flowers; asvadaya—taste; ihan—here;
dunhara—of both of them; ulta sthiti—the reverse situation; dharma—


--- Page 165 ---
164 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
characteristic nature; haila—became; vipariti—reversed; krsnera—of Lord Krsna;
rajye—in the kingdom; aiche—such; nyaya—principle; haya—there is.
TRANSLATION
‘Blue and red lotus flowers are unconscious objects, whereas cakravakas
are conscious and alive. Nevertheless, in ecstatic love, the blue lotuses began
to taste the cakravakas. This is a reversal of their natural behavior, but in Lord
Krsna’s kingdom such reversals are a principle of His pastimes.
PURPORT
Generally the cakravaka bird tastes the lotus flower, but in Krsna's pastimes the
lotus, which is usually lifeless, tastes the cakravaka bird.
TEXT 98
মিত্রের মিত্র সহবাসী, চক্রবাকে লুটে আসি”
FLA রাজ্যে GCE ব্যবহার |
অপরিচিত শত্রৰ্র মিত্র, রাখে উৎপল,- এ বড় চিত্র,
এই বড় “বিরোধ-অলমঙ্ক।র” ॥ ৯৮ ॥
mitrera mitra saha-vasi, cakravake lute asi’,
krsnera rajye aiche vyavahara
aparicita satrura mitra, rakhe utpala,—e bada citra,
ei bada ‘virodha-alarikara’
SYNONYMS
mitrera—of the sun-god; mitra—the friend; saha-vasi—living together with the
cakravaka birds; cakravake—the cakravaka birds; lute —plunder; asi’—coming;
krspera rajye—in the kingdom of Krsna; aiche —such; vyavahara—behavior;
aparicita—unacquainted; satrura mitra—the friend of the enemy; rakhe —pro-
tects; utpala—the red lotus flower; e —this; bada citra—very wonderful; ei—this;
bada—great; virodha-alankara—metaphor of contradiction.
TRANSLATION
‘The blue lotuses are friends of the sun-god, and though they all live
together, the blue lotuses plunder the cakravakas. The red lotuses, however,
blossom at night and are therefore strangers or enemies to the cakravakas. Yet


--- Page 166 ---
Text 99] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 165
in Krsna’s pastimes the red lotuses, which are the hands of the gopis, protect
their cakravaka breasts. This is a metaphor of contradiction.”
PURPORT
Because the blue lotus flower blossoms with the rising of the sun, the sun is the
friend of the blue lotus. The cakravaka birds also appear when the sun rises, and
therefore the cakravakas and blue lotuses meet. Although the blue lotus is a friend
of the sun, in Krsna's pastimes it nevertheless plunders their mutual friend the
cakravaka. Normally, cakravakas move about whereas lotuses stand still, but
herein Krsna's hands, which are compared to blue lotuses, attack the breasts of
the gopis, which are compared to cakravakas. This is called a reverse analogy. At
night the red lotus blossoms, whereas in sunlight it closes. Therefore the red lotus
is an enemy to the sun and is unknown to the sun's friend the cakravaka. The
gopis’ breasts, however, are compared to cakravakas and their hands to red
lotuses protecting them. This is a wonderful instance of reverse analogy.
TEXT 99
स्ङिगटस्नाक्ि, বিরোধাভাস, দুই অলঙ্কার প্রকাশ,
করি” কৃষ্ণ প্রকট (ण यारेन ।
যাহা করি” আস্বাদন, আনন্দিত মোর মন,
নেত্র-কর্ণ-যুগ্ম BIZ ॥ >> ॥
atisayokti, virodhabhasa, dui alankara prakasa,
kari’ krsna prakata dekhaila
yaha kari’ asvadana, anandita mora mana,
netra-karpa-yugma judaila
SYNONYMS
atisaya-ukti—exaggerated language; virodha-abhdsa—incongruent analogy;
dui alankara—two metaphors; prakasa—manifestations; kari’—making; krsna—
Lord Krsna; prakata—exhibited; dekhaila—showed; yaha—which; kari’
asvadana—tasting; dnandita—pleased; mora mana—My mind; netra-karna—of
eyes and ears; yugma—the couples; judaila—became satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, ‘In His pastimes, Krsna displayed the
two ornaments of hyperbole and reverse analogy. Tasting them brought glad-
ness to My mind and fully satisfied My ears and eyes.


--- Page 167 ---
166 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 100
এঁছে বিচিত্র का করি” তীরে আইলা Af,
সঙ্গে লঞ সব কান্তাগণ।
HES A, আমলকী-উদ্বর্তন,
সেবা করে कोट সখীগণ ॥ ১০০ ॥
aiche ৮1003 krida kari’, tire ila sri-hari,
sange lana saba kanta-gana
gandha-taila-mardana, amalaki-udvartana,
seva kare tire sakhi-gana
SYNONYMS
aiche —such; vicitra—wonderful; krida —pastimes; kari’—performing; tire—on
the bank; aila—arrived; sri-hari—Lord Sri Krsna; sange —with Him; lana—taking;
saba kanta-gana—all the beloved gopis; gandha—scented; taila—oil; mardana—
massaging; dmalaki—of the dmalaki fruit; udvartana—annointing with paste; seva
kare —render service; tire—on the bank of the Yamuna; sakhi-gana—all the gopis.
TRANSLATION
“After performing such wonderful pastimes, Lord Sri Krsna got up on the
shore of the Yamuna River, taking with Him all His beloved gopis. Then the
gopis on the riverbank rendered service by massaging Krsna and the other
gopis with scented oil and smearing paste of amalaki fruit on their bodies.
TEXT 101
সপুনরপি देकन चानः অুস্কবস্ত্র পরিধান,
রত্ন-মন্দিরে কৈল৷ ख।भैगन |
বৃবন্দা-কৃত সম্ভার, গন্ধপুষ্প-অলঙ্কার,
AYCIAS করিল AGA ॥ ১০১ ॥
punarapi kaila snana, Suska-vastra paridhana,
ratna-mandire kaila agamana
vrnda-krta sambhara, gandha-puspa-alankara,
vanya-vesa karila racana
SYNONYMS
punarapi—again;  kaila—took; snana—bath; suska-vastra—dry cloth;
paridhana—putting on; ratna-mandire—in a small house of jewels; kaila—did;


--- Page 168 ---
Text 103] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 167
agamana—arrival; vrnda-krta—arranged by the gopi Vrnda; sambhara—all kinds
of articles; gandha-puspa-alarnkara—scented flowers and ornaments; vanya-
vesa—forest dress; karila—did; racana—arrangement.
TRANSLATION
‘Then they all bathed again, and after putting on dry clothing, they went to
a small jeweled house, where the gopi Vrnda arranged to dress them in forest
clothing by decorating them with fragrant flowers, green leaves and all kinds
of other ornaments.
TEXT 102
বৃন্দাবনে তরুলতা, खर्र তাহার কথা,
বৰবারমাস ধরে ফুল-ফল |
বৃন্দাবনে দেবীগণ, কুঞ্জজাসী যত জন,
ফল পাড়ি” আনিয়া সকল ॥ ১০২ ॥
vrndavane taru-lata, adbhuta tahara katha,
bara-masa dhare phula-phala
vrndavane devi-gana, kunja-dasi yata jana,
phala padi’ aniya sakala
SYNONYMS
vrndavane —at Vrndavana; taru-lata—trees and creepers; adbhuta—wonder-
ful; tahara katha—their story; bara-masa—twelve months; dhare —produce;
phula-phala—fruits and flowers; vrndavane —at Vrindavana; devi-gana—all the
gopis; kufja-dasi—maidservants in the bowers; yata jana—as many persons as
there are; phala padi’—picking fruits; aniya—bringing; sakala—all varieties.
TRANSLATION
“In Vrndavana, the trees and creepers are wonderful because throughout
the entire year they produce all kinds of fruits and flowers. The gopis and
maidservants in the bowers of Vrndavana pick these fruits and flowers and
bring them before Radha and Krsna.
TEXT 103
উত্তম সংস্কার করি”, व বড় থালী ভরি”,
রত্-মন্দিরে निखात উপরে ।
ভক্কণের ক্রম করি”, ধরিয়াছে সারি সারি,
আগে আসন বসিবার তরে ॥ ১০৩ ॥


--- Page 169 ---
168 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
uttama sarnskara kari’, bada bada thali bhari’,
ratna-mandire pindara upare
bhaksanera krama kari’, dhariyache sari sari,
age asana vasibara tare
SYNONYMS
uttama —topmost; samskara—cleaning; kari’—doing; bada bada—big; thali—
plates; bhari’—filling up; ratna-mandire —in the house of jewels; (21000312 upare —
on the platform; bhaksanera krama kari’—making arrangements for eating;
dhariyache —have kept; sari sari—one after another; age—in front; asana—sitting
place; vasibara tare—to sit down.
TRANSLATION
‘The gopis peeled all the fruits and placed them together on large plates on
a platform in the jeweled cottage. They arranged the fruit in orderly rows for
eating, and in front of it they made a place to sit.
TEXT 104
এক নারিকেল নানা-জাতি, এক আত্ম নানা ভাতি,
কলা, কোলি -_ বিবিধণ্রকার ৷
পনস, খজুর, কমলা, নারঙজ, জাম, AVA,
Fie], বাদাম, মেওয়া যত আর ॥ ১০৪ ॥
eka narikela nana-jati, eka amra nana bhati,
kala, koli——vividha-prakara
panasa, kharjura, kamala, naranga, jama, santara,
draksa, badama, meoya yata ara
SYNONYMS
eka—one item; narikela—coconut; nana-jati—of many varieties; eka—one;
amra—mango; nana bhati—of many different qualities; kala—banana; koli—ber-
ries; vividha-prakara—of different varieties; panasa—jackfruit; kharjura—dates;
kamala—tangerines; ndranga—oranges; jama—blackberries; santard—another
type of tangerine; draksa—grapes; badama—almonds; meoya—dried fruits;
yata—as many as there are; ara—and.
TRANSLATION
‘“Among the fruits were many varieties of coconut and mango, bananas,
berries, jackfruits, dates, tangerines, oranges, blackberries, santaras, grapes,
almonds and all kinds of dried fruit.


--- Page 170 ---
Text 106] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 169
TEXT 105
খরমুজ, ক্ষীরিকা, তাল, কেশুর, পানীফল, For,
fam, Neg, দাড়িজ্ব।দি যত ।
কোন দেশে কার খ্যাতি, FWA সব-প্রাপ্তি,
जङ्ख्पज)ङि, লেখা যায় কত ? ১০৫ ॥
kharamuja, ksirika, tala, kesura, pani-phala, mrpala,
bilva, pilu, dadimbadi yata
kona dese kara khyati, vrndavane saba-prapti,
sahasra-jati, lekha yaya kata?
SYNONYMS
kharamuja—cantaloupe; ksirika—ksirika fruit; tala—palm or palmyra fruit
kesura—kesura fruit; pani-phala—a fruit produced in the water of rivers;
mrpala—a fruit from lotus flowers; bilva—bel fruit; pilu—a special fruit in
Vindavana; dadimba-adi—the pomegranate and other similar fruits; yata—as
many as there are; kona dese—in some country; kara—of which; khyati—of
fame; vrndavane—in Vrndavana; saba-prapti—obtainment of all; sahasra-jati—
thousands of varieties; lekha yaya—one is able to write; kata—how much.
TRANSLATION
“There were cantaloupes, ksirikas, palmfruits, keSuras, waterfruits, lotus
fruits, bel, pilu, pomegranate and many others. Some of them are variously
known in different places, but in Vrndavana they are always available in so
many thousands of varieties that no one can fully describe them.
TEXT 106
গঙ্গাজল, অমৃতকেলি, পীযুযগ্রন্থি, করপূরিকেলি,
AH, অন্তি, AAG |
খণ্ডচ্কীরিসার-বৃচ্ষ, ঘরে করি” নানা ভক্ক্য,
রাধা বাহ কৃষ্ণ লাগি” আনি ॥ ১০৬ ॥
gangdjala, amrtakeli, piyuasagranthi, karparakeli,
sarapdri, amrti, padmacini
khanda-ksirisara-vrksa, ghare kari’ nana bhaksya,
radha yaha krsna lagi’ ani


--- Page 171 ---
170 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
ganga-jala—the sweetmeat gangdajala; amrta-keli—a sweetmeat made of milk;
piydsa-granthi—piyasagranthi; karpara-keli—karparakeli;  sara-pari—a sweet
made from milk; amrti—a sweet prepared from rice flour; padma-cini—a sweet
preparation made from lotus flowers; khanda-ksiri-sara-vrksa—sugar sweets
made in the shape of trees; ghare—at home; kari’—making; nana bhaksya—
varieties of eatables; radha—Srimati Radharani; yaha—which; krsna lagi’—for
Krsna; ani—brought.
TRANSLATION
१५१ home Srimati Radharani had made various types of sweetmeats from
milk and sugar, such as gangajala, amrtakeli, piyasagranthi, karparakeli,
sarapiri, amrti, padmacini and khanda-ksirisara-vrksa. She had then brought
them all for Krsna.
TEXT 107
ভক্ষ্যের পরিপ।টা দেখি» কৃষ্ণ হৈল৷ মহাস্থখী,
বসি” কৈল৷ चक्र (राखन |
সঙ্গে Fl সখীগণ, রাধা टेकना। ভোজন,
দুঁহে देकन। মন্দিরে শয়ন ॥ ১০৭ ॥
bhaksyera paripati dekhi’, krspa haila maha-sukhi,
vasi’ kaila vanya bhojana
sange lana sakhi-gana, radha kaila bhojana,
dunhe (८०11 mandire sayana
SYNONYMS
bhaksyera—of eatables; paripati—the arrangements; dekhi’—seeing; krsna—
Lord Krsna; haila—became; maha-sukhi—very happy; vasi’—sitting down;
kaila—performed; vanya bhojana—a picnic in the forest; sarige—in association;
205 —taking; sakhi-gana—all the gopis; radha—Srimati Radharani; kaila bho-
jana—took the remnants; durihe —both of them; kaila—did; mandire—in the
jeweled house; sayana—Ilying down.
TRANSLATION
“When Krsna saw the very nice arrangement of food, He happily sat down
and had a forest picnic. Then, after Srimati Radharani and Her gopi friends
partook of the remnants, Radha and Krsna lay down together in the jeweled
house.


--- Page 172 ---
Text 109] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 171
TEXT 108
কেহ করে বীজন, (कङ्‌ পাদসদন্বাহুন,
(कङ्‌ করায় SIF ভক্ষণ |
রাধাকুষ্ণ निल] গেলা, সখীগণ শয়ন Ce,
দেখি” আমার FA হৈল मन ॥ ১০৮ ॥
keha kare vijana, keha pada-samvahana,
keha karaya tambdala bhaksana
radha-krsna nidra gela, sakhi-gana sayana kaila,
dekhi’ amara sukhi haila mana
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; kare—does; vijana—fanning; keha—someone; pada-sam-
vahana—massaging of the feet; keha—someone; kardya—made them do; tam-
bila bhaksana—eating a preparation of betel leaves; radha-krsna—Radha and
Krsna; nidra gela—went to sleep; sakhi-gana—all the gopis; Sayana kaila—lay
down; dekhi’—seeing; amara—My; sukhi—happy; haila—became; mana—
mind.
TRANSLATION
“Some of the gopis fanned Radha and Krsna, others massaged Their feet,
and some fed Them betel leaves to chew. When Radha and Krsna fell asleep,
all the other gopis also lay down. When | saw this, My mind was very happy.
TEXT 109
হেনকালে মোরে ধরি”, মহাকোলাহল করি”,
তুমি-সব ইহ न॑ আইলা ।
Fiz যমুনা, বৃন্দ।বন, কুঁাহা কৃষ্ণ, গোপীগণ,
সেই সুখ ভঙ্গ করাইল। !” ১০৯ ॥
hena-kale more dhari’, maha-kolahala kari’,
tumi-saba ihan lana aila
kanha yamuna, vrndavana, kanha krsna, gopi-gana,
sei sukha bhanga karaila!”
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at that time; more dhari’—picking Me up; maha-kolahala kari’'—
and making a great tumult; tumi-saba—all of you; ihan—here; lana aila—


--- Page 173 ---
172 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
brought; kanha—where; yamuna—the Yamuna River; vrndavana—Vrndavana;
kanha—where; krsna—Krsna; gopi-gana—the gopis; sei sukha—that happiness;
bharga karaila—you have broken.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Suddenly, all of you created a great tumult and picked Me up and brought
Me back here. Where now is the River Yamuna? Where is Vrndavana? Where
are Krsna and the gopis? You have broken My happy dream!’’
TEXT 110
এতেক কহিতে প্রভুর কেবল “বাহৃ” হৈল |
স্বকূপ-গোসাঞ্িরে দেখি” তাহারে পুছিল ॥ ১১০ ॥
eteka kahite prabhura kevala ‘bahya’ haila
svarapa-gosanire dekhi’ tanhare puchila
SYNONYMS
eteka—this; kahite—while speaking; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kevala—only; bahya—external consciousness; haila—there was; svardpa-
gosanire—Svarapa Gosani; dekhi’—seeing; tanhare puchila—He asked him.
TRANSLATION
Speaking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fully returned to external
consciousness. Seeing Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, the Lord questioned him.
TEXT 111
“ইহ কেনে তোমরা আমারে লঞা আইলা ?'
স্বক্ূপ-গোসাঞিি তবে কহিতে लोजिन्‌। ॥ ১১১ ॥
‘ihan kene tomara amare lana aila?’
svarapa-gosani tabe kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
ihan—here; kene—why; tomara—you; amare—Me; lana aila—have brought;
svarapa-gosani—Svarapa Damodara 0০531; tabe—at that time; kahite lagila—
began to speak.
TRANSLATION
“Why have you brought Me here?” He asked. Then Svarapa Damodara
answered Him.


--- Page 174 ---
Text 114] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 173
TEXT 112
“যমুনার व्वटम তুমি সমুদ্রে পড়িলা |
সমুদ্রের SIH আসি, এত দূর আইলা ! ১১২ ॥
“yamundra bhrame tumi samudre padila
samudrera tarange asi, eta dara aila!
SYNONYMS
yamunara bhrame—in mistaking for the Yamuna; tumi—You; samudre—in the
sea; padila—fell; samudrera tararige—by the waves of the sea; asi—coming;
eta—this; dara—far; aila—You have come.
TRANSLATION
‘You mistook the sea for the Yamuna River,’ he said, “and You jumped into
it. You have been carried this far by the waves of the sea.
TEXT 113
এই जानिम्ना জালে করি” তোমা উঠাইল |
তোমার পরশে এই প্রেমে মত্ত হুইল ॥ ১১৩ ॥
ei jaliya jale kari’ toma uthaila
tomara parase ei preme matta ha-ila
SYNONYMS
ei jaliya—this fisherman; jale—in the net; kari’—catching; toma—You;
uthaila—rescued from the water; tomara parase—by Your touch; ei—this man;
preme—in ecstatic love; matta ha-ila—became maddened.
TRANSLATION
“This fisherman caught You in his net and rescued You from the water. Be-
cause of Your touch, he is now mad with ecstatic love for Krsna.
TEXT 114
जव রাত্রি সবে বেড়াই তোমারে অস্বেষিয়। |
জালিয়ার মুখে खनि" পাইনু আসিয়া] ॥ ১১৪ ॥
saba ratri sabe bedai tomare anvesiya
jaliyara mukhe Suni’ painu asiya


--- Page 175 ---
174 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
saba ratri—the whole night; sabe —all of us; bedai—walked; tomare—You; an-
vesiya—searching for; jaliyara mukhe —from the mouth of this fisherman; suni’—
hearing; painu—we found; dsiya—coming.
TRANSLATION
“Throughout the night, we all walked about in search of You. After hearing
from this fisherman, we came here and found You.
TEXT 115
তুমি মূচছ।-ছলে বৃন্দাবনে দেখ ক্রীড়া |
তোমার PEI দেখি” সবে মনে পাই Aol ॥ ১১৫ ॥
tumi marccha-chale vrndavane dekha krida
tomara marccha dekhi’ sabe mane pai pida
SYNONYMS
tumi—You; marccha-chale—pretending to be unconscious; vrndavane —at
Vindavana; dekha—see; kridi—the pastimes; tomara marccha dekhi’—seeing
Your unconsciousness; sabe—all of us; mane—in the mind; pai—get; pida—
agony.
TRANSLATION
“While apparently unconscious, You witnessed the pastimes in Vrndavana,
but when we saw You unconscious, we suffered great agony in our minds.
TEXT 116
ইতে তোমার "स्थता হই
কৃষ্ণনাম লইতে তোমার “অধবাহৃ” হুইল |
তাতে যে প্রলাপ বৈলা, তাহা যে শুনিল ॥” ১১৬ ॥
krsna-nama la-ite tomara ‘ardha-bahya’ ha-ila
tate ye pralapa kaila, taha ye sunila”
SYNONYMS
krspa-nama la-ite—chanting the holy name of Krsna; tomara—Your; ardha-
bahya—half-consciousness; ha-ila—there was; tate—thereafter; ye —whatever;
pralapa—crazy talks; kailai—You did; taha—that; ye —which; sunila—have heard.


--- Page 176 ---
Text 118] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 175
TRANSLATION
“When we chanted the holy name of Krsna, however, You came to semi-
consciousness, and we have all been hearing You speak like a madman.”
TEXT 117
প্রভু कटक, “স্বপ্নে দেখি” গেলাঙ বৃন্দাবনে |
দেখি, কৃষ্ণ রাস করেন গোপীগণ-সনে ॥ ১১৭ ॥
prabhu kahe,— “svapne dekhi’ gelana vrndavane
dekhi,——krsna rasa karena gopigana-sane
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —$rT Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; svapne dekhi’—dreaming; gelana
vrndavane —| went to Vindavana; dekhi—I see; krsna—Lord Krsna; rasa karena—
performs the rasa dance; gopi-gana-sane —with the gopis.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “In My dream | went to Vrndavana, where |
saw Lord Krsna perform the rasa dance with all the gopis.
TEXT 118
कनो] করি” কৈলা वच्-८राकटन |
দেখি” আমি প্রলাপ टेकलु- (ङ्न লয় মনে ॥১১৮+৭
jala-krida kari’ kaila vanya-bhojane
dekhi’ ami pralapa kailun——hena laya mane”
SYNONYMS
jala-krida—sports in the water; kari’—performing; kaila—had; vanya-bho-
jane—a picnic; dekhi’—seeing; ami—I; praldpa kailun—talked crazily; hena—
such; laya—takes; mane —in My mind.
TRANSLATION
‘After sporting in the water, Krsna enjoyed a picnic. | can understand that
after seeing this, | must certainly have talked like a madman.”


--- Page 177 ---
176 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 119
তবে স্বক্মূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞি সারে छान করাঞা! ।
GLA লঞা ঘর আইল! আনন্দিত Zw] ॥ ১১৯ ॥
tabe svarapa-gosani tanre snana karana
prabhure lana ghara ila anandita hana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; svarapa-gosani—Svartpa Damodara Gosani; tanre—Him;
snana karana—causing to bathe; prabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; lana —
taking; ghara aila—came back to His house; dnandita hana—being very happy.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Svaripa Damodara Gosvami had Lord ওঃ Caitanya Mahaprabhu
bathe in the sea, and then he very happily brought Him back home.
TEXT 120
এই © কহিল্দু প্রভুর সমুদ্র-পতন |
ইহা যেই শুনে, পায় চৈতন্য-চরণ ॥ ১২০ ॥
ei ta’ kahilun prabhura samudra-patana
iha yei Sune, paya caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
ei ta’—thus; kahilun—! have described; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; samudra-patana—the falling into the sea; iha—this story; yei
Sune —anyone who hears; pdya—obtains; caitanya-carana—shelter at the lotus
feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Thus ॥ have described the incident of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
falling into the ocean. Anyone who listens to this pastime will certainly attain
shelter at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 121
Biot রঘুন।থ-পদে যার আশ |
চেতন্যচরিত। মৃত কহে FAIA ॥ ১২১ ॥


--- Page 178 ---
Text 121] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea 177
$ri-rapa-raghunatha pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritimrta; kahe—describes; krsnadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-lila,
Eighteenth Chapter, describing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s falling into the
water of the sea.


--- Page 179 ---
CHAPTER 19
The Inconceivable Behavior of
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
The following summary of Chapter Nineteen is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya.

Every year, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Jagadananda Pandita to visit His
mother in Navadvipa with gifts of cloth and prasada. After one such visit, Jagada-
nanda Pandita returned to Puri with a sonnet that Advaita Acarya had written.
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu read it, His ecstasy was so great that all the devo-
tees feared that the Lord would very soon pass away. The Lord's condition was so
serious that at night He would bruise and bloody His face by rubbing it against the
walls. To stop this, SvarGpa Damodara asked Sankara Pandita to stay at night in
the same room with the Lord. ॥

This chapter further describes how Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered the
Jagannatha-vallabha garden during the full-moon night of Vaisakha (April-May)
and experienced various transcendental ecstasies. Overwhelmed with ecstatic
love at suadenly seeing Lord Sri Krsna beneath an asoka tree, He exhibited various
symptoms of spiritual madness.

TEXT 1
বন্দে তং কৃষ্ণচৈতদ্তং মাতৃভক্তশিরোমণিম্‌ |
প্রলপ্তত মুখসংখযী মধুত্যানে ললাস सः ॥ > ॥
vande (2/7 krsna-caitanyarin
matr-bhakta-siromanim
pralapya mukha-sanigharsi
madhadyane lalasa yah
SYNONYMS

vande—I offer my respectful obeisances; tam—unto Him; krsna-caitanyam—
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; matr-bhakta—of great devotees of mothers;
siromanim—the crown jewel; pralapya—talking like a madman; mukha-

179


--- Page 180 ---
180 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
sangharsi—who used to rub His face; madhu-udyane —in the garden known as
Jagannatha-vallabha; lalasa—enjoyed; yah —who.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the most exalted of all devotees of mothers,
spoke like a madman and rubbed His face against the walls. Overwhelmed by
emotions of ecstatic love, He would sometimes enter the Jagannatha-vallabha
garden to perform His pastimes. | offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় Eos জয় निखनन्त |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya $/1-03113/77%3 jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; $ri-caitanya—to Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—to Nityananda Prabhu; jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to
Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Lord
Cauranga.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All
glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to all the devotees of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 3
এইমতে মহাপ্রভু কুষ্ণণ্রেমাবেশে |
উদ্মাদ-গ্রলাপ করে त्रोलि-क्रिवटज ॥ ৩ ॥
ei-mate mahaprabhu krspa-premavese
unmada-pralapa kare ratri-divase
SYNONYMS
ei-mate —in this way; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna-prema-
avese—in ecstatic emotional love of Krsna; unmada—madness; pralapa—and
crazy talk; kare—performs; ratri-divase —throughout the entire day and night.


--- Page 181 ---
Text 5] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 181
TRANSLATION
In the ecstasy of love of Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus behaved like a
madman, talking insanely all day and night.
TEXT 4
শ্রভুর অত্যন্ত প্রিয় পঞণ্ডিত-জগদানণজ্দ |
ষাহার एब्रिट প্রভু পায়েন আনন্দ ॥ 8 ॥
prabhura atyanta priya pandita-jagadananda
yahara caritre prabhu payena ananda
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; atyanta—very; priya—affectionate;
pandita-jagadananda—)agadananda Pandita; yahara caritre —in whose activities;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; payena—gets; ananda—great pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Jagadananda Pandita was a very dear devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
The Lord derived great pleasure from his activities.
TEXT 5
প্রতিবৎসর প্রভু ভারে পাঠান নদীয়াতে |
বিচ্ছেদ-তুঃখিতা। जानिः জননী আশ্বাসিতে ॥ ৫ ॥
prati-vatsara prabhu tanre pathana nadiyate
viccheda-duhkhita jani’ janani asvasite
SYNONYMS
prati-vatsara—every year; prabhu—S$r Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre—him;
pathana—sends; nadiyate —to Navadvipa; viccheda-duhkhita jani’—knowing her
affliction due to separation; janani—His mother; asvasite—to console.
TRANSLATION
Knowing His mother to be greatly afflicted by separation, the Lord would
send Jagadananda Pandita to Navadvipa every year to console her.


--- Page 182 ---
182 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 6
“নদীয়া চলহু, মাতারে কহিহ নমন্কার ।
আমার নামে गफ ধরিহ ভাহার ॥ ৬ ॥
“nadiya calaha, matare kahiha namaskara
amara name pada-padma dhariha tanhara
SYNONYMS
nadiya calaha—start for Nadia; matare—unto My mother; kahiha—tell;
namaskara—My obeisances; amara name —in My name; pada-padma—the lotus
feet; dhariha—catch; tanhara—her.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Jagadananda Pandita, ‘Go to Nadia and offer
My obeisances to My mother. Touch her lotus feet in My name.
TEXT 7
কহিহু তঁহারে- “তুমি করহ স্মরণ |
নিত্য আসি” আমি তোমার বন্দিয়ে চরণ ॥ ৭ ॥
kahiha tanhare—‘tumi karaha smarana
nitya asi’ ami tomara vandiye carana
SYNONYMS
kahiha tanhare —inform her; tumi karaha smarana—please remember; nitya
asi’—coming daily; ami—I; tomara—your; vandiye carana—offer respect to the
lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
“Tell her for Me, ‘Please remember that | come here every day and offer My
respects to your lotus feet.
TEXT 8
যে-দিনে তোমার Boal করাইতে ভোজন |
সে-দিনে আসি” অবশ্য করিয়ে ভক্ষণ ॥ ৮ ॥
ye-dine tomara iccha karaite bhojana
se-dine asi’ avasya kariye bhaksana


--- Page 183 ---
Text 10] The Lord’s inconceivable Behavior 183
SYNONYMS
ye-dine—any day; tomara—your; iccha—desire; karaite bhojana—to feed Me;
se-dine—on that day; asi’—coming; avasya—certainly; kariye bhaksana—I eat.
TRANSLATION
‘Any day you desire to feed Me, | certainly come and accept what you
offer.
TEXT 9
তোমার সেবা ছাড়ি” আমি कच्चिद সল্ল্যাস।
“বাউল” mel আমি exe ধর্মমাশ ॥ > ॥
tomara seva chadi’ ami karilun sannyasa
‘baula’ hana ami kailun dharma-nasa
SYNONYMS
tomara seva chadi’—giving up your service; ami—I; karilun—accepted; san-
nyasa—the renounced order of life; 65412 hana—becoming mad; ami—I;
kailun—did; dharma-nasa—destruction of religion.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘I have given up service to you and have accepted the vow of sannyasa. |
have thus become mad and have destroyed the principles of religion.
TEXT 10
এই অপরাধ তুমি ना লইহ আমার |
তোমার অধীন আমি- পুত্র সে তোমার do ॥
ei aparadha tumi na la-iha amara
tomara adhina ami——putra se tomara
SYNONYMS
ei aparadha—this offense; tumi—you; na—do not; la-iha—take; amara—of
Me; tomara—your; adhina—dependent; ami—I; putra—son; se—that; tomara—
of you.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Mother, please do not take this as an offense, for I, your son, am com-
pletely dependent upon you.


--- Page 184 ---
184 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 11
নীলাচলে আছি আমি তোমার আজ্ঞাতে |
যাবৎ জীব, তাবৎ আমি নারিব ছাড়িতে ॥ >> ॥
nilacale achi ami tomara ajinate
yavat jiba, tavat ami nariba chadite’
SYNONYMS
nilacale—)agannatha Purl, Nilacala; achi ami—I| am; tomdara ajaate—on the
basis of your order; yavat jiba—as long as | live; tavat—so long; ami—I; nariba—
shall not be able; chadite—to leave.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘1 am staying here at Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri, according to your order. As
long as I live, I shall not leave this place.” ^“
TEXT 12
গোপ-লীলায় পাইল৷ যেই প্রস।দ-বসনে |
মাতারে পাঠান তাহা পুণ্রীর বচনে ॥ ১২ ॥
gopa-lilaya paila yei prasada-vasane
madtare pathana taha purira vacane
SYNONYMS
gopa-lilaya—in His pastimes as a cowherd boy; paila—got; yei—whatever;
prasada—remnant; vasane —clothing; matare—unto His mother; pathana—sent;
taha—that; purira vacane—on the order of Paramananda Puri.
TRANSLATION
Following the order of Paramananda Puri, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent His
mother the prasada clothing left by Lord Jagannatha after His pastimes as a
cowherd boy.
TEXT 13
জগন্নাথের উত্তম প্রসাদ खां निञ्न। যতনে।
মাতাতে HAF পাঠান, আর ভক্তগণে ॥ ১৩ ॥
jagannathera uttama prasada aniya yatane
matare prthak pathana, ara bhakta-gane


--- Page 185 ---
Text 15] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 185
SYNONYMS
jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; uttama—first class; prasada—remnants of
food; aniya yatane—bringing very carefully; matare—unto His mother; prthak —
separately; pathana—sends; ara bhakta-gane—and to the other devotees.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very carefully brought first-class prasada from
Lord Jagannatha and sent it in separate packages to His mother and the devo-
tees at Nadia.
TEXT 14
মাতৃভ্ক্তগণের প্রভু হন শিরোমণি |
সন্ন্যাস HFN সদ! সেবেন জননী ॥ ১৪ ॥
matr-bhakta-ganera prabhu hana siromani
sannyasa kariya sada sevena janani
SYNONYMS
matr-bhakta-ganera—of the devotees of mothers; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hana—is; siromani—the topmost jewel; sannydsa kariya—even
after taking the sannyasa order; sada—always; sevena—renders service; janani—
to His mother.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the topmost gem of all devotees of mothers. He
rendered service to His mother even after He had accepted the vow of san-
nyasa.
TEXT 15
Fatwa নদীয়। গিয়। মাতারে মিলিলা।
প্রভুর যত নিবেদন, সকল কহিল ॥ ১৫ ॥
jagadananda nadiya giya matare milila
prabhura yata nivedana, sakala kahila
SYNONYMS
jagadananda—Jagadananda; nadiya—to Navadvipa; giya—going; matare—
mother Saci; milila—met; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; = कद्व
nivedana—all kinds of salutations; sakala—everything; kahila—he told.


--- Page 186 ---
186 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Jagadananda Pandita thus returned to Nadia, and when he met Sacimata, he
conveyed to her all the Lord's salutations.
TEXT 16
আচার্যাদি ভক্তগণে মিলিলা প্রসাদ fami)
মাতা-ঠাঞ্ি Siw लशेल। মাসেক রহিয়। ॥ ১৬ ॥
acaryadi bhakta-gane milila prasada diya
mata-thani ajna la-ila maseka rahiya
SYNONYMS
dcarya-adi—beginning with Advaita Acarya; bhakta-gane—all the devotees;
milila—he met; prasada diya—delivering the prasada of Lord Jagannatha; mata-
thani—from mother Sact; 4jAa la-ila—took permission to leave; maseka rahiya—
remaining for one month.
TRANSLATION
He then met all the other devotees, headed by Advaita Acarya, and gave
them the prasada of Jagannatha. After staying for one month, he took permis-
sion from mother Saci to leave.
TEXT 17
আচার্যেের $ 5 fami আজ্ঞা मोनिल। |
আচার্য-গোসাঞ্চি প্রভুরে সম্দেশ কহিল। ॥ ১৭ ॥
acaryera thani giya 3155 magila
acarya-gosani prabhure sandesa kahila
SYNONYMS
acaryera thani—to Advaita Acarya; giya—going; 3175 magila—begged for per-
mission to leave; dcadrya-gosani—Advaita Acarya; prabhure—unto Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sandesa kahila—sent a message.
TRANSLATION
When he went to Advaita Acarya and also asked His permission to return,
Advaita Prabhu gave him a message to deliver to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 187 ---
Text 20] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 187
TEXT 18
তরজা-প্রহেলী আচার্য কহেন ঠারে-ঠোরে |
প্রভু মাত্র বুঝেন, কেহ বুঝিতে না পারে ॥ ১৮ ॥
taraja-praheli acarya kahena thare-thore
prabhu matra bujhena, keha bujhite na pare
SYNONYMS
taraja-praheli—a sonnet in equivocal language; dcarya—Advaita Acarya;
kahena—spoke; thare-thore—making some indications; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; matra—only; bujhena—could understand; keha bujhite na pare—
others could not understand.
TRANSLATION
Advaita Acarya had written a sonnet in equivocal language with an import
that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could understand but others could not.
TEXT 19
“প্রভুরে কহিহ আমার কোটি नमच्छान्न ।
এই নিবেদন ভার চরণে আমার ॥ ১৯ ॥
“prabhure kahiha amara koti namaskara
ei nivedana tanra carane amara
SYNONYMS
prabhure kahiha—just inform Lord Caitanya; amara—My; koti namaskara—
hundreds and thousands of obeisances; ei nivedana—this is the submission;
tanra—His; carane—unto the lotus feet; amara—My.
TRANSLATION
In His sonnet, Advaita Prabhu first offered His obeisances hundreds and
thousands of times unto the lotus feet of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He
then submitted the following statement at His lotus feet.
TEXT 20
বাউলকে fee, — (नाक হইল বাউল ।
বাউলকে কহিহ,- হাটে না বিকায় চাউল ॥ २० ॥


--- Page 188 ---
188 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
baulake kahiha,—Iloka ha-ila baula
baulake kahiha,— hate na vikaya caula
SYNONYMS
baulake kahiha—please inform Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is playing the
part of a madman in ecstatic love; loka—the people in general; ha-ila—have be-
come; baula—also mad in ecstatic love; baulake kahiha—again inform Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the baula; hate—in the market; na—not; vikaya—sells;
caula—rice.
TRANSLATION
“Please inform Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is acting like a madman, that
everyone here has become mad like Him. Inform Him also that in the
marketplace, rice is no longer in demand.
TEXT 21
বাউলকে কহিহ,- कोटय নাহিক আউল |
বাউলকে কহিহ,-_ ইহ কহিয়াছে বাউল ॥” ২১ ॥
baulake kahiha,— kaye nahika aula
baulake kahiha, —iha kahiyache baula”
SYNONYMS
baulake kahiha—again inform the baula, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaye—in
business; nahika—there is not; dula—persons who have become mad in ecstatic
love; baulake kahiha—again inform the baula, ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 105 --
this; kahiyache—has spoken; baula—another madman, Sri Advaita Prabhu
Himself.
TRANSLATION
“Those now mad in ecstatic love are no longer interested in the material
world. Tell Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that Advaita Prabhu, who has also be-
come a madman in ecstatic love, has spoken these words.’
TEXT 22
এত नि, জগদানন্দ হাসিতে wife |
নীলাচলে আসি” তবে প্রভুরে কহিল। ॥ ২২ ॥
eta suni’ jagadananda hasite lagila
nilacale asi’ tabe prabhure kahila


--- Page 189 ---
Text 24] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 189
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; jagadananda—J)agadananda Pandita; hasite lagila—
began to laugh; nilicale—to Jagannatha Puri; asi’—returning; tabe—then;
prabhure kahila—he told all this to ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
When he heard Advaita Acarya’s statement, Jagadananda Pandita began to
laugh, and when he returned to Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala, he informed
Caitanya Mahaprabhu of everything.
TEXT 23
তরজ। শুনি” মহাপ্রভু लेसर ङोनिल)।
ডোর যেই साखा" বলি” মৌন ধরিল। ॥ ২৩ ॥
taraja suni’ mahaprabhu 1530 hasila
‘tanra yei ajna’——bali’ mauna dharila
SYNONYMS
taraja suni’—hearing the sonnet; mahaprabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 752८
hasila—quietly smiled; tanra yei ajia—that is His order; bali’—saying; mauna
dharila—became silent. :
TRANSLATION
After hearing the equivocal sonnet by Advaita Acarya, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu quietly smiled. ‘That is His order, ^“ He said. Then He fell silent.
TEXT 24
জানিয়াও স্বরূপ গোসাঞ প্রভুরে পুছিল।
এই তরজার wef বুঝিতে [AFA ॥ ২৪ ॥
janiyao svarGpa gosani prabhure puchila
‘ei tarajara artha bujhite narila’
SYNONYMS
janiyao—although knowing; svarGpa gosani—Svaripa Damodara Gosvami;
prabhure puchila—inquired from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei tarajara artha—the
meaning of this sonnet; bujhite—to understand; narila—I was not able.


--- Page 190 ---
190 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Antya-lild, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Although he knew the secret, Svaripa Damodara Gosvami inquired from
the Lord, “What is the meaning of this sonnet? ॥ could not understand it.”
TEXT 25
প্রভু কহেন,- “আচার্য হয় পূজক জ্বল |
আপম-শাস্ত্রের বিধি-বিধানে কুশল ॥ ২৫ ॥
prabhu kahena,—‘acarya haya pajaka prabala
agama-sastrera vidhi-vidhane kusala
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; dcarya haya pajaka prabala—
Advaita Acarya is a great worshiper; agama-sastrera—of the Vedic literature;
vidhi-vidhane kusala—very expert in the regulative principles.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, ‘Advaita Acarya is a great worshiper of
the Lord and is very expert in the regulative principles enjoined in the Vedic
literatures.
TEXT 26
উপাসনা লাগি” দেবের করেন खावांङ्न |
পূজ। লাগি” কত কাল করেন নিরোধন ॥ ২৬ ॥
upasana lagi’ devera karena avahana
paja lagi’ kata kala karena nirodhana
SYNONYMS
upasana lagi’—for worshiping the Deity; devera—of the Lord; karena
avahana—invites to come; puja lagi’—to perform the worship; kata kala—for
some time; karena nirodhana—He keeps the Deity.
TRANSLATION
‘Advaita Acarya invites the Lord to come and be worshiped, and to perform
the worship He keeps the Deity for some time.


--- Page 191 ---
Text 29] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 191
TEXT 27
পুজা-লির্বাহণ হৈলে পাছে করেন বিসর্জন |
তরজার লা জানি অর্থ, কিবা সার মল ॥ ২৭ ॥
paja-nirvahana haile pache karena visarjana
tarajara na jani artha, kiba {7/2 mana
SYNONYMS
paja-nirvahana—finishing of the worship; haile—when there is; pache—at
last; karena visarjana—sends back the Deity; tarajara—of the sonnet; na jani—I
do not know; artha—the meaning; kiba tarnra mana—what is in His mind.
TRANSLATION
‘‘ After the worship is completed, He sends the Deity somewhere else. | do
not know the meaning of this sonnet, nor do | know what is in Advaita
Prabhu’s mind.
TEXT 28
মহাযো গেশ্বর আচার্খথ_ তরজাতে সমর্থ |
আমিহ বুঝিতে নারি তরজার অর্থ ॥” ২৮- ॥
maha-yogesvara acarya——tarajate samartha
amiha bujhite nari tarajara artha’
SYNONYMS
maha-yogesvara—the greatest mystic; dcarya—Advaita Acarya; tarajate
samartha—very expert in writing sonnets; amiha—and yet |; bujhite —to under-
stand; nari—am not able; tarajara—of the sonnet; artha—the meaning.
TRANSLATION
Advaita Acarya is a great mystic. No one can understand Him. He is expert
in writing sonnets that even | Myself cannot understand.”
TEXT 29
শুনিয়া বিস্মিত 28a जव ভক্তগণ।
ऋक्रश-८9)1 ज) यञ কিছু হইল fama ॥ ২৯ ॥


--- Page 192 ---
192 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
Suniya vismita ha-ila saba bhakta-gana
svartipa-gosani kichu ha-ila vimana
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing; vismita—astonished; ha-ila—became; saba—all; bhakta-
gana—the devotees; svardpa-gosani—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; kichu—
somewhat; ha-ila—became; vimana—morose.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, all the devotees were astonished, especially Svarupa
Damodara, who became somewhat morose.
TEXT 30
সেই जिन হৈতে প্রভুর আর দশা হইল |
কৃষ্ণের বিচ্ছেদ-দশ। দ্বিগুণ বাড়িল ॥ ৩০ ॥
sei dina haite prabhura ara dasa ha-ila
krsnera viccheda-dasa dviguna badila
SYNONYMS
sei dine haite—from that day on; prabhura—of তা Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dra—another; dasa—condition; ha-ila—there was; krspera—from Lord Krsna;
viccheda-dasa—the condition of separation; dvi-guna—twice; badila—in-
creased.
TRANSLATION
From that day on, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s emotional state changed
markedly; His feelings of separation from Krsna doubled in intensity.
TEXT 31
উদ্মাদ-প্রলাপ-চেষ্টা করে রাত্রি-দিনে |
রাধা-ভাবাবেশে বিরিহ বাড়ে অনুষক্ষণে ॥ <> ॥
unmada-pralapa-cesta kare ratri-dine
radha-bhavavese viraha bade anuksane
SYNONYMS
unmada—madness; praldpa—craziness; cesta—activities; kare ratri-dine —He
performed day and night; radha-bhava-avese —in the ecstatic emotion of Srimati
Radharani; viraha—separation; bade —increases; anuksane —every moment.


--- Page 193 ---
Text 33] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 193
TRANSLATION
As His feelings of separation in the ecstasy of Srimati Radharani increased at
every moment, the Lord’s activities, both day and night, were now wild, in-
sane performances.
TEXT 32
আচনম্বিতে স্ফুরে কৃষ্ণের মথুর।-গমন |
উদ্ঘূর্ণা-্দশ। হৈল উন্মাদ-লক্ষণ ॥ ৩২ ॥
adcambite sphure krsnera mathura-gamana
udgharna-dasa haila unmada-laksana
SYNONYMS
acambite—suddenly; sphure—there awoke; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; mathura-
gamana—the departure for Mathura; udgharna-dasa—the ecstatic condition
known as udghdrna; haila—there was; unmada-laksana—the symptom of mad-
ness.
TRANSLATION
Suddenly there awoke within Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the scene of Lord
Krsna’s departure to Mathura, and He began exhibiting the symptom of
ecstatic madness known as (1087 01103.
TEXT 33
রামানন্দের গলা ধরি” করেন ত্রলাপন ।
স্বরূপে পুছেন মানি” নিজ-সখীগণ ॥ ৩৩ ॥
ramanandera gala dhari’ karena pralapana
svarape puchena mani’ nija-sakhi-gana
SYNONYMS
ramanandera—of Ramananda Raya; gala dhari’—holding the neck; karena
pralapana—begins talking like a crazy man; svarape puchena—inquired from
5৬৪03 Damodara; mani’—accepting; nija-sakhi-gana—as a gopi friend.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like a madman, holding Ramananda Raya
by the neck, and He questioned Svaripa Damodara, thinking him to be His
gopi friend.


--- Page 194 ---
194 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 34
পূর্বে যেন বিশাখারে রাধিক। পুছিল৷ |
সেই শ্লোক পড়ি” প্রলাপ করিতে লাগিল ॥ ৩৪ ॥
puarve yena visakhare radhika puchila
sei sloka padi’ pralapa karite lagila
SYNONYMS
parve—formerly; yena—as; visakhare—unto Visakha; radhika —Srimati
Radharani; puchila—inquired; sei sloka—that verse; padi’—reading; pralapa—
talking like a crazy man; karite lagila—began to do.
TRANSLATION
Just as Srimati Radharani inquired from Her personal friend Visakha, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, reading that very verse, began speaking like a
madman.
TEXT 35
ক্ব নন্দকুলচন্দ্রমাঃক্ক শিখিচন্দ্রকালঙ্কৃতিঃ
क মন্দ্রমূরণীরবঃ F হ হুরেন্দ্রনীলদু্যুতিঃ।
রব রাসরসতাগুবী क मयि জীবরক্ষৌষখি-
নিধির্মম সহুহৃত্তমঃ क वर হস্ত হা विशि।दम्‌ ॥ ৩৫ ॥
1:৮৪ nanda-kula-candramah kva sikhi-candrakalarnkrtih
kva mandra-murali-ravah kva nu surendra-nila-dyutih
kva rasa-rasa-tandavi kva sakhi jiva-raksausadhir
nidhir mama suhrttamah kva bata hanta ha dhig-vidhim
SYNONYMS
kva—where; nanda-kula-candramah —Krsna, who has arisen like the moon in
the ocean of the dynasty of Nanda Maharaja; kva—where; sikhi-candraka-
alankrtih —Krsna, whose head is decorated with a peacock feather; kva—where;
mandra-murali-ravah—Krsna, whose flute produces a deep sound; kva—where;
nu—certainly; surendra-nila-dyutih—Krsna, whose bodily luster is like the jewel
called indranila; kva—where; rasa-rasa-tandavi—Krsna, who is expert in dancing
in the rasa dance; kva—where; sakhi—O My dear friend; jiva-raksa-ausadhih—
Krsna, who is the medicine that can save one’s life; nidhih—treasure; mama—
My; suhrt-tamah —best of friends; kva—where; bata—| am so sorry; hanta—alas;
ha—oh; dhik-vidhim—condemnation to Vidhi, the maker of my destiny.


--- Page 195 ---
Text 36] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 195
TRANSLATION

‘“‘My dear friend, where is Krsna, who is like the moon rising from the
ocean of Maharaja Nanda’s dynasty? Where is Krsna, His head decorated with
a peacock feather? Where is He? Where is Krsna, whose flute produces such a
deep sound? Oh, where is Krsna, whose bodily luster is like the luster of the
blue indranila jewel? Where is Krsna, who is so expert in rasa dancing? Oh,
where is He who can save My life? Kindly tell Me where to find Krsna, the
treasure of My life and best of My friends. Feeling separation from Him, 1
hereby condemn Providence, the shaper of My destiny.’

PURPORT
This verse is found in the Lalita-madhava (3.25) of Srila Rapa Gosvami.
TEXT 36
“ব্রজেন্দ্র কুল FG কৃষ্ণ তাহে পূর্ণ ইন্দু,
জঙ্গি” কৈল। জগৎ Beer |
কান্ত্যমৃত যেবা Pe, নিরন্তর পিয়৷ জিয়ে,
বত্রজ-জনের নয়ন-চকোর ॥ ৩৬ ॥
“vrajendra-kula— dugdha-sindhu, krsna tahe parna indu,
janmi’ kaila jagat ujora
kanty-amrta yeba piye, nirantara piya jiye,
vraja-janera nayana-cakora
SYNONYMS

vrajendra-kula—the dynasty of Maharaja Nanda in Vrajabhami; dugdha-
sindhu—like the ocean of milk; krsna—Lord Krsna; tahe—in that; parna—full;
indu—moon; janmi’—arising; kaila—has made; jagat—the whole world; ujora—
illuminated; kanti-amrta—the nectar of His bodily luster; yeba piye —anyone who
drinks; nirantara—always; piya—drinking; jiye —sustains life; vraja-janera—of the
inhabitants of Vrndavana; nayana-cakora—eyes that are like cakora birds.

TRANSLATION

‘The family of Maharaja Nanda is just like an ocean of milk, wherein Lord
Krsna has arisen like the full moon to illuminate the entire universe. The eyes
of the residents of Vraja are like cakora birds that continuously drink the nec-
tar of His bodily luster and thus live peacefully.


--- Page 196 ---
196 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 37
সখি হে, কোথা FF, করাহ দরশন |
ক্ষণেকে যাহার মুখ, না দেখিলে ফাটে বুক,
শীঘ্র দেখাহ, না ACT জীবন ॥ ৩৭ ॥ ऋ ॥
sakhi he, kotha krsna, karaha darasana
ksaneke yahara mukha, na dekhile phate buka,
$ighra dekhaha, na rahe jivana
SYNONYMS
sakhi he—O My dear friend; kotha krspa—where is Lord Krsna; karaha
darasana—please let Me see Him; ksaneke—within a moment; yahara—whose;
mukha—face; na dekhile—if not seeing; phate buka—My heart is breaking;
Sighra—quickly; dekhaha—show; na rahe jivana—My life is expiring.
TRANSLATION
‘“My dear friend, where is Krsna? Kindly let Me see Him. My heart breaks at
not seeing His face even for a moment. Kindly show Him to Me immediately;
otherwise | cannot live.
TEXT 38
এই তব্রজের রমণী, কামার্কতপ্ত-কুমুদিনী,
নিজ-করামৃত gal দান |
«FHS করে যেই, कर्‌] মোর চন্দ্র সেই,
দেখাহ, সখি, রাখ মোর सथान ॥ ৩৮ ॥
ei vrajera ramani, kamarka-tapta-kumudini,
nija-karamrta diya dana
praphullita kare yei, kahan mora candra sei,
dekhaha, sakhi, rakha mora prana
SYNONYMS
ei—these; vrajera ramani—women of Vrndavana; kama-arka-tapta-
kumudini—exactly like lilies becoming very hot in the sun of lusty desire; nija—
own; kara-amrta—nectar of hands; diya—giving; dana—charity; praphullita—
jubilant; kare—makes; yei—one who; kahan—where; mora—My; candra—
moon; sei—that; dekhaha—please show; sakhi—O My dear friend; rakha—
please save; mora prana—My life.


--- Page 197 ---
Text 40] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 197
TRANSLATION
“The women of Vrndavana are just like lilies growing hot in the sun of lusty
desires. But moonlike Krsna makes them all jubilant by bestowing upon them
the nectar of His hands. O My dear friend, where is My moon now? Save My
life by showing Him to Me!
TEXT 39
+1& সে চুড়ার ঠাম, শিখিপিথ্ছের উড়ান,
নব-মেথ্ে যেন BEY, |
পীতাত্বর--তড়িদ্ত্যুতি, মুক্তামাল।-বকপী তি,
নবান্দুদ্র জিনি” आग्‌ ॥ ৩৯ ॥
kahan se cadara thama, Sikhi-pifichera udana,
nava-meghe yena indra-dhanu
pitambara—tadid-dyuti, mukta-mala— baka-panti,
navambuda jini’ Syama-tanu
SYNONYMS
kahan—where; se —that; cidara thama—beauty of the helmet; sSikhi-pirichera
udana—upon which there is a peacock feather; nava-meghe—in a new cloud;
yena—ijust like; indra-dhanu—the rainbow; pita-ambara—yellow garments;
tadit-dyuti —like the illumination of lightning; mukta-mala—pearl necklace; baka-
panti—like rows of ducks; nava-ambuda—a new rain cloud; jini’—conquering;
Syama-tanu—the blackish body.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear friend, where is that beautiful helmet with a peacock feather upon
it like a rainbow upon a new cloud? Where are those yellow garments, shining
like lightning? And where is that necklace of pearls that resemble flocks of
ducks flying in the sky? The blackish body of Krsna triumphs over the new
blackish rain cloud.
TEXT 40
একবার যার নয়নে লাগে, AT তার ECR জাগে,
FURST যেন আম্ম-আঠা।
নারী-মনে পৈশে হায়, Tey নাহি বাহিরায়,
खर्‌ नट्‌, সেয়াকুলের क| ॥ ৪০ ॥


--- Page 198 ---
198 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
eka-bara yara nayane lage, sada tara hrdaye jage,
krspa-tanu——yena amra-atha
nari-mane paise haya, yatne nahi bahiraya,
tanu nahe, ——seya-kulera karnta
SYNONYMS

eka-bara—once; yara—whose; nayane—eyes; lage —capture; sada —always;
tara—his; hrdaye—in the heart; jage —remains prominent; krsna-tanu—the body
of Krsna; yena—like; amra-atha—the sap of the mango tree; nari-mane—in the
minds of women; paise —enters; haya—alas; yatne—even with great endeavor;
nahi—does not; bahiraya—come out; tanu nahe —is not an ordinary body; seya-
kulera karnta—it is like the thorn of the seya berry tree.
TRANSLATION
“If a person’s eyes even once capture that beautiful body of Krsna's, it
remains always prominent within his heart. Krsna’s body resembles the sap of
the mango tree, for when it enters the minds of women, it will not come out,
despite great endeavor. Thus Krsna’s extraordinary body is like a thorn of the
seya berry tree.
TEXT 41
জিনিয়া তমালছুযুতি, ইন্দ্রলীল-সম কান্তি,
সে কান্তিতে জগৎ মাতায়।
শবঙ্গার-রস-সার ছানি” তাতে চন্দ্র-জ্যোৎস্ন। সানি,
জানি বিধি নিরমিলা তায় ॥ ৪১ ॥
jiniya tamala-dyuti, indranila-sama kanti,
se kantite jagat mataya
$rrigara-rasa-sara chani’, tate candra-jyotsna sani’,
jani vidhi niramila taya
SYNONYMS
jiniya—being victorious over; tamala-dyuti—the luster of the tamala tree; in-
dra-nila—the gem known as indranila; sama kanti—the luster like; se kantite —by
that luster; jagat mataya—the whole world becomes maddened; srrigara-rasa—of
the mellow of conjugal love; siara—essence; chani’—filtering; tate—in that;
candra-jyotsna—the illumination of the full moon; sani’—mixing; jani—I know;
vidhi—Providence; niramila—made very clear; taya—that.


--- Page 199 ---
Text 43] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 199
TRANSLATION
‘’Krsna’s bodily luster shines like the indranila gem and surpasses the luster
of the tamala tree. The luster of His body drives the entire world mad because
Providence has made it transparent by refining the essence of the mellow of
conjugal love and mixing it with moonshine.
TEXT 42
कार সে মুরলীধ্বনি, নবাজভ্র-গঞিত किनि,
জগৎ আকর্ষে শ্রবণে যাহার |
উঠি' ধায় ত্রজ-জন, তৃষিত চাভকগণ,
আসি” পিয়ে কান্ত;মৃত-ধার ॥ ৪২ ॥
kahan se murali-dhvani, navabhra-garjita jini’,
jagat akarse sravane yahara
0101 dhaya vraja-jana, trsita cataka-gana,
asi’ piye kanty-amrta-dhara
SYNONYMS
kahan—where; se—that; murali-dhvani—the vibration of the flute; nava-
abhra-garjita jini’—conquering the vibrations of new clouds; jagat—the whole
world; akarse—attracts; sravane—the hearing; yahara—whose; uthi’—standing
up; dhaya—run; vraja-jana—the inhabitants of Vrajabhami; trsita cataka-gana—
like lusty cataka birds; asi’—coming; piye—drink; kanti-amrta-dhara—the
showers of the nectar of Krsna’'s bodily luster.
TRANSLATION
‘The deep vibration of Krsna’s flute surpasses the thundering of new clouds
and attracts the aural reception of the entire world. Thus the inhabitants of
Vrndavana rise and pursue that sound, drinking the showering nectar of
Krsna’s bodily luster like thirsty catakabirds.
TEXT 43
ন্‌ [श
মোর সেই কলানিথে, প্রাণরক্ষা-মহোৌষধি,
সখি, মোর (dew NES |
দেহ জীয়ে Siw) বিনে, fig এই জীবমে,
বিধি করে এত विष्वन्‌ 1” ৪৩ ॥


--- Page 200 ---
200 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
mora sei kala-nidhi, prana-raksa-mahausadhi,
sakhi, mora tenho suhrttama
deha jiye tanha vine, dhik ei jivane,
vidhi kare eta vidambana!”’
SYNONYMS
mora—of Me; sei—that; kala-nidhi—reservoir of art and culture; prana-raksa-
maha-ausaudhi—the panacea for saving My life; sakhi—O My dear friend;
mora—My; tenho —He; suhrt-tama—the best of friends; deha jiye—My body
lives; tanha vine—without Him; dhik —condemnation; ei jivane—to this life;
vidhi—Providence; kare —does; eta vidambana—so much cheating.
TRANSLATION
“Krsna is the reservoir of art and culture, and He is the panacea that saves
My life. 0 My dear friend, since 1 live without Him, who is the best among My
friends, | condemn the duration of My life. | think that Providence has cheated
Me in many ways.
TEXT 44
*যষে-জন জীতে নাহি চায়, তারে কেনে জীয়ায়”,
বিধিপ্রতি উঠে (वकथना क ।
বিধিরে করে sew, কৃষ্ণে দেন ওলাহুন,
পড়ি” ভাগৰতের এক শ্লোক ॥ 88 ॥
‘ye-jana jite nahi caya, tare kene jiyaya’,
vidhi-prati uthe krodha-soka
vidhire kare bhartsana, krsne dena olahana,
padi’ bhagavatera eka sloka
SYNONYMS
ye-jana—that person who; jite—to live; nahi caya—does not want; tare—him;
kene—why; jiyaya—he makes life continue; vidhi-prati—towards Providence;
uthe—awakens; krodha-soka—anger and lamentation; vidhire—unto Provi-
dence; kare—does; bhartsana—chastisement; krspe—unto Lord Krsna; dena—
gives;  olahana—accusation;  padi’—reading;  bhagavatera—of  Srimad-
Bhagavatam; eka sloka —one verse.
TRANSLATION
“Why does Providence continue the life of one who does not wish to live?”
This thought aroused anger and lamentation. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then


--- Page 201 ---
Text 46] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 201
read a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam that chastises Providence and makes an
accusation against Krsna.
TEXT 45
অহো বিধাতস্তব न ক্বচিদ্দয়া
সংযোজ্য মৈত্র্যা প্রণয়েন দেহিনঃ |
তাংস্চাক্কতার্থান্‌ বিয়ুনজ্ক্যপাথকং
বিচেষ্টিতং তেহর্ভকচেষ্টিতং যথা॥ ৪৫ ॥
aho vidhatas tava na kvacid daya
sarnyojya maitrya pranayena dehinah
tams cakrtarthan viyunarksy aparthakarn
vicestitarn te ‘rbhaka-cestitam yatha
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; vidhatah—O Providence; tava—your; na—not; kvacit—at any
time; daya—mercy; samyojya—making connections; maitrya—by friendship;
pranayena—and by affection; dehinah —of the embodied souls; tan —them; ca—
and; akrta-arthan —without achievement; viyunariksi—you cause to happen;
aparthakam —separation; vicestitam—activities; te—your; arbhaka—of a boy;
cestitam—the childish play; yatha —like.
TRANSLATION
‘‘O Providence, you have no mercy! You bring embodied souls together
through friendship and affection, but before their desires are fulfilled, you
separate them. Your activities are like the foolish pranks of children.’
PURPORT
This verse, quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.39.19), was chanted by the
damsels of Vraja when Krsna left Vindavana for Mathura with Akrara and
Balarama. The gopis lamented that providence had made it possible for them to
meet Krsna and Balarama in affection and love and had then separated them.
TEXT 46
“না জানিস্‌ প্রেম-মর্ম, ব্যর্থ করিস্‌ পরিশ্রম,
তোর চেষ্টা _বালক-সমান |
“তোর यङि লাগ, পাইয়ে, তবে তোরে শিক্ষা দিয়ে,
এমন যেন না করিস বিধান ॥ ৪৬ ॥


--- Page 202 ---
202 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
“na janis prema-marma, vyartha karis parisrama,
tora cesta——balaka-samana
‘tora yadi lag paiye, tabe tore Siksa diye,
emana yena na karis vidhana
SYNONYMS
na janis—you do not know; prema-marma—the purport of loving affairs;
vyartha karis—you baffle; parisrama—all labor; tora cesta—your activities;
balaka-samana—like the childish activities of a boy; tora yadi lag paiye—if | get
the opportunity to meet you; tabe—then; tore—unto you; siksa diye —I shall
give some lessons; emana—like this; yena—so that; na karis vidhana—will not
make arrangements.
TRANSLATION
‘Providence, you do not know the purport of loving affairs, and therefore
you baffle all our endeavors. This is very childish of you. If we could catch
you, we would give you such a lesson that you would never again make such
arrangements.
TEXT 47
অরে বিধি, তুই বড়ই निर |
टचा তুলভ জন, প্রেমে कत्रा সম্মিলন,
“অকৃতার্থান কেনে করিস্‌ দুর ? ৪৭ ॥ গ্রু ॥
are vidhi, tui bada-i nithura
anyo ‘nya durlabha jana, preme karana sammilana,
‘akrtarthan’ kene karis dara?
SYNONYMS
are—oh; vidhi—Providence; tui—you; bada-i—very; nithura—cruel; anyo
‘nya—for one another; durlabha jana—persons rarely obtained; preme —in love;
karana sammilana—causing to meet together; akrta-arthan—unsuccessful;
kene—why; karis—you do; dara—far apart.
TRANSLATION
“Oh, cruel Providence! You are very unkind, for you bring together in love
people who are rarely in touch with each other. Then, after you have made
them meet but before they are fulfilled, you again spread them far apart.


--- Page 203 ---
Text 49] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 203
TEXT 48
অরে বিধি खकक्रन, দেখ।এঞা কৃষ্ণানন,
নেত্র-মন লোভাইল। মোর 1
ক্ষণেকে করিতে পান, কাড়ি” নিলা खच স্থান,
পাপ टेकनि “দত্ত-অপহার” ॥ ৪৮ ॥
are vidhi akaruna, dekhana krsnanana,
netra-mana lobhaila mora
ksaneke karite pana, kadi’ nila anya sthana
papa kaili ‘datta-apahara’
SYNONYMS
are—oh; vidhi—Providence; akaruna—most unkind; dekhana—showing;
krsna-anana—the beautiful face of Krsna; netra-mana—mind and eyes;
lobhaila—have made greedy; mora—My; ksaneke karite pana—drinking only for
a moment; kadi’ nila—took it away; anya sthana—to another place; papa kaili—
have performed a most sinful act; datta-apahara—taking back things given in
charity.
TRANSLATION
““O Providence, you are so unkind! You reveal the beautiful face of Krsna
and make the mind and eyes greedy, but after they have drunk that nectar for
only a moment, you whisk Krsna away to another place. This is a great sin be-
cause you thus take away what you have given as charity.
TEXT 49
“অত্র করে তোমার দোবষআমায় কেনে FACADE,
ইহা सक्ति কহ ‘GAGE |
তুই অত্র-মুতি ধরি”, কৃষ্ণ লিলি চুরি করি”,
অস্তের নহে এঁছে ব্যবহার ॥ ৪৯ ॥
‘akrara kare tomara dosa, amadaya kene kara rosa’,
iha yadi kaha ‘duracara’
tui akrara-marti dhari’, krsna nili curi kari’,
anyera nahe aiche vyavahara


--- Page 204 ---
204 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
akrara—Akrara; kare—does; tomara dosa—fault to you; amaya—unto me;
kene—why; kara—you do; rosa—anger; iha—this; yadi—if; kaha—you say;
duracara—O misbehaved (Providence); tui—you; akrara-marti dhari’—taking the
form of Akrara; krspa—Lord Krsna; nili—you have taken; curi kari’—stealing;
anyera—of others; nahe—there is not; aiche —this type of; vyavahara—behavior.
TRANSLATION
0 misbehaved Providence! If you reply to us, ‘Akrara is actually at fault;
why are you angry with me?’ then ॥ say to you, ‘Providence, you have taken
the form of Akrara and have stolen Krsna away. No one else would behave like
this.”
TEXT 50
আপনার কর্ম-দোষ, তোরে কিবা করি রোষ,
তোয়-মোয় সম্বদ্ধ বিদুর |
(ष আমার প্রাণনাথ, একত্র রহি যার সাথ,
সেই কৃষ্ণ হইল নিঠুর ! ৫০ ॥
apandra karma-dosa, tore kiba kari rosa,
toya-moya sambandha vidara
ye amadra prana-natha, ekatra rahi yanra satha,
sei krsna ha-ila nithura!
SYNONYMS
apanara karma-dosa—it is the result of My own fate; tore—unto you; kiba—
what; kari rosa—I give accusations; toya-moya—between you and Me; sam-
bandha—the relationship; vidira—very far; ye—the one who is; amara—My;
prana-natha—life and soul; ekatra—together; rahi—We remain; yanra satha—
with whom; sei krsna—that Krsna; ha-ila nithura—has become so cruel.
TRANSLATION
“But this is the fault of My own destiny. Why should | needlessly accuse
you? There is no intimate relationship between you and Me. Krsna, however,
is My life and soul. It is We who live together, and it is He who has become so
cruel.


--- Page 205 ---
Text 52] The Lord's Inconceivable Behavior 205
TEXT 51
जव जि, खञि যারে, সেই আপন-হাতে মারে,
নারীবধে কৃষ্ণের নাহি ভয় ।
তার লাগি” আমি মরি, উলটি” না চাহে হরি,
ক্ষণমাত্রে ভাঙ্গিল প্রণয় ॥ ৫১ ॥
saba tyaji’ bhaji yarre, sei apana-hate mare,
nari-vadhe krsnera nahi bhaya
tanra lagi’ ami mari, ulati’ nd cahe hari,
ksana-matre bhangila pranaya
SYNONYMS
saba tyaji’—leaving everything aside; bhaji yanre—the person whom | wor-
ship; sei—that person; apana-hate—by His own hand; mare —kills; nari-vadhe —
in killing one woman; krsnera—of Krsna; nahi bhaya—there is no fear; tanra
lagi’—for Him; ami mari—I die; ulati’—turning back; na cahe hari—Krsna does
not look; ksana-matre—within a moment; bhangila—has broken; pranaya—all
loving affairs.
TRANSLATION
‘He for whom | have left everything is personally killing Me with His own
hands. Krsna has no fear of killing women. Indeed, | am dying for Him, but He
doesn’t even turn back to look at Me. Within a moment, He has broken off our
loving affairs.
TEXT 52
কৃষ্ণে কেনে করি রোষ, আপন তুদৈৈবি-দোবষ,
পাকিল মোর এই পাপফল |
যে কৃষ্ণ মোর প্রেমাধীন, তারে কৈল উদ।সীন,
এই মোর অভাগ্য প্রবল ॥” ৫২ ॥
krsne kene kari rosa, apana durdaiva-dosa,
pakila mora ei papa-phala
ye krsna—— mora premadhina, tare kaila udasina,
ei mora abhagya prabala”
SYNONYMS
krsne—unto Krsna; kene—why; kari rosa—I am angry; apana—of My own;
durdaiva—of misfortune; dosa—fault; pakila—has ripened; mora—My; ei—this;


--- Page 206 ---
206 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
papa-phala—sinful reaction; ye—that; krspa—Krsna; mora—My; prema-
adhina—dependent on love; tare—Him; kaila—has made; udasina—indifferent;
ei mora—this is My; abhagya—misfortune; prabala—very strong.
TRANSLATION
‘Yet why should I be angry with Krsna? It is the fault of My own misfortune.
The fruit of my sinful activities has ripened, and therefore Krsna, who has al-
ways been dependent on My love, is now indifferent. This means that My
misfortune is very strong.”’
TEXT 53
এইমত (नौन्र-त गर, বিষাদে করে হায় হায়,
“হা ङा কৃষ্ণ, তুমি গেলা কতি ?”
(भोनोडोव হৃদয়ে, তার বাকে বিলাপয়্ে,
“গোবিন্দ দামোদর মাধবেতি” ॥ ৫৩ ॥
ei-mata gaura-raya, visade kare haya haya,
‘ha ha krsna, tumi gela kati?’
gopi-bhava hrdaye, tara vakye vilapaye,
‘govinda damodara madhaveti’
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; gaura-raya—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; visade —in
lamentation due to separation; kare haya haya—always says “alas, alas”; ha ha
krsna—oh, oh Krsna; tumi gela kati—where have You gone; gopi-bhava hrdaye —
with the ecstatic love of the gopis in His heart; tara vakye—in their words;
vilapaye—He laments; govinda damodara madhava—O Govinda, O Damodara,
O Madhava; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lamented in the mood of separation,
‘‘Alas, alas! O Krsna, where have You gone?’’ Feeling in His heart the ecstatic
emotions of the gopis, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu agonized in their words,
saying, ‘“O Govinda! © Damodara! O Madhava!”’
TEXT 54
তবে স্বক্মূপ-রামরায়, করি” নানা উপায়,
মহৃাসভুর করে আশ্ব৷সন ।


--- Page 207 ---
Text 55] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 207
গায়েন সঙ্গম-গীত, প্রভুর Fada চিত,
প্রভুর fog স্থির হৈল মন ॥ ৫৪ ॥
tabe svarapa-rama-raya, kari’ nana upaya,
mahaprabhura kare asvasana
gayena sangama-gita, prabhura phiraila cita,
prabhura kichu sthira haila mana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; svarapa-rama-raya—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami and Rama-
nanda Raya; kari’ 7373 updya—devising many means; mahaprabhura—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare asvasana—pacify; gayena—they sang; sangama-
gita—meeting songs; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; phiraila cita—
transformed the heart; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kichu—some-
what; sthira—peaceful; haila—became; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Svarapa Damodara and Ramananda Raya then devised various means to
pacify the Lord. They sang songs of meeting that transformed His heart and
made His mind peaceful.
TEXT 55
এইমত বিলপিতে অর্ধরাত্রি গেল ।
গম্ভীরাতে স্বরূপ-গোসা यञ প্রভুরে শোয়াইল nee ॥
ei-mata vilapite ardha-ratri gela
gambhirate svarapa-gosani prabhure soyaila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; vilapite—speaking in lamentation; ardha-ratri gela—half
the night passed; gambhirate—in the room known as the Gambhira; svarapa-
gosani—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; prabhure soydila—made the Lord lie down.
TRANSLATION
As Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lamented in this way, half the night passed.
Then Svariipa Damodara made the Lord lie down in the room known as the
Gambhira.


--- Page 208 ---
208 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 56
APTA শোয়াঞ। त्रामानन्त्‌ ET ঘরে |
স্বরূপ, গোবিন্দ শুইলা গন্ভীরার দ্বারে ॥ ৫৬ ॥
prabhure soyana ramananda gela ghare
svarapa, govinda suila gambhirara dvare
SYNONYMS
prabhure—Lord 57 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; soyana —making lie down; rama-
nanda—Ramananda Raya; gela ghare—returned to his home; svardpa—Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami; govinda—Govinda; suila—lay down; gambhirara dvare —at
the door of the Gambhira.
TRANSLATION
After the Lord was made to lie down, Ramananda Raya returned home, and
ऽवा प्य Damodara and Govinda lay down at the door of the Gambhira.
TEXT 57
প্রেমাবেশে মহাপ্রভুর গর-গর मन |
নামসঙন্ধীর্তন করি” করেন জাগরণ ॥ ৫৭ ॥
premavese mahaprabhura gara-gara mana
nama-sankirtana kari’ karena jagarana
SYNONYMS
prema-avese—in greatly ecstatic emotion; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; gara-gara mana—the mind was fully overwhelmed; nama-
sankirtana kari’—chanting the Hare Krsna mantra; karena—does; jagarana—
wakefulness.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed awake all night, chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra, His mind overwhelmed by spiritual ecstasy.
TEXT 58
বিরহে ব্যাকুল প্রভু উদ্বেগে छठिन। 1
শগম্ভীরার ভিত্ত্যে নুখ ঘষিতে नोगिल्‌। ॥ ৫৮ ॥
virahe vyakula prabhu udvege uthila
gambhirara bhittye mukha ghasite lagila


--- Page 209 ---
Text 60] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 209
SYNONYMS
virahe—in the lamentation of separation; vyakula—very agitated; prabhu—S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; udvege—in great anxiety; uthilai—stood up;
gambhirara—of the Gambhira; bhittye—on the walls; mukha—face; ghasite —to
rub; lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
Feeling separation from Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so distraught
that in great anxiety He stood up and began rubbing His face against the walls
of the Gambbhira.
TEXT 59
মুখে, ACY, নাকে ক্ষত হুইল অপার |
ভাবাবেশে না জানেন AG, পড়ে রক্তধার ॥ ৫৯ ॥
mukhe, 83096, nake ksata ha-ila apara
bhavavese na janena prabhu, pade rakta-dhara
SYNONYMS
mukhe —on the mouth; gande —on the cheeks; nake —on the nose; ksata—in-
juries; ha-ila—there were; apara—many; bhava-avese—in ecstatic emotion; na
janena—could not understand; prabhu—S5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pade —oozes
out; rakta-dhara—a flow of blood.
TRANSLATION
Blood oozed from the many injuries on His mouth, nose and cheeks, but
due to His ecstatic emotions, the Lord did not know it.
TEXT 60
সর্বরাত্রি করেন ভাবে মুখ সংঘর্ষণ |
গৌ-গোৌ-শব্দ করেন,- স্বরূপ শুনিল| তখন ॥ ৬০ ॥
sarva-ratri karena bhave mukha sangharsana
gon-gon-sabda karena, —svaripa sunila takhana
SYNONYMS
sarva-ratri—the whole night; karena—does; bhave—in emotion; mukha
sangharsana—rubbing of the face; gon-gon-sabda karena—makes a peculiar
sound, gon-gon; svarGpa—Svaradpa Damodara Cosvami; sunila—heard;
takhana—then.


--- Page 210 ---
210 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
In ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rubbed His face against the walls all
night long, making a peculiar sound, ‘‘gon-gon,” which Svarapa Damodara
could hear through the door.
TEXT 61
দীপ আ্বালি” ঘরে গেলা, দেখি” প্রভুর মুখ ।
अक्रन, ८1 विन्न তু'হার হৈল বড় দুঃখ ॥ ৬১ ॥
dipa jvali’ ghare gels, dekhi’ prabhura mukha
svarapa, govinda dunhara haila bada duhkha
SYNONYMS
dipa jvali’—lighting the lamp; ghare—in the room; gela—went; dekhi’—
seeing; prabhura mukha—the face of the Lord; svartipa—Svarapa Damodara
Gosvami; govinda—and Govinda; dunhara—of both of them; haila bada
duhkha—there was great unhappiness.
TRANSLATION
Lighting a lamp, Svaripa Damodara and Govinda entered the room. When
they saw the Lord's face, both of them were full of sorrow.
TEXT 62
শ্রভুরে শয্যাতে আমনি' স্থস্থির sida |
কহে কৈল। এই তুমি ?”- স্বরূপ পুছিল। ॥ ৬২ ॥
prabhure sayyate ani’ susthira karaila
‘kanhe kaila ei tumi?’——svarapa puchila
SYNONYMS
prabhure—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sayyate—to the bed; ani’—bringing; su-
sthira karaila—made Him pacified; kanhe—why; kaila—have done; ei—this;
tumi—You; svardpa puchila—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami inquired.
TRANSLATION
They brought the Lord to His bed, calmed Him and then asked, ‘Why have
You done this to Yourself?’’


--- Page 211 ---
Text 65] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 211
TEXT 63
প্রভু कटङ्न, “উদ্বেগে ঘরে না পারি রহিতে ।
দ্বার চাহি” বুলি” শীঘ্র বাহির হইতে ॥ ৬৩ ॥
prabhu kahena, — “udvege ghare na pari rahite
dvara cahi’ buli’ Sighra bahira ha-ite
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; udvege —out of great agita-
tion; ghare—within the room; na pari—! was not able; rahite—to stay; dvara
cahi’—looking for the door; buli’—wandering; sighra—quickly; bahira ha-ite —to
get out.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, “८1 was in such anxiety that | could not
stay in the room. | wanted to go out, and therefore | wandered about the
room, looking for the door.
TEXT 64
দ্বার নাহি” পাঞ। মুখ লাগে চারিভিতে ।
ক্ষত হয়, রক্ত পড়ে, न পাই যাইতে ॥” ७8 ॥
dvara nahi’ pana mukha lage cari-bhite
ksata haya, rakta pade, na pai yaite”
SYNONYMS
dvara nahi’ pana—not finding the door; mukha lige—My face strikes; cari-
bhite —on the four walls; ksata haya—there was injury; rakta pade —blood came
out; na pai yaite—still | could not get out.
TRANSLATION
‘“Unable to find the door, 1 kept hitting the four walls with My face. My face
was injured, and it bled, but I still could not get ০01.”
TEXT 65
উন্মাদ-দশায় প্রভুর স্থির নহে मन |
যেই করে, যেই বোলে সব,-_উদ্মাদ-লক্ষণ ॥ ৬৫ ॥


--- Page 212 ---
212 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
unmada-dasaya prabhura sthira nahe mana
yei kare, yei bole saba, — unmada-laksana
SYNONYMS
unmada-dasaya—in such a state of madness; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sthira nahe mana—the mind is not steady; yei kare —whatever He
does; yei bole—whatever He says; saba—all; unmada-laksana—simply
symptoms of madness.
TRANSLATION
In this state of madness, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mind was unsteady.
Whatever He said or did was all symptomatic of madness.
TEXT 66
खक्रणे-८भाजोय তবে চিন্তা পাইলা মনে |
ভক্তগণ Agel বিচার टेकन्‌। আর দিনে ॥ ৬৬ ॥
svarapa-gosani tabe cinta paila mane
bhakta-gana lana vicara kaila ara dine
SYNONYMS
svarapa-gosani—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; tabe—thereafter; cinta—an
anxiety or thought; paila mane—got in his mind; bhakta-gana lana—among all
the devotees; vicara kaila—considered; ara dine—the next day.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara was very anxious, but then he had an idea. The
following day, he and the other devotees considered it together.
TEXT 67
সব ভক্ত মেলি” তবে প্রভুরে जो धिन |
শঙ্কর-পণ্ডিতে প্রভুর সঙ্গে শোয়াইল ॥ ৬৭ ॥
saba bhakta meli’ tabe prabhure sadhila
Sankara-pandite prabhura sarge soyaila
SYNONYMS
saba bhakta meli’—all the devotees, meeting together; tabe—thereupon;
prabhure sadhila—entreated Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $arkara-pandite —


--- Page 213 ---
Text 69] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 213
Sankara Pandita; prabhura—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sange—with; soyaila—
made to lie down.
TRANSLATION
After consulting with one another, they entreated Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
to allow Sankara Pandita to lie down in the same room with Him.
TEXT 68
প্রভু-পাদতলে শঙ্কর করেন শয়ল |
প্রভু সার উপর করেন পাদ-প্রসারণ ॥ ৬৮ ॥
prabhu-pada-tale sankara karena sayana
prabhu tanra upara karena pada-prasarana
SYNONYMS
prabhu-pada-tale—at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sankara—
Sankara; karena Sayana—lies down; prabhu—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanra—
of him; upara—on the body; karena—does; pada-prasarana—extending His legs.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sankara Pandita lay at the feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and the
Lord placed His legs upon Sankara’s body.
TEXT 69
প্রভু-পাদে।পাধান” afer Sta নাম হইল |
পূর্বে বিত্রে যেন Awa বণিল ॥ ৬৯ ॥
‘prabhu-padopadhana’ bali’ tanra nama ha-ila
parve vidure yena sri-suka varnila
SYNONYMS
prabhu-pada-upadhana—the pillow of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s legs; bali’—
calling as such; tanra nama—his name; ha-ila—became; parve—formerly;
vidure—Vidura; yena—as; sri-suka varnila—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami described.
TRANSLATION
Sankara became celebrated by the name ‘‘the pillow of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.”” He was like Vidura, as Sukadeva Gosvami previously described
him.


--- Page 214 ---
214 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 70
ইতি Tarek विष्‌ ९ বিনীতং नडखनेकः-5 वदन्‌ नष] नम्‌ ।
SHAAN ভগবঙৎকথায়াং প্রণীয়মানে মুনিরভ্যচষ্ট ॥ १० ॥
iti bruvapnam viduram ৮/71(377
sahasra-Sirsnas caranopadhanam
prahrsta-roma bhagavat-kathayam
praniyamano munir abhyacasta
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; bruvanam—speaking; viduram—to Vidura; vinitam—submissive;
sahasra-sirsnah —of Lord Krsna; carana-upadhanam—the resting pillow for the
legs; prahrsta-roma—whose hairs on the body were standing; bhagavat-
kathayam—in topics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; praniyamanah—
being induced; munih—the great sage Maitreya; abhyacasta—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
“When submissive Vidura, the resting place of the legs of Lord Krsna, had
thus spoken to Maitreya, Maitreya began speaking, his hair standing on end
due to the transcendental pleasure of discussing topics concerning Lord
Krsna.”
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.13.5).
TEXT 71
শঙ্কর করেন AGT न1ण-नष्डाङ्न्‌ |
ঘুমাঞ। পড়েন, তৈছে করেন শয়ন ॥ ৭১ ॥
Sarkara karena prabhura pada-samvahana
ghumana padena, taiche karena sayana
SYNONYMS
sankara—Sankara; karena—does; prabhura—of Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
pada-samvahana —massaging the legs; ghumana padena—he falls asleep;
taiche—in that way; karena sayana—he lies down.
TRANSLATION
Sankara massaged the legs of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but while
massaging he would fall asleep and thus lie down.


--- Page 215 ---
Text 74] The Lord's Inconceivable Behavior 215
TEXT 72
উতঘাড়-অঙ্জে পড়িয়! শঙ্কর awl যায়।
প্রভু উঠি” আপন-কুঁাথা তাহারে জড়ায় ॥ ৭২ ॥
ughada-ange padiya sankara nidra yaya
prabhu uthi’ apana-kantha tahare jadaya
SYNONYMS
ughada-arige—without a covering over the body; padiya—lying down;
sankara—Sankara; nidra yaya—goes to sleep; prabhu —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
uthi’—getting up; apana-kantha—His own quilt; tahare jadaya—wraps him with.
TRANSLATION
He would lie asleep without a covering on his body, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu would get up and wrap him with His own quilt.
TEXT 73
নিরন্তর খুমায় শঙ্কর শীঘ্র-চেতন |
বসি” পাদ চাপি” করে রাত্রি-জাগরণ ॥ ৭৩ ॥
nirantara ghumaya sankara sighra-cetana
vasi’ pada capi’ kare ratri-jagarana
SYNONYMS
nirantara—incessantly; ghumaya—sleeps; $ankara—Sankara; sighra—very
quickly; cetana—waking up; vasi’—sitting; pada capi’—massaging the legs;
kare —does; ratri-jagarana—keeps awake at night.
TRANSLATION
Sankara Pandita would always fall asleep, but he would quickly awaken, sit
up and again begin massaging the legs of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this
way he would stay awake the entire night.
TEXT 74
ভার ভয়ে নারেন প্রভু বাহিরে যাইতে |
তাঁর ভয়ে নারেন ভিত্ত্যে JAS ঘষিতে ॥ ৭৪ ॥
tanra bhaye narena prabhu bahire yaite
tanra bhaye narena bhittye mukhabja ghasite


--- Page 216 ---
216 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
tanra bhaye—because of fear of him; narena—was not able; prabhu—S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bahire yaite—to go out; tanra bhaye—because of fear of
him; narena—was not able; bhittye—on the walls; mukha-abja ghasite—to rub
His lotuslike face.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of Sankara, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could neither leave His
room nor rub His lotuslike face against the walls.
TEXT 75
এই লীলা মহাপ্রভুর রঘুনাথ-দাস |
গোৌরাঙ্গ-ুবকল্পবৃক্ষে করিয়াছে প্রকাশ ॥ ৭৫ ॥
ei lila mahaprabhura raghunatha-dasa
gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse kariyache prakasa
SYNONYMS
ei lila—this pastime; mahaprabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; raghunatha-
dasa—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; gauranga-stava-kalpa-vrkse—in his book
known as Cauranga-stava-kalpavrksa; kariyache prakasa—has described very
nicely.
TRANSLATION
This pastime of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s has been described very nicely
by Raghunatha dasa Gosvami in his book known as Gauranga-stava-
kalpavrksa.
TEXT 76
স্বকীয়স্ত প্রাণাবুদসদৃশ-গোষ্ঠশ্ু বিরহাৎ
প্রলাপানুন্মাদাং সততমতি कृर्वन्‌ বিকলধীঃ |
দধদ্ভিত্তৌ শশ্বদ্বদন বিধুঘর্ষেণ कपि च
ক্ষাতোখং (तरो वाम হৃদয় উদয়ন্মাং মদয়তি ॥ ৭৬ ॥
svakiyasya pranarbuda-sadrsa-gosthasya virahat
pralapan unmadat satatam ati kurvan vikala-dhih
dadhad bhittau sasvad vadana-vidhu-gharsena rudhirari
ksatottham gaurango hrdaya udayan marih madayati


--- Page 217 ---
Text 78] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 217
SYNONYMS
svakiyasya—His own; prana-arbuda—uncountable breaths of life; sadrsa—like;
gosthasya—of Vrndavana; virahat—because of separation; pralapan—crazy talks;
unmadat—because of madness; satatam—always; ati—very much; kurvan—
doing; vikala-dhih—whose intelligence was disturbed; dadhat—oozing forth;
bhittau—on the walls; sasvat—always; vadana-vidhu—of His moonlike face;
gharsena—by rubbing; rudhiram—blood; ksata-uttham—coming forth from in-
juries; gaurangah—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hrdaye—in my heart;
udayan—rising; mam—me; madayati—maddens.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Because of separation from His many friends in Vrndavana, who were like
His own life, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like a madman. His intelligence
was transformed. Day and night He rubbed His moonlike face against the
walls, and blood flowed from the injuries. May that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
rise in my heart and make me mad with love.”
TEXT 77
এইমত মহাপ্রভু রাত্রি-দিবসে ।
প্র্রেমসিজ্ব-মগ্ন ACR, কভু ডুবে, ভাসে ॥ ৭৭ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu ratri-divase
prema-sindhu-magna rahe, kabhu dube, bhase
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ratri-divase —
day and night; prema-sindhu-magna rahe —remains merged in the ocean of love
of Krsna; kabhu dube —sometimes drowns; bhase —floats.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in this way stayed immersed day and night in an
ocean of ecstatic love for Krsna. Sometimes He was submerged, and some-
times He floated.
TEXT 78
এককালে বৈশাখের পৌণমাসী-দিনে |
রাত্রিকালে মহাপ্রভু চলিল৷ উদ্যানে ॥ ৭৮ ॥
eka-kale vaisakhera paurpnamasi-dine
ratri-kale mahaprabhu calila udyane


--- Page 218 ---
218 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
eka-kale—at one time; vaisakhera—of the month of Vaisakha, (April-May);
paurnamasi-dine—on the full-moon night; ratri-kale —at night; mahaprabhu —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calila—went; udydne— to a garden.
TRANSLATION
One full-moon night in the month of Vaisakha [April and May], Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu went to a garden.
TEXT 79
“জগন্নাথবল্লন' নাম উদ্যানপ্রধানে ।
RAT FFE শ্রভু লঞ। ভক্তগণে ॥ ৭৯ ॥
‘jagannatha-vallabha’ nama udyana-pradhane
pravesa karila prabhu laiia bhakta-gane
SYNONYMS
jagannatha-vallabha—Jagannatha-vallabha; nama—named; udyana-pra-
dhiane—one of the best gardens; pravesa karili—entered; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; landa—taking; bhakta-gane —the devotees.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, along with His devotees, entered one of the nicest gardens, called
Jagannatha-vallabha.
TEXT 80
প্রফুক্লিত বৃচ্চ-বল্লী,_ যেন বৃন্দাবন |
শুক, শারী, गिक, ভূঙ্গ করে আলাপন ॥ ৮০ ॥
praphullita vrksa-valli, —yena vrndavana
Suka, sari, pika, bhrnga kare alapana
SYNONYMS
praphullita—fully blossomed; vrksa-valli—trees and creepers; yena
vrndavana—exactly resembling Vrndavana; suka—the suka birds; sari—the sari
birds; pika—the pika birds; bhriiga—the bumblebees; kare—do; alapana—
talking with one another.


--- Page 219 ---
Text 82] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 219
TRANSLATION
In the garden were fully blossomed trees and creepers exactly like those in
Vrndavana. Bumblebees and birds like the suka, sari and pika talked with one
another.
TEXT 81
ARNE लग বহে মলয়-পবল |
‘QF হঞ। তরুলতায় শিখায় নাচন ॥ ৮১ ॥
puspa-gandha lana vahe malaya-pavana
‘guru’ hana taru-lataya sikhaya nacana
SYNONYMS
puspa-gandha—the fragrance of the flowers; lana—taking; vahe—blows;
malaya-pavana—the mild breeze; guru hafa—becoming the spiritual master;
taru-lataya—to the trees and creepers; sikhaya—instructs; nacana—dancing.
TRANSLATION
A mild breeze was blowing, carrying the fragrance of aromatic flowers. The
breeze had become a guru and was teaching all the trees and creepers how to
dance.
TEXT 82
পূর্ণচন্দ্রকল্দ্বিকায় পরম উভ্জ্বল |
তরুলতাদি CITT করে ঝলমল ॥ ৮২ ॥
parna-candra-candrikaya parama ujjvala
taru-latadi jyotsnaya kare jhalamala
SYNONYMS
parna-candra—of the full moon; candrikaya—by the shine; parama—very; uj-
jvala—bright; taru-lata-adi—the creepers, trees and so on; jyotsndya—in the il-
lumination of the moonshine; kare—do; jhalamala—glittering.
TRANSLATION
Brightly illuminated by the full moon, the trees and creepers glittered in the
light.


--- Page 220 ---
220 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 83
ছয় शडग WE ING প্রধান |
দেখি” আনন্দিত হৈল। গৌর खन वान्‌ ॥ ৮৩ ॥
chaya rtu-gana yahan vasanta pradhana
dekhi’ anandita haila gaura bhagavan
SYNONYMS
chaya—six; rtu-gana—seasons; yahan—where; vasanta pradhana—the spring
season was chief; dekhi’—seeing; anandita—very pleased; haila—became;
gaura—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The six seasons, especially spring, seemed present there. Seeing the
garden, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was
very happy.
TEXT 84
“ললিত-লবঙ্গলত।” পদ গাওয়াএঞ। |
নৃত্য করি? IEE AG নিজগণ नयग ॥ ৮৪ ॥
“lalita-lavanga-lata” pada gaoyana
nrtya kari’ bulena prabhu nija-gana lana
SYNONYMS
lalita-lavanga-lata —beginning with the words lalita-lavanga-lata; pada—the
verse; gdoyana—making sing; nrtya kari’—dancing; bulena—wanders; prabhu—
Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nija-gana laAda—accompanied by His personal
associates.
TRANSLATION
In this atmosphere, the Lord had His associates sing a verse from the Gita-
govinda, beginning with the words ‘‘lalita-lavanga-lata,”’ as He danced and
wandered about with them.
TEXT 85
প্রতিবৃচ্চ্বল্লী এছে ভ্রমিতে ल्य मिट |
অশোকের তলে FCA (टन আচন্মিতে ॥ ৮৫ ॥


--- Page 221 ---
Text 87] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 221
prati-vrksa-valli aiche bhramite bhramite
asokera tale krspne dekhena dcambite
SYNONYMS
prati-vrksa-valli—around each and every tree and creeper; aiche—in that way;
bhramite bhramite —wandering; asokera tale —underneath an asoka tree; krsne—
Lord Krsna; dekhena—He sees; dcambite —suddenly.
TRANSLATION
As He thus wandered around every tree and creeper, He came beneath an
asoka tree and suddenly saw Lord Krsna.
TEXT 86
কৃষ্ণ দেখি” মহাপ্রভু diel एनिन। ।
আগে দেখি” হাসি” কৃষ্ণ खखर्षान হইল! ॥ ৮৬ ॥
krsna 091/001 mahaprabhu dhana calila
age dekhi’ hasi’ krsna antardhana ha-ila
SYNONYMS
krsna dekhi’—seeing Krsna; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 00373
calila—began to run very swiftly; age—ahead; dekhi’—seeing; hasi’—smiling;
krsna—Lord Krsna; antardhana ha-ila—disappeared.
TRANSLATION
When He saw Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began running very swiftly,
but Krsna smiled and disappeared.
TEXT 87
আগে ग। रेन Fe, ভারে পুনঃ হারা ঞ। |
ভুমেতে পড়িল। প্রভু মুর্ছিত 2०1 ॥ ৮৭ ॥
age paila krsne, tanre punah harana
bhamete padila prabhu marcchita hana
SYNONYMS
age—in the beginning; paila—got; krsne—Lord Krsna; tanre—Him; punah—
again; harana—losing; bhamete —on the ground; padila—fell down; prabhu—
Lord जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; marcchita—unconscious; hafAd—becoming.


--- Page 222 ---
222 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Having first gotten Krsna and then having lost Him again, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu fell to the ground unconscious.
TEXT 88
FLT ল্রীঅঙ্গগন্ধে ভরিছে উদ্যানে |
সেই शकष পাঞ। প্রভু হৈলা অচেতনে ॥ ৮৮ ॥
krsnera sri-anga-gandhe bhariche udyane
sei gandha pana prabhu haila acetane
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Lord Krsna; sri-anga-gandhe —the aroma of the transcendental
body; bhariche —filled; udyane—in the garden; sei gandha pana—getting that
aroma; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;  haila—became; acetane—
unconscious.
TRANSLATION
The entire garden was filled with the scent of Lord Sri Krsna’s transcenden-
tal body. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smelled it, He fell unconscious at
once.
TEXT 89
নিরন্তর নাসায় পশে কৃষ্ণ-সরিমল ।
গন্ধ আস্বাদিতে প্রভু হইল। পাগল ॥ ৮৯ ॥
nirantara nasaya pase krsna-parimala
gandha asvadite prabhu ha-ila pagala
SYNONYMS
nirantara—incessantly; nasaya—in the nostrils; pase —enters; krsna-parimala—
the scent of Krsna’s body; gandha asvadite—to relish the fragrance; prabhu—S$n
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ha-ila pagala—became mad.
TRANSLATION
The scent of Krsna’s body, however, incessantly entered His nostrils, and
the Lord became mad to relish it.


--- Page 223 ---
Text 91] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 223
TEXT 90
FRNG-J@| व्राधा সখীরে যে কহিলা |
সেইপ্লোক পড়ি” প্রভু অর্থ করিল। ॥ ৯০ ॥
krsna-gandha-lubdha radha sakhire ye kahila
sei sloka padi’ prabhu artha karila
SYNONYMS
krsna-gandha—the scent of the body of Krsna; lubdha—hankering after;
radha —Srimati Radharani; sakhire—to the gopi friends; ye kahila—whatever She
said; sei—that; sloka—verse; padi’ —reciting; prabhu—SrT Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
artha karila—explained its meaning.
TRANSLATION
Srimati Radharani expressed to Her gopi friends how She hankers for the
transcendental scent of Krsna’s body. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited that
same verse and made its meaning clear.
TEXT 91
কুরঙ্গমদজিদ্বপুঃপরিমলোমি কষ্টাঙ্গনঃ
স্বকাঙ্গ-নলিনাষ্টকে শশিষযুতাজ্জগন্ধ প্রথঃ |
মদেন্দুবরচন্দনাগুরুস্থগন্ধিচচাচিতঃ
ज মে মদনমোহইনঃ সখি তনো তি নাসাস্পৃহাম্‌ ॥ >> ॥
kuranga-mada-jid-vapuh-parimalormi-krstanganah
svakanga-nalinastake sasi-yutabja-gandha-prathah
madenduvara-candanaguru-sugandhi-carcarcitah
sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti nasa-sprham
SYNONYMS
kuranga-mada-jit—conquering the aromatic smell of musk; vapuh —of His tran-
scendental body; parimala-armi—with waves of scent; krsta-ariganah—at-
tracting the gopis of Vrndavana; svaka-anga-nalina-astake—on all eight different
lotuslike parts of the body (face, navel, eyes, palms and feet); sasi-yuta-abja-
gandha-prathah —who distributes the scent of lotus mixed with camphor; mada-
induvara-candana-aguru-sugandhi-carca-arcitah —smeared with the unguents of
musk, camphor, white sandalwood and aguru; sah—He; me—My; madana-
mohanah —Lord Krsna, who enchants even Cupid; sakhi—O My dear friends;
tanoti—increases; ndsa-sprham—the desire of My nostrils.


--- Page 224 ---
224 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘The scent of Krsna’'s transcendental body surpasses the aroma of musk
and attracts the minds of all women. The eight lotuslike parts of His body dis-
tribute the fragrance of lotuses mixed with that of camphor. His body is
anointed with aromatic substances like musk, camphor, sandalwood and
aguru. O My dear friend, that Personality of Godhead, also known as the
enchanter of Cupid, always increases the desire of My nostrils.’
PURPORT
This is a verse found in Govinda-lilamrta (8.6).
TEXT 92
कख व्रिका-नोटन)९ se, তার যেই পরিমল,
Stel জিনি” কৃষ্ণ-অজ-গন্ধ |
ব্যাপে চৌদ্দ-ভুবনে, করে সর্ব আকর্ষণে,
নারীগণের আঁখি করে खक्ष ॥ ৯২ ॥
kastarika-nilotpala, tara yei parimala,
taha jini’ krsna-anga-gandha
vyape caudda-bhuvane, kare sarva akarsane,
nari-ganera ankhi kare andha
SYNONYMS
kastarika—musk; nilotpala—combined with the bluish lotus flower; tara—its;
yei —whatever; parimala—scent; taha—that; jini’—conquering; krspa-arga—of
the transcendental body of Krsna; gandha —the scent; vyape—spreads; caudda-
bhuvane —throughout the fourteen worlds; kare—does; sarva akarsane —at-
tracting everyone; nari-ganera—of the women; arikhi—the eyes; kare —makes;
andha—blind.
TRANSLATION
‘The scent of Krsna’s body surpasses the fragrances of musk and the bluish
lotus flower. Spreading throughout the fourteen worlds, it attracts everyone
and makes the eyes of all women blind.
TEXT 93
সখি হে, কৃষ্ণগন্ধ জগৎ NSH |
নারীর AACS পশে, সর্বকাল তাহ বৈসে,
FRO ধরি” न] যায় ॥ ৯৩ ॥ ॐ ॥


--- Page 225 ---
Text 94] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 225
sakhi he, krspna-gandha jagat mataya
ndrira nasate pase, sarva-kala tahan vaise,
krsna-pasa dhari’ laa yaya
SYNONYMS

sakhi he—O My dear friend; krsna-gandha—the fragrance of the body of
Krsna; jagat mataya—enchants the whole world; narira—of women; nasate —in
the nostrils; pase—enters; sarva-kala—always; tahan—there; vaise —remains;
krsna-pasa—to the side of Lord Krsna; dhari’—catching; lafia yaya—takes one.

TRANSLATION

“My dear friend, the scent of Krsna’s body enchants the entire world. It es-
pecially enters the nostrils of women and remains seated there. Thus it cap-
tures them and forcibly brings them to Krsna.

TEXT 94
(नलं-ना खि, বদন, কর-যুগ চরণ,»
এই TRAY কৃষ্ণ-অঙ্গে |
কর্পুত্র-লিপ্ত কমল, তার যৈছে পরিমল,
সেই গন্ধ অষ্টপণল্ল-সঙ্গে ॥ ৯৪ ॥
netra-nabhi, vadana, kara-yuga carana,
ei asta-padma krsna-ange
karpara-lipta kamala, tara yaiche parimala,
sei gandha asta-padma-sange
SYNONYMS

netra—the eyes; nabhi—the navel; vadana—the face; kara-yuga—the palms;
carana—the feet; ei—these; asta—eight; padma—Ilotus flowers; krsna-ange—in
the body of Krsna; karpara—with camphor; lipta—smeared; kamala—the lotus
flower; tara—of that; yaiche—like; parimala—the fragrance; sei gandha—that
fragrance; asta-padma-sange—is associated with the eight lotus flowers.

TRANSLATION

‘“Krsna’s eyes, navel and face, hands and feet are like eight lotus flowers on
His body. From those eight lotuses emanates a fragrance like a mixture
of camphor and lotus. That is the scent associated with His body.


--- Page 226 ---
226 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 95
হেম-কীলিত চন্দন, তাহা করি” ঘর্ষণ,
তাহে অগুরু, TED कख. नौ ।
কর্পূর-সনে চর্চা অঙ্গে, পুর্ব অজের গন্ধ সঙ্গে,
মিলি” তারে যেন ta চুরি ॥ ৯৫ ॥
hema-kilita candana, taha kari’ gharsana,
tahe aguru, kunkuma, kastari
karpara-sane carca ange, parva arigera gandha sarge,
mili’ tare yena kaila curi
SYNONYMS
hema—with gold; kilita—bedecked; candana—white sandalwood; taha—
that; kari’—doing; gharsana—rubbing; tahe—in that; aguru—the aguru flavor;
kunkuma—kunkuma; kastari—and musk; karpdra—camphor; sane —with;
carca—smearing; arige—on the body; purva—previous; arigera—of the body;
gandha—scent; sange—with; mili’—combining; tare —that; yena—as if; kaila—
did; curi—stealing or covering.
TRANSLATION
‘““When sandalwood pulp with aguru, kunkuma and musk is mixed with
camphor and spread on Krsna’s body, it combines with Krsna’s own original
bodily perfume and seems to cover it.
PURPORT
In another version, the last line of this verse reads, kamadevera mana kaila curi.
This means “the scent of all these substances mixes with the previous scent of
Krsna’s body and steals away the mind of Cupid.”
TEXT 96
হরে নারীর ST, নাসা! করে ঘূর্পন,
খসায় नोवि, চুটায় কেশবজ্ধ |
করিয়। আগে বাউরী, নাচায় জগৎ-নারী,
হেন ডাকাতিয়া কৃষ্ণাঙ্গগন্ধ ॥ ৯৬ ॥
hare narira tanu-mana, nasa kare gharnana,
khasaya nivi, chutaya kesa-bandha


--- Page 227 ---
Text 971 The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 227
kariya age bauri, nacaya jagat-nari,
hena dakatiya krspanga-gandha
SYNONYMS
hare—enchants; narira—of women; tanu-mana—the minds and bodies;
nasa—the nostrils; kare gharpana—bewiiders; khasaya—slackens; nivi—the belt;
chutaya—loosens; kesa-bandha—the bunch of hair; kariya—acting; age—in
front; bauri—like madwomen; nacaya—causes to dance; jagat-nari—all the
women of the world; hena—such; dakatiya—a plunderer; krspa-arga-gandha—
the scent of Krsna's body.
TRANSLATION
‘The scent of Krsna’s transcendental body is so attractive that it enchants
the bodies and minds of all women. It bewilders their nostrils, loosens their
belts and hair, and makes them madwomen. All the women of world come
under its influence, and therefore the scent of Krsna’'s body is like a plunderer.
TEXT 97
সেই গন্ধবশ নাসা, সদ। করে গন্ধের আশ
কভু পায়, Tg নাহি পায় |
পাইলে fal পেট ভরে, পিঙ পিঙ তবু করে,
না পাইলে তৃষ্ণায় মরি” যায় ॥ ৯৭ ॥
sei gandha-vasa nasa, sada kare gandhera asa,
kabhu paya, kabhu nahi paya
paile piya peta bhare, pina pina tabu kare,
na paile trspaya mari’ yaya
SYNONYMS
sei —that; gandha-vasa—under the control of the fragrance; nasa—the nostrils;
sada—always; kare—make; gandhera—for the fragrance; asa—hope; kabhu
paya—sometimes they obtain; kabhu nahi paya—sometimes do not obtain;
paile—if obtaining; piya—drinking; peta—the belly; bhare—fills; pina—let me
drink; pina—let me drink; tabu —still: kare —they hanker; na paile —if they do not
get; trsnaya—out of thirst; mari’ yaya—they die.
TRANSLATION
‘’Falling completely under its influence, the nostrils yearn for it con-
tinuously, although sometimes they obtain it and sometimes not. When they
do they drink their fill, though they still want more and more, but if they
don’t, out of thirst they die.


--- Page 228 ---
228 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 98
মদনমোহন-নাট, পসারি গন্ধের হাট,
জগন্নারী-গ্রাহকে লোভায়।
বিনা-মূলে্যে দেয় গন্ধ, গন্ধ দিয়া করে অন্ধ,
चन्न যাইতে পথ নাহি পায় ॥” ৯৮ ॥
madana-mohana-nata, pasari gandhera hata,
jagan-nari-grahake lobhaya
vina-mulye deya gandha, gandha diya kare andha,
ghara yaite patha nahi paya”
SYNONYMS
madana-mohana-nata—the dramatic player Madana-mohana; pasari—a
dealer; gandhera hata—in a market of scents; jagat-nari—of the women of the
whole world; grahake —to the customers; lobhaya—attracts; vina-mualye —with-
out a price; deya—distributes; gandha—the scent; gandha diya—delivering the
scent; kare andha—makes the customers blind; ghara yaite—to retum home;
patha—the path; nahi paya—do not find.
TRANSLATION
‘The dramatic actor Madana-mohana has opened a shop of scents that at-
tract the women of the world to be His customers. He delivers the scents
freely, but they make the women all so blind they cannot find the path
returning home.”
TEXT 99
এইমত গোৌরহরি, গন্ধে কৈল মন চুরি,
ভূঙ্গপ্রায় ইতি-উত্তি ধায় |
যায় বৃক্ষলতা-পাশে, কৃষ্ণ স্ুরে- সেই আশে,
কৃষ্ণ ন। পায়, গন্ধমাত্র পায় ॥ >> ॥
ei-mata gaurahari, gandhe kaila mana curi,
bhrnga-praya iti-uti dhaya
ydya vrksa-lata-pase, krsna sphure —sei ase,
krsna na paya, gandha-matra paya


--- Page 229 ---
Text 100] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 229
SYNONYMS

ei-mata—in this way; gaurahari—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gandhe —by the
scent; kaila—did; mana curi—stealing of the mind; bhriga-praya—just like a
bumblebee; iti-uti dhaya—wanders here and there; yaya—goes; vrksa-lata-
pase—by the side of the trees and creepers; krsna sphure—Lord Krsna will ap-
pear; sei ase —by that hope; krsna na paya—does not obtain Krsna; gandha-matra
paya—gets only the scent.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His mind thus stolen by that scent, ran here and
there like a bumblebee. He ran to the trees and plants, hoping that Lord Krsna
would appear, but instead He found only the scent of Krsna’s body.

TEXT 100
স্বরূপ-রামানম্দ গায়, প্রভু নাচে, FY পায়,
এইমতে প্রাতঃকাল হৈল।
স্বরূপ-রামানন্দরায়, করি नान উপায়,
মহাপ্রভুর বাহুস্ফুতি কৈল ॥ ১০০ ॥
svardpa-ramananda gaya, prabhu nace, sukha paya,
ei-mate pratah-kala haila
svardpa-ramananda-raya, kari nana upaya,
mahaprabhura bahya-spharti kaila
SYNONYMS

svardpa-ramananda gaya—Svaripa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya
sing; prabhu nace—Lord 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu dances; sukha paya—enjoys
happiness; ei-mate—in this way; pratah-kala haila—morning arrived; svarapa-
ramananda-raya—both Svarapa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya; kari—
devising; nand—various; updya—means; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bahya-spharti kaila—awakened the external consciousness.

TRANSLATION

Both Svariipa Damodara and Ramananda Raya sang to the Lord, who danced
and enjoyed happiness until the morning arrived. Then they devised a plan to
revive the Lord to external consciousness.


--- Page 230 ---
230 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 101
মাতৃভক্তি, প্রলাপন, ভিত্ত্যে মুখ-ঘর্ষণ,
কৃষ্ণগন্ধ-স্ফূর্ত্যে দিব্যলূত্য |
এই চারিলীলা-ভেদে, গাইল এই পরিচ্ছেদে,
FWA রূপগোসাণ্ঞি-ভূত্য ॥ ১০১ ॥
matr-bhakti, pralapana, bhittye mukha-gharsana,
krsna-gandha-sphartye divya-nrtya
ei cari-lila-bhede, gaila ei paricchede,
krspadasa rapa-gosani-bhrtya
SYNONYMS
matr-bhakti—devotion to His mother; pralapana—words of madness; bhit-
tye—on the walls; mukha-gharsana—rubbing His face; krspa-gandha—of Lord
Krsna's fragrance; sphartye—on the appearance; divya-nrtya—transcendental
dancing; ei—these; cari—four; lila—pastimes; bhede—different; gaila—has
sung; ei paricchede—in this chapter; krsnadasa—Krsnadasa Kavirdja; rapa-
gosani-bhrtya—servant of Srila Rapa Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Thus, 1, Krsnadasa, the servant of Srila Rapa Gosvami, have sung of four
divisions of the Lord’s pastimes in this chapter: the Lord’s devotion to His
mother, His words of madness, His rubbing His face against the walls at night,
and His dancing at the appearance of Lord Krsna’s fragrance.
PURPORT
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami says that he has been able to describe these four
pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by the blessings of Srila Rapa Gosvami.
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami was not actually a direct disciple of Srila Rapa
Gosvami , but he followed the instructions given by Srila Rapa Gosvami in Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu. He therefore acted according to the directions of Rapa Gosvami
and prayed in every chapter for his mercy.
TEXT 102
এইমত মহাপ্রভু नैशं (न |
परान করি” কৈল জগলন্নাথ-দরশন ॥ ১০২ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu pana cetana
snana kari’ kaila jagannatha-darasana


--- Page 231 ---
Text 104] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 231
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pana cetana—
becoming conscious; snana kari’—after bathing; kaila jagannatha-darasana—saw
Lord Jagannatha.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus returned to consciousness. He then bathed
and went to see Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 103
অলোকিক কুষ্ণলীলা, দিব্যশক্তি তার |
তর্কের গোচর নহে চরিত্র যাহার ॥ ১০৩ ॥
alaukika krsna-Iila, divya-sakti tara
tarkera gocara nahe caritra yahara
SYNONYMS
alaukika—uncommon; krsna-lila—pastimes of Lord Krsna; divya-sakti—tran-
scendental potency; tara—of that; tarkera—of argument; gocara—within the
purview; nahe—is not; caritra—the characteristics; yahara—of which.
TRANSLATION
The pastimes of Lord Krsna are uncommonly full of transcendental potency.
It is a characteristic of such pastimes that they do not fall within the jurisdic-
tion of experimental logic and arguments.
TEXT 104
এই প্রেম সদা জাগে যাহার অন্তরে |
পণ্ডিতেহ তার চেষ্টা বুঝিতে न পারে ॥ ১০৪ ॥
ei prema sada jage yahara antare
panditeha tara cesta bujhite na pare
SYNONYMS
ei—this; prema —love of Godhead; sada—always; jage —awakens; yahara—of
whom; antare —within the heart; panditeha—even a learned scholar; tara—his;
cesta—activities; bujhite—to understand; na pare —cannot.


--- Page 232 ---
232 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
When transcendental love of Krsna awakens in one’s heart, even a learned
scholar cannot comprehend one’s activities.
TEXT 105
ধন্যস্যায়ং नवः প্রেমা যন্তোন্মীল তি চেতসি |
অন্তর্বাণীভিরপ্যস্ত মুদ্রা TY TAT ॥ ১০৫ ॥
dhanyasyayarin navah prema
yasyonmilati cetasi
antarvanibhir apy asya
mudra susthu sudurgama
SYNONYMS
dhanyasya—of a most fortunate person; ayam—this; navah—new; prema —
love of Codhead; yasya—of whom; unmilati—manifests; cetasi—in the heart;
antarvanibhih—by persons well versed in sastras; api—even; asya—of him;
mudra—the symptoms; susthu—exceedingly; sudurgama—difficult to under-
stand.
TRANSLATION
“The activities and symptoms of that exalted personality in whose heart
love of Godhead has awakened cannot be understood even by the most
learned scholar.”
PURPORT
This verse is quoted from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.17).
TEXT 106
অলোকিক প্রভুর “চেষ্টা, প্রলাপ” खनिन्ना |
তর্ক না করিহ, শুন বিশ্বাস করিয়|॥ ১০৬ ॥
alaukika prabhura ‘cesta’, ‘pralapa’ suniya
tarka na kariha, Suna visvasa kariya
SYNONYMS
alaukika—uncommon; prabhura—of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cesta—the ac-
tivities; pralapa—talking in madness; suniya—hearing; tarka—unnecessary argu-
ments; na kariha—do not make; suna—simply hear; visvasa kariya—having full
faith.


--- Page 233 ---
Text 107] The Lord's Inconceivable Behavior 233
TRANSLATION
The activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are undoubtedly uncommon, es-
pecially His talking like a madman. Therefore, one who hears of these
pastimes should not put forward mundane arguments. He should simply hear
the pastimes with full faith.
TEXT 107
ইহার সত্যত্বে প্রমাণ প্রীভাগবতে।
জীরাধার প্রেম-প্রলাপ “ভ্রমর-গীতা”তে ॥ ১০৭ ॥
ihara satyatve pramana sri-bhagavate
sri-radhara prema-pralapa ‘bhramara-gita’te
SYNONYMS
thara—of these talks; satyatve —in the truthfulness; pramana—the evidence;
$ri-bhagavate—in Srimad-Bhagavatam; $ri-radhara—of Srimati Radharant; prema-
pralapa—talking crazily in ecstatic love; bhramara-gitate—in the section known
as Bhramara-gita.
TRANSLATION
The evidence of the truth of these talks is found in Srimad-Bhagavatam.
There, in the section of the Tenth Canto known as the Bhramara-gita, ‘‘the
Song to the Bumblebee,” Srimati Radharani speaks insanely in ecstatic love
for Krsna.
PURPORT
When Uddhava arrived from Mathura carrying a message for the gopis, the
gopis began talking about Krsna and crying. Then one important gopi saw a
bumblebee and began speaking to it like someone mad, thinking that the bee was
a messenger of Uddhava's or was someone very dear to him and Krsna. The verses
are as follows (Bhag. 10.47.12-21):
madhupa kitava-bandho ma sprsanghrirn sapatnyah
kuca-vilulita-mala-kunkuma-smasrubhir nah
vahatu madhu-patis tan-manininarh prasadarn
yadu-sadasi vidambyarn yasya datas tvam idrk
“My dear bumblebee, you are a very cunning friend of Uddhava and Krsna. You
are very expert in touching people's feet, but | am not going to be misled by this.
You appear to have sat on the breasts of one of Krsna’s friends, for | see that you
have kurkuma dust on your mustache. Krsna is now engaged in flattering all His


--- Page 234 ---
234 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
young girl friends in Mathura. Therefore, now that He can be called a friend of the
residents of Mathura, He does not need the help of the residents of Vrndavana.
He has no reason to satisfy us gopis. Since you are the messenger of such a person
as He, what is the use of your presence here? Certainly Krsna would be ashamed
of your presence in this assembly.”
How has Krsna offended the gopis so that they want to reject Him from their
minds? The answer is given as follows:
sakrd adhara-sudham svar mohinirh payayitva
sumanasa iva sadyas tatyaje ‘sman bhavadrk
paricarati katham tat-pada-padmarn tu padma
hy api bata hrta-ceta uttama-sloka-jalpaih
“Krsna no longer gives us the enchanting nectar of His lips; instead, He now gives
that nectar to the women of Mathura. Krsna directly attracts our minds, yet He
resembles a bumblebee like you because He gives up the association of a
beautiful flower and goes to a flower that is inferior. That is the way Krsna has
treated us. | do not know why the goddess of fortune continues to serve His lotus
feet instead of leaving them aside. Apparently she believes in Krsna’s false words.
We gopis, however, are not unintelligent like Laksmi.”
After hearing the bumblebee’s sweet songs and recognizing that the bee was
singing about Krsna for Her satisfaction, the gopi replied,
kim iha bahu sadarighre gayasi tvarh yadanam
adhipatim agrhanam agrato nah puranam
vijaya-sakha-sakhinarn giyatari tat-prasargah
ksapita-kucarujas te kalpayantistam istah
“Dear bumblebee, Lord Krsna has no residence here, but we know Him as
Yadupati [the King of the Yadu dynasty]. We know Him very well, and therefore
we are not interested in hearing any more songs about Him. It would be better for
you to go sing to those who are now very dear to Krsna. Those women of
Mathura have now achieved the opportunity to be embraced by Him. They are
His beloveds now, and therefore He has relieved the burning in their breasts. If
you go there and sing your songs to those fortunate women, they will be very
pleased, and they will honor you.”
divi bhuvi ca rasayarn kah striyas tad durapah
kapata-rucira-hasa-bhravi-jrmbhasya yah syuh
carana-raja updste yasya bhatir vayari ka
api ca krpapa-pakse hy uttamasloka-sabdah


--- Page 235 ---
Text 107] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 235
“O collector of honey, Krsna must be very sorry not to see us gopis. Surely He is
afflicted by memories of our pastimes. Therefore He has sent you as a messenger
to satisfy us. Do not speak to us! All the women in the three worlds where death
is inevitable —the heavenly, middle and lower planets—are very easily available
to Krsna because His curved eyebrows are so attractive. Moreover, He is always
served very faithfully by the goddess of fortune. In comparison with her, we are
most insignificant. Indeed, we are nothing. Yet although He is very cunning, Krsna
is also very charitable. You may inform Him that He is praised for His kindness to
unfortunate persons and that He is therefore known as Uttamasloka, one who is
praised by chosen words and verses.”
visrja sirasi padam vedmy aham catukarair
anunaya-vidusas te ‘bhyetya dautyair mukundat
svakrta iha visrstapatya-paty-anya-loka
vyasrjad akrta-cetah kim nu sandheyam asmin
“You are buzzing at My feet just to be forgiven for your past offenses. Kindly go
away from My feet! | know that Mukunda has taught you to speak very sweet,
flattering words like this and to act as His messenger. These are certainly clever
tricks, My dear bumblebee, but | can understand them. This is Krsna’s offense. Do
not tell Krsna what | have said, although | know that you are very envious. We
gopis have given up our husbands, our sons, and all the religious principles that
promise better births, and now we have no other business then serving Krsna. Yet
Krsna, by controlling His mind, has easily forgotten us. Therefore, don't speak of
Him any more. Let us forget our relationship.”
mrgayur iva kapindram vivyadhe lubdha-dharma
striyam akrta-virapar stri-jitah kamayanam
balim api balim attvavestayad dhvanksavad yas
tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-katharthah
“When we remember the past births of Krsna, My dear bumblebee, we are very
afraid of Him. In His incarnation as Lord Ramacandra, He acted just like a hunter
and unjustly killed His friend Vali. Lusty Sarpanakha came to satisfy Ramacandra’s
desires, but He was so attached to Sitadevi that He cut off Sarpanakha’s nose. In
His incarnation as Vamanadeva, He plundered Bali Maharaja and took all his
possessions, cheating him on the pretext of accepting worship from him.
Vamanadeva caught Bali Maharaja exactly as one catches a crow. My dear
bumblebee, it is not very good to make friends with such a person. | know that
once one begins to talk about Krsna, it is very difficult to stop, and | admit that |
have insufficient strength to give up talking about Him.”


--- Page 236 ---
236 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
yad-anucarita-lila-karna-piyusa-viprut
sakrd adana-vidhata-dvandva-dharma vinastah
sapadi grha-kutumbam dinam utsrjya dina
bahava iha vihariga bhiksu-caryam caranti
“Topics about Krsna are so powerful that they destroy the four religious prin-
ciples —religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation. Any-
one who drinks even a small drop of krsna-katha through aural reception is freed
from all material attachment and envy. Like a bird with no means of subsistence,
such a person becomes a mendicant and lives by begging. Ordinary household
affairs become miserable for him, and without attachment he suddenly gives up
everything. Although such renunciation is quite suitable, because | am a woman |
am unable to adopt it.”
vayam rtam iva jihma-vyahrtarn sraddadhanah
kulikarutam ivajAah krsna-vadhvo hiranyah
dadrsur asakrd etat tan-nakha-sparsativra-
smararuja upamantrin bhanyatam anya-varta
“O My dear messenger, | am just like a foolish bird that hears the sweet songs of a
hunter, believes in them due to simplicity, and is then pierced in the heart and
made to suffer all kinds of miseries. Because we believed in Krsna’s words, we
have suffered great pain. Indeed, the touch of Krsna's nails has injured our faces.
He has caused us so much pain! Therefore, you should give up topics concerning
Him and talk about something else.”
After hearing all these statements from Srimati Radhika, the bumblebee left and
then returned. After some thought, the gopr said:
priya-sakha punar agah preyasa presitah kim
varaya kim anurundhe mananiyo ‘si me ‘nga
nayasi katham ihasman dustyaja-dvandva-parsvarn
satatam urasi saumya srir vadhah sakamaste
“You are Krsna's very dear friend, and by His order you have come here again.
Therefore you are worshipable for Me. O best of messengers, tell Me now, what is
your request? What do you want? Krsna cannot give up conjugal love, and
therefore | understand that you have come here to take us to Him. But how will
you do that? We know many goddesses of fortune now reside at Krsna's chest,
and they constantly serve Krsna better than we can.”
Praising the bumblebee for its sobriety, She began to speak in great jubilation.
api bata madhu-puryam arya-putro ‘dhuna ‘ste
smarati sa pitr-gehan saumya bandhams ca gopan


--- Page 237 ---
Text 108] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 237
kvacid api sa katha nah kinkarinarn groite
bhujam aguru-sugandharm muardhny adhasyat kada nu
“Krsna is now living like a gentleman at the Gurukula in Mathurg, forgetting all the
gopis of Vrndavana. But does He not remember the sweet house of His father,
Nanda Maharaja? We are all naturally His maidservants. Does He not remember
us? Does He ever speak about us, or has He forgotten us completely? Will He ever
forgive us and once again touch us with those hands fragrant with the scent of
aguru?”
TEXT 108
মহিযীর গীত যেন “দশমে”র শেষে |
পণ্ডিতে ना বুঝে তার অর্থবিশেষে ॥ ১০৮ ॥
mabhisira gita yena ‘dasame’ra sese
pandite na bujhe tara artha-visese
SYNONYMS
mahisira—of the queens; gita—the songs; yena—just as; dasamera—of the
Tenth Canto; Sese—at the end; pandite—very learned scholars; na—not; bu-
jhe—understand; tara—its; artha-visese —particular meaning.
TRANSLATION
The songs of the queens at Dvaraka, which are mentioned at the end of the
Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, have a very special meaning. They are
not understood even by the most learned scholars.
PURPORT
These songs of Srimad-Bhagavatam are verses 15-24 of the Ninetieth Chapter
of the Tenth Canto.
kurari vilapasi tvarn vita-nidra na sese
svapiti jagati ratryam isvaro gupta-bodhah
vayam iva sakhi kaccid gadha-nirbhinna-ceta
nalina-nayana-hasodara-lileksitena
All the queens incessantly thought of Krsna. After their pastimes in the water, the
queens said, “Our dear friend the osprey, Krsna is now asleep, but we stay awake
at night because of Him. You laugh at us when you see us awake at night, but why
are you not sleeping? You seem absorbed in thoughts of Krsna. Have you also
been pierced by Krsna’'s smile? His smile is very sweet. One who is pierced by
such an arrow is very fortunate.”


--- Page 238 ---
238 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-l7la, Ch. 19
netre nimilayasi naktam adrsta-bandhus
tvam roravisi karunam bata cakravaki
dasyam gata vayam ivacyuta-pada-justam
kim va srajam sprhayase kabarena vodhum
^^ cakravaki, you keep your eyes wide open at night because you cannot see
your friend. Indeed, you are suffering very much. 15 it because of compassion that
you are crying, or are you trying to capture Krsna by remembering Him? Having
been touched by the lotus feet of Krsna, all the queens are very happy. Are you
crying to wear Krsna’'s garland on your head? Please answer these questions
clearly, O cakravaki, so that we can understand.”
bho bhoh sada nistanase udanvann
alabdha-nidro ‘dhigata-prajagarah
kim va mukundapahrtatma-lanchanah
praptam dasam tvarm ca gato duratyayam
^^ ocean, you have no opportunity to sleep quietly at night. Instead, you are al-
ways awake and crying. You have received this benediction, and your heart is
broken just like ours. Mukunda'’s business with us is simply to smear our marks of
kunkuma. O ocean, you suffer as much as we.”
(৮377 yaksmana balavatasi grhita indo
ksinas tamo na nija-didhitibhih ksinosi
kaccin mukunda-gaditani yatha vayam tvam
vismrtya bhoh sthagita-gir upalaksyase nah
"^ moon, you appear to be suffering from a severe fever, perhaps tuberculosis.
Indeed, your effulgence does not have the strength to destroy the darkness. Have
you become mad after hearing the songs of Krsna? Is that why you are silent?
Seeing your suffering, we feel that you are one of us.”
kim tvacaritam asmabhir
malayanila te ‘priyam
govindapanga-nirbhinne
hrdirayasi nah smaran
“O Malayan breeze, kindly tell us what wrong we have done to you. Why do you
fan the flames of desire in our hearts? We have been pierced by the arrow of
Govinda’s glance, for He is perfect in the art of awakening the influence of
Cupid.”


--- Page 239 ---
Text 108] The Lord's Inconceivable Behavior 239
megha srimams tvam asi dayito yadavendrasya nanari
Srivatsankarn vayam iva bhavan dhyayati prema-baddhah
atyutkanthah sabala-hrdayo ‘smad-vidho baspa-dharah
smrtva smrtva visrjasi muhur duhkha-das tat-prasangah
“Dear cloud, O friend of Krsna's, are you thinking of the Srivatsa symbol on Krsna’s
chest like us queens engaged in loving affairs with Him? You are absorbed in
meditation, remembering the association of Krsna, and thus you shed tears of
misery.”
priya-rava-padani bhasase
mrta-samjivikayanaya gira
karavani kim adya te priyam
vada me valgita-kantha kokila
“Dear cuckoo, you possess a very sweet voice, and you are very expert in imi-
tating others. You could excite even a dead body with your voice. Therefore, tell
the queens that good behavior is their proper duty.”
na calasi na vadasy uddara-buddhe
ksiti-dhara cintyase mahantam artham
api bata vasudeva-nandananghririn
vayam iva kamayase stanair vidhartum
“O magnanimous mountain, you are very grave and sober, absorbed in thoughts
of doing something very great. Like us, you have vowed to keep within your heart
the lotus feet of Krsna, the son of Vasudeva.”
Susyad-ghradah karsita bata sindhu-patnyah
sampraty-apasta-kamala-sriya-ista-bhartuh
yadvad vayam madhu-pateh pranayavalokam
aprapya musta-hrdayah puru-karsitah sma
“Orrivers, wives of the ocean, we see that the ocean does not give you happiness.
Thus you have almost dried up, and you no longer bear beautiful lotuses. The
lotuses have become skinny, and even in the sunshine they are devoid of all
pleasure. Similarly, the hearts of us poor queens are all dried up, and our bodies
are skinny because we are now devoid of loving affairs with Madhupati. Are you,
like us, dry and without beauty because you are devoid of Krsna’s loving glance?”
harmsa svagatam asyatam piba payo brahy anga saureh katham
datarn tvarm nu vidama kaccid ajitah svasty asta uktarn pura


--- Page 240 ---
240 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
kim va nas cala-sauhrdah smarati tar kasmad bhajamo vayam
ksaudralapaya-kamadam Sriyamrte saivaika-nistha striyam
“O swan, you have come here so happily! Let us welcome you. We understand
that you are always Krsna’s messenger. Now while you drink this milk, tell us what
His message is. Has Krsna said something about us to you? May we inquire from
you whether Krsna is happy? We want to know. Does He remember us? We
know that the goddess of fortune is serving Him alone. We are simply maidser-
vants. How can we worship He who speaks sweet words but never fulfills our

desires?”
TEXT 109
মহাপ্রভু-নিত্যানন্দ, (FIZ দাসের काज ।
যারে कुण॑। করেন, তার হয় ইথে বিশ্বাস ॥ ১০৯ ॥
mahaprabhu-nityananda, donhara dasera dasa
yare krpa karena, tara haya ithe visvasa
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu—S$ri  Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityananda—Lord Nityananda;
donhara dasera dasa—I am a servant of the servant of the servants of these two
personalities; yare krpa karena—if anyone is favored by Them; tara haya—he cer-
tainly maintains; ithe visvasa—faith in all these affairs.
TRANSLATION
If one becomes a servant of the servants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
Lord Nityananda Prabhu and is favored by Them, he can believe in all these
discourses.
TEXT 110
শ্রদ্ধা করি, खन ইহা, শুনিতে मर्‌] थ |
খণ্ডিবে আধ্যাত্মিকাদি কুতর্কাদি-তুঃখ ॥ ১১০ ॥
$raddha kari, $una 103, sunite maha-sukha
khandibe adhyatmikadi kutarkadi-duhkha
SYNONYMS
Sraddha kari—with great faith; suna—hear; iha—all these topics; sunite —even
to hear; maha-sukha—great pleasure; khandibe—it will destroy; adhyatmika-


--- Page 241 ---
Text 112] The Lord’s Inconceivable Behavior 241
adi—all distresses due to the body, mind and so on; kutarka-adi-duhkha—and
the miserable conditions arising from the use of false arguments.
TRANSLATION
Just try to hear these topics with faith, for there is great pleasure even in
hearing them. That hearing will destroy all miseries pertaining to the body,
mind and other living entities, and the unhappiness of false arguments as well.
TEXT 111
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্বত- নিত্য-নুতন।
শুনিতে শুনিতে জুড়ায় ছুদয়-শ্রবণ ॥ ১১১ ॥
caitanya-caritamrta——nitya-natana
Sunite sunite juddya hrdaya-sravana
SYNONYMS
caitanya-carita-amrta—the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; nitya-natana—al-
ways fresh; sunite sunite—by hearing and hearing; juddya—becomes pacified;
hrdaya-sravana—the ear and heart.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya-caritamrta is ever-increasingly fresh. Continuously hearing it
pacifies one’s heart and ear.
TEXT 112
জীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চৈতন্যচরিতামৃত কহে FAFA ॥ ১১২ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe —describes; krsnadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.


--- Page 242 ---
242 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION

Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and Sri Raghunitha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-Iila,
Nineteenth Chapter, describing the Lord’s devotion to His mother, His mad
speeches in separation from Krsna, His rubbing His face against the walls, and His
dancing in the Jagannatha-vallabha garden.


--- Page 243 ---
CHAPTER 20
The Siksastaka Prayers
The following summary study of the Twentieth Chapter is given by Srila Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed His
nights tasting the meaning of Siksastaka in the company of Svarapa Damodara
Cosvami and Ramananda Raya. Sometimes He recited verses from Jayadeva
Gosvami's Gita-govinda, from Srimad-Bhagavatam, from Sri Ramananda Raya’s
Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka or from Sri Bilvamangala Thakura's Krsna-karnamrta. In
this way, He became absorbed in ecstatic emotions. For the twelve years Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu lived at Jagannatha Puri, He relished the taste of reciting
such transcendental verses. The Lord was present in this mortal world for forty-
eight years altogether. After hinting about the Lord's disappearance, the author of
Caitanya-caritamrta gives a short description of the entire Antya-lila and then
ends his book.
TEXT 1
প্রেমোষ্কাবিতহর্ের্ষ্যোদ্বেগদৈন্যাতিমিশ্রিতম্‌ |
লপিতং গৌরচন্দ্রন্ত ভাগ্যবস্ডিনিষেব্যতে ॥ > ॥
premodbhavita-harsersyod-
vega-dainyarti-misritam
lapitar gauracandrasya
bhagyavadbhir nisevyate
SYNONYMS
prema-udbhavita—produced from ecstatic love and emotion; harsa—jubila-
tion; irsyd—envy; udvega—agitation; dainya—submissiveness; arti—grief;
misritam—mixed with; fapitam—talks like those of a crazy man; gaura-
candrasya—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhagyavadbhih—by the most fortu-
nate; nisevyate —is enjoyable.
TRANSLATION
Only the most fortunate will relish the mad words of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, which mixed with jubilation, envy, agitation, submissiveness
and grief, all produced by ecstatic loving emotions.
243


--- Page 244 ---
244 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 2
জয় জয় গৌরচন্দ্র জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়াদ্বৈতচল্দর জয় গোরন্তক্তবৃন্দ ॥२॥
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; gauracandra—to Lord ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—to Lord Nityananda Prabhu; jaya—all glories; advaita-
candra—to Advaita Prabhu; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vinda—to the devo-
tees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda!
All glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to all the devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 3
এইমত মহাপ্রভু বৈসে নীলাচলে |
রজনী-দিবসে কৃষ্ণবিরহে বিহরবলে ॥ ৩ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu vaise nilacale
rajani-divase krspa-virahe vihvale
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vaise nilacale —
resided at Nilacala; rajani-divase—day and night; krsna-virahe —because of sepa-
ration from Krsna; vihvale —overwhelmed.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus resided at Jagannatha Puri [Nilacalal,
He was continuously overwhelmed, night and day, by separation from Krsna.
TEXT 4
স্বরূপ, ANH, — এই দুইজন-সনে |
রাত্রি-দিনে রস-গীত-শ্লেক আস্বাদনে ॥ 8 ॥


--- Page 245 ---
Text 6] The Siksastaka Prayers 245
svarapa, ramananda, — ei duijana-sane
ratri-dine rasa-gita-sloka asvadane
SYNONYMS
svarapa—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; ramananda—Ramananda Raya; ei—
these; dui-jana-sane—with two persons; ratri-dine—night and day; rasa-gita-
Sloka—verses and songs containing the mellows of transcendental bliss;
asvadane—in tasting.
TRANSLATION
Day and night He tasted transcendental blissful songs and verses with two
associates, namely Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya.
TEXT 5
নানা-ভাব উঠে প্রভুর হর্ষ, শোক, রোষ 1
দৈদ্যোছ্বেগ-আত্তি উৎকণ্ঠা, সন্তোষ ॥ ৫ ॥
nana-bhava uthe prabhura harsa, soka, rosa
dainyodvega-arti utkantha, santosa
SYNONYMS
nana-bhava—all kinds of emotion; uthe—awaken; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; harsa—jubilation; soka—lamentation; rosa—anger; dainya—
humility; udvega—anxiety; arti—grief; utkantha—more eagerness; santosa—
satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
He relished the symptoms of various transcendental emotions such as
jubilation, lamentation, anger, humility, anxiety, grief, eagerness and satisfac-
tion.
TEXT 6
সেই সেই ভাবে মিজ-শ্লোক পড়িয়া ৷
শ্লোকের অর্থ আস্বাদয়ে দুইবন্ধু Fel ॥ ৬ ॥
sei sei bhave nija-sloka padiya
slokera artha asvadaye dui-bandhu lana


--- Page 246 ---
246 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
SYNONYMS
sei sei bhave —in that particular emotion; nija-sloka padiya —reciting His own
verses; slokera—of the verses; artha—meaning; asvadaye —tastes; dui-bandhu
lana —with two friends.
TRANSLATION
He would recite His own verses, expressing their meanings and emotions,
and thus enjoy tasting them with these two friends.
TEXT 7
কোন দিনে কোন ভাবে শ্লোক-পঠন |
সেই শ্লোক আস্বাদ্বিতে রাত্রি-জাগরণ ॥ ৭ ॥
kona dine kona bhave sloka-pathana
sei sloka asvadite ratri-jagarana
SYNONYMS
kona dine—sometimes; kona bhave—in some emotion; sloka-pathana—
reciting the verses; sei sloka—those verses; dsvadite—to taste; rdtri-jagarana—
keeping awake at night.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the Lord would be absorbed in a particular emotion and would
stay awake all night reciting related verses and relishing their taste.
TEXT 8
FE প্রভু कटङन,- “खन স্বক্ূপ-রামরায় ।
নামসঙ্কীর্তন- কলে পরম উপায় ॥ ৮ ॥
harse prabhu kahena,—— “Suna 5৮3/003-/3/773-/3%/3
nama-sankirtana— kalau parama upaya
SYNONYMS
harse —in jubilation; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahena—says; suna—
please hear; svaripa-rama-raya—My dear Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and Rama-
nanda Raya; nama-sankirtana—chanting of the holy name of the Lord; kalau—in
the age of Kali; parama upaya—the most feasible means for deliverance.


--- Page 247 ---
Text 10] The Siksastaka Prayers 247
TRANSLATION
In great jubilation, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “My dear Svariipa
Damodara and Ramananda Riya, know from Me that chanting of the holy
names is the most feasible means of salvation in this age of Kali.
TEXT 9
गद्धोरनयटच्छ कटनो কৃষ্ণ-আরাধন |
সেই ऊ স্থমেধা পায় কৃষ্ণের চরণ ॥ > ॥
sankirtana-yajie kalau krsna-aradhana
sei ta’ sumedha paya krsnera carana
SYNONYMS
sankirtana-yajie—performing the yajna of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra;
kalau —in this age of Kali; krsna-aradhana—the process of worshiping Krsna; sei
ta’—such persons; su-medha—greatly intelligent; paya—get; krsnera carana—
shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
1) this age of Kali, the process of worshiping Krsna is to perform sacrifice
by chanting the holy name of the Lord. One who does so is certainly very in-
telligent, and he attains shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna.
PURPORT
For further information, one may refer to the Adi-lila, Chapter Three, texts
77-78.
TEXT 10
FAR ত্তিষাইক্বষ্ণৎ সাঙ্গোপাঙ্গাস্ত্রপার্ষদম্‌ |
Tm: AF SA প্রাম়ৈযজস্তি হি হ্থমেধনঃ ॥ ১০ ॥
krsna-varpar tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadam
yajiaih sankirtana-prayair
yajanti hi sumedhasah
SYNONYMS
krsna-varpam—repeating the syllables krs-pa; tvisa—with a luster; akrspam—
not black (golden); sa-anga—with associates; upanga—servitors; astra—weap-


--- Page 248 ---
248 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
ons; parsadam—confidential companions; yajAaih—by sacrifice; sankirtana-
prayaih —consisting chiefly of congregational chanting; yajanti—they worship;
hi—certainly; su-medhasah —intelligent persons.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational chanting to
worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings the name of Krsna.
Although His complexion is not blackish, He is Krsna Himself. He is accom-
panied by His associates, servants, weapons and confidential companions.’
PURPORT
This verse is spoken by Saint Karabhajana in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.32). For
further information, see Adi-lila, Chapter Three, text 52.
TEXT 11
নামসঙ্কীর্তন হৈতে সর্বানর্থ-নাশ |
সর্ব-শুভোদয়, কৃষ্ণ-প্রেমের উল্লাস ॥ >> ॥
nama-sankirtana haite sarvanartha-nasa
sarva-subhodaya, krsna-premera ullasa
SYNONYMS
nama-sankirtana—chanting of the holy names of the Lord; haite—from; sarva-
anartha-nasa—destruction of all undesirable things; sarva-subha-udaya—
awakening of all good fortune; krsna-premera ullasa—the beginning of the flow
of love of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna, one can be freed from all
undesirable habits. This is the means of awakening all good fortune and in-
itiating the flow of waves of love for Krsna.
TEXT 12
চেতোদপপণমার্জনৎ ভবমহাদাবাগ্নিনির্বাপণং
শ্রেয়ঃকৈরবচন্দ্রিকা বিতরণং বিদ্যাবধূজীবনম্‌ |
আনন্দাত্বুধিবর্ধনং প্রতিপদং পূর্ণামৃতাস্বাদনৎ
সর্বাত্মস্বপনং পরং বিজয়তে শ্রীকবষ্ণসন্কীর্তনম্‌ ॥ ১২ ॥


--- Page 249 ---
Text 13] The Siksastaka Prayers 249
ceto-darpana-marjanarn bhava-mahadavagni-nirvapanam
Sreyah-kairava-candrika-vitaranarm vidya-vadha-jivanam
anandambudhi-vardhanam prati-padam parpamrtasvadanar
sarvatma-snapanam param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam
SYNONYMS
cetah—of the heart; darpana—the mirror; mdarjanam—cleansing; bhava—of
material existence; maha-davagni—the blazing forest fire; nirvapanam—ex-
tinguishing; sreyah—of good fortune; kairava—the white lotus; candrika—the
moonshine; vitaranam—spreading; vidya—of all education; vadha—wife;
jivanam—the life; ananda—of bliss; ambudhi—the ocean; vardhanam—in-
creasing; prati-padam—at every step; pdarpa-amrta—of the full nectar;
asvadanam—giving a taste; sarva—for everyone; atma-snapanam—bathing of
the self; param —transcendental; vijayate—let there be victory; sri-krspa-
sankirtanam —for the congregational chanting of the holy name of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna,
which can cleanse the mirror of the heart and stop the miseries of the blazing
fire of material existence. That chanting is the waxing moon that spreads the
white lotus of good fortune for all living entities. It is the life and soul of all
education. The chanting of the holy name of Krsna expands the blissful ocean
of transcendental life. It gives a cooling effect to everyone and enables one to
taste full nectar at every step.
PURPORT
This is the first verse of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s Siksastaka. The other seven
verses are found in texts 16, 21, 29, 32, 36, 39 210 47.
TEXT 13
সন্ধীর্তন হৈতে পাপ-সংসার-নাশন |
চিত্তশুদ্বি, সর্বভক্তিসাধন-উদগম ॥ ১৩ ॥
sankirtana haite papa-samsara-nasana
citta-suddhi, sarva-bhakti-sadhana-udgama
SYNONYMS
sankirtana haite—from the process of chanting the holy name; papa-samsara-
nasana—annihilation of materialistic life resulting from sins; citta-suddhi—


--- Page 250 ---
250 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
cleansing of the heart; sarva-bhakti—all kinds of devotional service; sadhana —of
the performances; udgama—awakening.
TRANSLATION
‘‘By performing congregational chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra, one can
destroy the sinful condition of material existence, purify the unclean heart
and awaken all varieties of devotional service.
TEXT 14
करखश्टव्थंटयाकलय, প্রেমাম্ৃত-আস্বাদন |
কৃষ্ণপ্রাপ্তি, সেবাম্বত-সমুদ্রে মড্জন ॥ ১৪ ॥
krsna-premodgama, premamrta-asvadana
krsna-prapti, sevamrta-samudre majjana
SYNONYMS
krsna-prema-udgama—awakening of love for Krsna; prema-amrta-asvadana—
tasting of the transcendental bliss of love for Krsna; krsna-prapti—attainment of
the lotus feet of Krsna; seva-amrta—of the nectar of service; samudre—in the
ocean; majjana—immersing.
TRANSLATION
‘The result of chanting is that one awakens his love for Krsna and tastes
transcendental bliss. Ultimately, one attains the association of Krsna and
engages in His devotional service, as if immersing himself in a great ocean of
love.”
TEXT 15
উঠিল বিষাদ, देन, পড়ে আপন-প্লোক |
যাহার অর্থ শুনি” সব যায় তুঃখ-শোক ॥ ১৫ ॥
uthila visada, dainya, —pade apana-sloka
yahara artha suni’ saba yaya duhkha-soka
SYNONYMS
uthila visada—there was awakening of lamentation; dainya—humility; pade —
reads; apana-sloka—His own verse; yahara—of which; artha suni’—hearing the
meaning; saba—all; yaya—go away; duhkha-soka—unhappiness and lamenta-
tion.


--- Page 251 ---
Text 17} The Siksastaka Prayers 251
TRANSLATION
Lamentation and humility awoke within $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and He
began reciting another of His own verses. By hearing the meaning of that
verse, one can forget all unhappiness and lamentation.
TEXT 16
নায়ামকারি বহুধা নিজসর্বশ ক্তি-
खव्यांत्रिङ। নিয়মিতঃ স্মরণে न কালঃ ।
SIEM তব Fo ভগবন্সমমাপি
দুর্দৈবমীদৃশমিহাজনি नात्रः ॥ ১৬ ॥
namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis
tatrarpita niyamitah smarane na kalah
etadrsi tava krpa bhagavan mamapi
durdaivam idrsam ihajani nanuragah
SYNONYMS
namnam—of the holy names of the Lord; akari—manifested; bahudha—
various kinds; nija-sarva-saktih—all kinds of personal potency; tatra—in that; ar-
pitai—bestowed; niyamitah—restricted; smarane—in remembering; na—not;
kalah—consideration of time; etadrsi—so much; tava—Your; krpa—mercy;
bhagavan—O Lord; mama—My; api—although; durdaivam—misfortune;
idrsam—such; iha—in this (the holy name); ajani—was born; na—not;
anuragah —attachment.
TRANSLATION
“My Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, in Your holy name there is
all good fortune for the living entity, and therefore You have many names,
such as Krsna and Govinda, by which You expand Yourself. You have invested
all Your potencies in those names, and there are no hard and fast rules for
remembering them. My dear Lord, although You bestow such mercy upon the
fallen, conditioned souls by liberally teaching Your holy names, | am so unfor-
tunate that | commit offenses while chanting the holy name, and therefore | do
not achieve attachment for chanting.
TEXT 17
অনেক-লোকের व] छ।--खटनक-व्कांन्न |
FATS করিল অমনেক-নামের প্রচার ॥ ১৭ ॥


--- Page 252 ---
252 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
aneka-lokera vaficha —aneka-prakara
krpate karila aneka-namera pracara
SYNONYMS
aneka-lokera—of many persons; vancha—the desires; aneka-prakara—of
many varieties; krpate—by Your mercy; karila—You have done; aneka—various;
namera—of the holy names; pracara—broadcasting,
TRANSLATION
‘‘Because people vary in their desires, You have distributed various holy
names by Your mercy.
TEXT 18
খাইতে শুইতে যথা তথা নাম लन्न ।
কাল-দেশ-নিয়ম নাহি, সর্ব जिक्ि হুয় ॥ ১৮ ॥
khaite Suite yatha tatha nama laya
kala-desa-niyama nahi, sarva siddhi haya
SYNONYMS
khaite—eating; suite—lying down; yatha—as; tatha—so; nama laya—one
takes the holy name; kala—in time; desa—in place; niyama—regulation; nahi—
there is not; sarva siddhi haya—there is all perfection.
TRANSLATION
“Regardless of time or place, one who chants the holy name, even while
eating or sleeping, attains all perfection.
TEXT 19
“সর্বশক্তি নামে किनि] <f@m বিভাগ ।
আমার BUH, — নামে নাহি অনুরাগ 1» ১৯ ॥
“sarva-sakti name dila kariya vibhaga
amara durdaiva, — name nahi ৭7017389117
SYNONYMS
sarva-sakti—all potencies; name—in the holy name; dila—You have
bestowed; kariya vibhaga—making separation; amara durdaiva—My misfortune;
name —for chanting the holy names; nahi—there is not; anuraga—attachment.


--- Page 253 ---
Text 21] The Siksastaka Prayers 253
TRANSLATION
‘You have invested Your full potencies in each individual holy name, but 1
am so unfortunate that I have no attachment for chanting Your holy names.”
TEXT 20
যেরূপে লইলে নাম প্রেম উপজয় |
তাহার লক্ষণ শুন, স্বরূপ-রামরায় ॥ ২০ ॥
ye-rape la-ile nama prema upajaya
tahara laksana suna, svarapa-rama-raya
SYNONYMS
ye-rape—by which process; la-ile —if chanting; nama —the holy name; prema
upajaya—dormant love of Krsna awakens; tahara laksana suna—just hear the
symptom of that; svardpa-rama-rdya—O Svarapa Damodara and Ramananda
Raya.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, /0 Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and
Ramananda Raya, hear from Me the symptoms of how one should chant the
Hare Krsna maha-mantra to awaken very easily one’s dormant love for Krsna.
TEXT 21
তৃণাদপি স্থনীচেন তরোরিব সহিষ্ণুনা!।
অমানিনা মানদেন কীর্তনীয়ঃ সদা TFA ॥ ২১ ॥
trnad api sunicena
taror iva sahisnuna
amanina manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih
SYNONYMS
trnat api—than downtrodden grass; sunicena—being lower; taroh—than a
tree; iva—like; sahisnuna—with tolerance; amanina—without being puffed up
by false pride; manadena—giving respect to all; kirtaniyah—to be chanted;
sada—always; harih —the holy name of the Lord.


--- Page 254 ---
254 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
‘One who thinks himself lower than the grass, who is more tolerant than a
tree, and who does not expect personal honor but is always prepared to give
all respect to others, can very easily always chant the holy name of the Lord.
TEXT 22
উত্তম ङ| আপনাকে মানে তৃণাধম |
দুইপ্রকারে সহিযুণঞ্তা করে JHA ॥ ২২ ॥
uttama hana apanake mane trnadhama
dui-prakare sahisnuta kare vrksa-sama
SYNONYMS
uttama hana —although being very exalted; apanake —himself; mane —thinks;
trna-adhama—Ilower than a blade of the grass on the ground; dui-prakare —in
two ways; sahisnuta—tolerance; kare —performs; vrksa-sama—like the tree.
TRANSLATION
“These are the symptoms of one who chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
Although he is very exalted, he thinks himself lower than the grass on the
ground, and like a tree, he tolerates everything in two ways.
TEXT 23
বৃক্ষ যেল কার্টিলেহু কিছু न বোলয় |
SP মৈলেহ কারে পানী A AAT ॥ ২৩ ॥
vrksa yena katileha kichu na bolaya
sukana maileha kare pani na magaya
SYNONYMS
vrksa—a tree; yena—as; katileha—when it is cut; kichu na bolaya—does not
say anything; sukana—drying up; maileha—if dying; kare—anyone; pani—
water; na magaya—does not ask for.
TRANSLATION
“When a tree is cut down, it does not protest, and even when drying up, it
does not ask anyone for water.


--- Page 255 ---
Text 26] The Siksastaka Prayers 255
TEXT 24
যেই যে মাগয়ে, তারে দেয় আপন-ধন।
ঘর্ম-বৃষ্টি সহে, আনের করয়ে রক্ষণ ॥ ২৪ ॥
yei ye magaye, tare deya apana-dhana
gharma-vrsti sahe, anera karaye raksana
SYNONYMS
yei ye magaye—if anyone asks anything from the tree; tare—unto him; deya—
gives; apana-dhana—its own wealth; gharma-vrsti—the scorching heat of the sun
and torrents of rain; sahe—tolerates; anera—to others; karaye raksana—gives
protection.
TRANSLATION
“The tree delivers its fruits, flowers and whatever it possesses to anyone
and everyone. It tolerates scorching heat and torrents of rain, yet it still gives
shelter to others.
TEXT 25
উত্তম হঞ। বৈষ্ণব হবে নিরভিমান |
জীবে সম্মান দিবে জানি” “কৃষ্ণ'-অধিষ্ঠান ॥ ২৫ ॥
uttama hana vaisnava habe nirabhimana
jive sammana dibe jani’ *krsna’-adhisthana
SYNONYMS
uttama hana—although being very exalted; vaispnava—a devotee; habe—
should become; nirabhimana—without pride; jive—to all living entities; sam-
mana dibe—should give respect; jani’—knowing; krsna-adhisthana—the residing
place of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘Although a Vaisnava is the most exalted person, he is prideless and gives
all respect to everyone, knowing everyone to be the resting place of Krsna.
TEXT 26
এইমত 2.31 যেই কৃষ্ণনাম लसर |
জীকৃষ্ণচরণে তার প্রেম উপজয় ॥ ২৬ ॥


--- Page 256 ---
256 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
ei-mata hana yei krspna-nama laya
$ri-krsna-carane tanra prema upajaya
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; haiia—becoming; yei—anyone who; krsna-nama laya—
chants the holy name of Krsna; sri-krsna-carane—at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna;
tanra—his; prema upajaya—love of Krsna awakens.
TRANSLATION
‘‘1f one chants the holy name of Lord Krsna in this manner, he will certainly
awaken his dormant love for Krsna’s lotus feet.”
TEXT 27
কহিতে কহিতে প্রভুর wd বাড়িল। ।
‘gee কৃষ্ণ-ঠাঞি মানিতে লাগিল। ॥ ২৭ ॥
kahite kahite prabhura dainya badila
‘suddha-bhakti’ krspa-thani magite lagila
SYNONYMS
kahite kahite—speaking like this; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dainya—humility; badila—increased; suddha-bhakti—pure devotional service;
krspa-thani—from Krsna; magite lagila—began to pray for.
TRANSLATION
As Lord Caitanya spoke in this way, His humility increased, and He began
praying to Krsna that He could discharge pure devotional service.
TEXT 28
প্রেমের স্বভাব- यो] প্রেমের जच्छ |
সেই মানে, FT মোর নাহি 'প্রেম-গন্ধ' ॥ २७. ॥
premera svabhava——yahan premera sambandha
sei mane, —‘krsne mora nahi prema-gandha’
SYNONYMS
premera sva-bhava—the nature of love of Godhead; yaharn—where; premera
sambandha—a relationship of love of Godhead; sei mane—he recognizes;


--- Page 257 ---
Text 29] The Siksastaka Prayers 257
krsne—unto Lord Krsna; mora—my; nahi—there is not; prema-gandha—even a
scent of love of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

Wherever there is a relationship of love of Godhead, its natural symptom is
that the devotee does not think himself a devotee. Instead, he always thinks
that he has not even a drop of love for Krsna.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that persons who are ac-
tually very poor because they possess not even a drop of love of Godhead or pure
devotional service falsely advertise themselves as great devotees, although they
cannot at any time relish the transcendental bliss of devotional service. A class of
so-called devotees known as prakrta-sahajiyas sometimes display devotional
symptoms to exhibit their good fortune. They are pretending, however, because
these devotional features are only external. The prakrta-sahajiyas exhibit these
symptoms to advertise their so-called advancement in love of Krsna, but instead
of praising the prakrta-sahajiyas for their symptoms of transcendental ecstasy,
pure devotees do not like to associate with them. It is not advisable to equate the
prakrta-sahajiyas with pure devotees. When one is actually advanced in ecstatic
love of Krsna, he does not try to advertise himself. Instead, he endeavors more
and more to render service to the Lord.

The prakrta-sahajiyas sometimes criticize pure devotees by calling them
philosophers, learned scholars, knowers of the truth, or minute observers, but not
devotees. On the other hand, they depict themselves as the most advanced,
transcendentally blissful devotees, deeply absorbed in devotional service and
mad to taste transcendental mellows. They also describe themselves as the most
advanced devotees in spontaneous love, as knowers of transcendental mellows,
as the topmost devotees in conjugal love of Krsna, and so on. Not actually
knowing the transcendental nature of love of God, they accept their material
emotions to be indicative of advancement. In this way they pollute the process of
devotional service. To try to become writers of Vaisnava literature, they introduce
their material conceptions of life into pure devotional service. Because of their
material conceptions, they advertise themselves as knowers of transcendental
mellows, but they do not understand the transcendental nature of devotional ser-
vice.

TEXT 29
न धनस्न AL ন হন্দরীং কবিতাৎবা জগদীশ কাময়ে।
মম TAA FAA AA ভবতান্তক্তিরহৈতুকী তয়ি ॥ ২৯ ॥


--- Page 258 ---
258 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
na dhanam na janam na sundariri
kavitarh va jagadisa kamaye
mama janmani jamanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
SYNONYMS
na—not; dhanam —riches; na—not; janam—followers; na—not; sundarim—a
very beautiful woman; kavitam—fruitive activities described in flowery language;
va—or; jagat-isa—O Lord of the universe; kamaye—I desire; mama—My; jan-
mani—in birth; janmani—after birth; isvare—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bhavatat—let there be; bhaktih —devotional service; ahaituki—with
no motives; tvayi—unto You.
TRANSLATION
““O Lord of the universe, | do not desire material wealth, materialistic
followers, a beautiful wife or fruitive activities described in flowery language.
All I want, life after life, is unmotivated devotional service to You.
TEXT 30
“ধন, জন নাহি ACH, কবিতা TWA |
“শুদ্ধভক্তি” দেহ” মোরে, কৃষ্ণ কৃপা করি” ॥ ৩০ ॥
dhana, jana nahi magon, kavita sundari
‘Suddha-bhakti’ deha’ more, krsna krpa kari’
SYNONYMS
dhana—wealth; jana—followers; nahi—do not; magon—I| want; kavita sun-
dari—a beautiful wife or fruitive activities; suddha-bhakti—pure devotional ser-
vice; deha—please award; more—unto Me; krsna—O Lord Krsna; krpa kari'—
becoming merciful.
TRANSLATION
‘“My dear Lord Krsna, ॥ do not want material wealth from You, nor do | want
followers, a beautiful wife or the results of fruitive activities. 1 only pray that
by Your causeless mercy You give Me pure devotional service to You, life after
life.
TEXT 31
सङदिनट পুলঃ মাগে দাস্তযভক্তি-দান |
আপনারে করে সংসারী জীব-অভিমান ॥ ৩১ ॥


--- Page 259 ---
Text 33] The Siksastaka Prayers 259
ati-dainye punah mage dasya-bhakti-dana
apanare kare sarnsari jiva-abhimana
SYNONYMS
ati-dainye—in great humility; punah-—again; mage —begs; dasya-bhakti-
dana—the awarding of devotion in servitude; apanare —to Himself; kare —does;
sarsari—materialistic; jiva-abhimana—conception as a conditioned soul.
TRANSLATION
In great humility, considering Himself a conditioned soul of the material
world, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again expressed His desire to be endowed
with service to the Lord.
TEXT 32
अभि Awery কিঙ্করং পতিতং মাং বিষমে sarge ।
FAT তব পাদপক্ষজ স্থিতধূলীসদৃশং বিচিষ্তয় ॥ ৩২ ॥
ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitarn mar visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-pankaja-
sthita-dhali-sadrsar vicintaya
SYNONYMS
ayi—oh, My Lord; nanda-tanuja—the son of Nanda Mahardja, Krsna;
kinkaram—the servant; patitam—fallen; mam—Me; visame —horrible; bhava-
ambudhau —in the ocean of nescience; krpaya—by causeless mercy; tava—Your;
pada-pankaja—lotus feet; sthita—situated at; dhali-sadrsam—Ilike a particle of
dust; vicintaya—kindly consider.
TRANSLATION
“Oh, My Lord, O Krsna, son of Maharaja Nanda, | am Your eternal servant,
but because of My own fruitive acts, ॥ have fallen in this horrible ocean of
nescience. Now please be causelessly merciful to Me. Consider Me a particle
of dust at Your lotus feet.
TEXT 33
“তোমার নিত্যদাস মুই, তোমা পাসরিয়া।
পড়িয়াছে। ভবাণৰে মায়াবদ্ধ gpl ॥ ৩৩ ॥


--- Page 260 ---
260 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
“tomara nitya-dasa mui, toma pasariya
padiyachon bhavarnave maya-baddha hana
SYNONYMS
tomara—Your; nitya-dasa—eternal servant; mui—I|; toma pasariya —forgetting
Your Lordship; padiyachori—! have fallen; bhava-arnave—in the ocean of
nescience; maya-baddha hana —becoming conditioned by the external energy.
TRANSLATION
“(| am Your eternal servant, but | forgot Your Lordship. Now 1 have fallen in
the ocean of nescience and have been conditioned by the external energy.
TEXT 34
Fo করি” কর মোরে পদধুলি-সম ।
তোমার সেবক TTF তোমার সেবন ॥ ৩৪ ॥
krpa kari’ kara more pada-dhali-sama
tomara sevaka karon tomara sevana”
SYNONYMS
krpa kari’—being merciful; kara—make; more —Me; pada-dhali-sama—Ilike a
particle of dust at Your lotus feet; tomara sevaka—as | am Your eternal servant;
karori—let Me be engaged; tomara sevana—in Your service.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Be causelessly merciful to Me by giving Me a place with the particles of
dust at Your lotus feet so that | may engage in the service of Your Lordship as
Your eternal servant.”
TEXT 35
পুনঃ অতি-উৎকণ্ঠ, Lr 2&1 Tw |
কৃষ্ণ-ঠাঞি মাগে প্রেম-নামসঙ্কীর্তন ॥ ৩৫ ॥
punah ati-utkantha, dainya ha-ila udgama
krsna-thani mage prema-nama-sankirtana
SYNONYMS
punah—again; ati-utkantha—great eagerness; dainya—humility; ha-ila
udgama—was awakened; krsna-thani—from Lord Krsna; mage—prays for;
prema —in ecstatic love; nama-sarnkirtana—chanting the maha-mantra.


--- Page 261 ---
Text 37] The Siksastaka Prayers 261
TRANSLATION
Natural humility and eagerness then awoke in Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He prayed to Krsna to be able to chant the maha-mantra in
ecstatic love.
TEXT 36
নয়নং SARAH TAAL, বদনং গদগদ-রুক্কয় গিরা।
পুলকৈনিচিতং বপুঃ কদা, তব নাম-গ্রহণে ভবিষ্যতি ॥৩৬॥
nayanarh galad-asru-dharaya
vadanarh gadgada-ruddhaya gira
pulakair nicitarh vapuh kada,
tava nama-grahane bhavisyati
SYNONYMS
nayanam—the eyes; galat-asru-dharaya—by streams of tears running down;
vadanam—mouth; gadgada—faltering; ruddhaya—choked up; gira—with
words; pulakaih—with erection of the hairs due to transcendental happiness;
nicitam—covered; vapuh—the body; kadd—when; tava—Your; nama-grahane —
in chanting the name; bhavisyati—will be.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Lord, when will My eyes be beautified by filling with tears that
constantly glide down as | chant Your holy name? When will My voice falter
and all the hairs on My body stand erect in transcendental happiness as | chant
Your holy name?
TEXT 37
“প্রেমধন বিনা ব্যর্থ দরিদ্র জীবন ।
“দাস” করি” বেতন মোরে দেহ (ATLA ॥” ৩৭ ॥
“prema-dhana vina vyartha daridra jivana
‘dasa’ kari’ vetana more deha prema-dhana”
SYNONYMS
prema-dhana—the wealth of ecstatic love; vind—without; vyartha—useless;
daridra jivana—poor life; dasa kari’—accepting as Your eternal servant; vetana—
salary; more—unto Me; deha—give; prema-dhana—the treasure of love of
Codhead.


--- Page 262 ---
262 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
“Without love of Godhead, My life is useless. Therefore | pray that You ac-
cept Me as Your servant and give Me the salary of ecstatic love of God."’
TEXT 38
রসাম্তরাবেশে হইল বিয়োগ-স্ফুরণ |
উদ্বেগ, বিষাদ, ट्ट कटर जननेन ॥ ৩৮ ॥
rasantaravese ha-ila viyoga-sphurana
udvega, visada, dainye kare pralapana
SYNONYMS
rasa-antara-avese —in the ecstatic love of different mellows; ha-ila—there was;
viyoga-sphurana—awakening of separation; udvega—distress; visada—morose-
ness; dainye—humility; kare pralapana—speaks like a crazy person.
TRANSLATION
Separation from Krsna awoke various mellows of distress, lamentation and
humility. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like a crazy man.
TEXT 39
যুগায়িতং নিমেষেণ চক্ষুষ। প্রাবৃষা য়িতম্‌ ।
শূন্যায়িতং জগ২ সর্বং গোবিন্দ-বিরহেণ মে ॥ ৩৯ ॥
yugdyitarn nimesena
caksusa pravrsdyitam
Sanydyitarn jagat sarvari
govinda-virahena me
SYNONYMS
yugdyitam —appearing like a great millennium; nimesena—by a moment; cak-
susa—from the eyes; pravrsayitam—tears falling like torrents of rain;
Sanydyitam —appearing void; jagat—the world; sarvam —all; govinda—from Lord
Govinda, Krsna; virahena me—by My separation.
TRANSLATION
“My Lord Govinda, because of separation from You, | consider even a
moment a great millennium. Tears flow from My eyes like torrents of rain, and
॥ see the entire world as void.


--- Page 263 ---
Text 42] The Siksastaka Prayers 263
TEXT 40
উদ্বেগে দিবস না যায়, ক্ষণ' হৈল “যুগ'-সম।
বর্ষার মেখঘপণ্রায় Sep বরিষে নয়ন ॥ ৪০ ॥
udvege divasa na yaya ‘ksana’ haila ‘yuga’-sama
varsara megha-praya asru varise nayana
SYNONYMS
udvege—by great agitation; divasa—day; na—not; ydya—passes; ksana—a
moment; haila—became; yuga-sama—like a great millennium; varsara—of the
rainy season; megha-praya—like clouds; asru—tears; varise—fall down;
nayana—from the eyes.
TRANSLATION
‘‘In My agitation, a day never ends, for every moment seems like a millen-
nium. Pouring incessant tears, My eyes are like clouds in the rainy season.
TEXT 41
গোবিন্দ-বিরহে ग्यक হইল जिवन ।
তুষানলে পোড়ে, যেন ন] যায় জীবন ॥ ৪১ ॥
govinda-virahe Sanya ha-ila tribhuvana
tusanale pode, —yena na yaya jivana
SYNONYMS
govinda-virahe —by separation from Govinda; sanya—void; ha-ila—became;
tri-bhuvana—the three worlds; tusa-anale—in the slow fire; pode —burns;
yena—ijust like; na yaya—does not go; jivana—life.
TRANSLATION
‘The three worlds have become void because of separation from Govinda. |
feel as if | were burning alive in a slow fire.
TEXT 42
কৃষ্ণ উদাসীন হইল। করিতে পরীক্ষণ |
সখী লব कटङ््‌,+ FLW कब्र BCAA’ ॥ ৪২ ॥
krsna udasina ha-ila karite pariksana
sakhi saba kahe,— ‘krsne kara upeksana’


--- Page 264 ---
264 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
SYNONYMS
krspa—Lord Krsna; udasina—indifferent; ha-ila—became; karite—to make;
pariksana—testing; sakhi saba kahe—all the friends say; krsne—unto Krsna;
kara—just do; upeksana—neglecting.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Lord Krsna has become indifferent to Me just to test My love, and My
friends say, ‘Better to disregard Him." ^“
TEXT 43
«TT চিস্তিতে রাধার নির্মল শুদয় ।
স্বাভাবিক প্রেমার স্বভাব করিল উদয় ॥ ৪৩ ॥
eteka cintite radhara nirmala hrdaya
svabhavika premara svabhava karila udaya
SYNONYMS
eteka—thus; cintite—thinking; radhara—of Srimati  Radharani; nirmala
hrdaya—possessing a pure heart; svabhavika—natural; premara—of love of
Krsna; sva-bhava—the character; karila udaya—awakes.
TRANSLATION
While Srimati Radharani was thinking in this way, the characteristics of
natural love became manifest because of Her pure heart.
TEXT 44
नेद, উৎকণ্ঠা, 24D, প্রৌড়ি, বিনয় |
এত रोव এক-ঠাঞি করিল উদয় ॥ 88 ॥
irsya, utkantha, dainya, praudhi, vinaya
eta bhava eka-thani karila udaya
SYNONYMS
irsya—envy; utkantha—eagerness; dainya—humility; praudhi—zeal; vinaya—
solicitation; eta bhava—all these transcendental ecstasies; eka-thani—in one
place; karila udaya—awoke.
TRANSLATION
The ecstatic symptoms of envy, great eagerness, humility, zeal and sup-
plication all became manifest at once.


--- Page 265 ---
Text 47] The Siksastaka Prayers 265
TEXT 45
এত ভাবে রাধার मन অস্থির হইলা।
সখীগণ-আগে প্রৌড়ি-শ্লোক যে পড়িল৷ ॥ ৪৫ ॥
eta bhave radhara mana asthira ha-ila
sakhi-gana-age praudhi-sloka ye padila
SYNONYMS
eta bhave—in that mood; radhara—of Srimati Radharani; mana—the mind;
asthira ha-ila—became agitated; sakhi-gana-age —before the friends, the gopis;
praudhi-sloka—advanced devotional verse; ye—which; padila—She recited.
TRANSLATION
In that mood, the mind of Srimati Radharani was agitated, and therefore She
spoke a verse of advanced devotion to Her gopi friends.
TEXT 46
সেই ভাবে প্রভু সেই শ্লোক উচ্চারিলা |
শ্লোক উচ্চারিতে STH আপনে হইল ॥ ৪৬ ॥
sei bhave prabhu sei sloka uccarila
Sloka uccarite tad-rapa apane ha-ila
SYNONYMS
sei bhave—in that ecstatic mood; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sei—
that; sloka —verse; uccarila—recited; sloka—the verse; uccarite—by reciting;
tat-rapa—Ilike Srimati Radharani; apane —Himself; ha-ila—became.
TRANSLATION
In the same spirit of ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited that verse,
and as soon as He did so, He felt like Srimati Radharani.
TEXT 47
wtfag व्‌] পাদরতাং পিনষ্ট, মা
মদর্শনান্ম্মহতাং করোতু বা।
যথা তথা বা বিদধাতু লম্পটো
মৎ্প্রাণনাথস্ত স এব নাপরঃ ॥ ৪৭ ॥


--- Page 266 ---
266 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
aslisya va pada-ratam pinastu mam
adarsanan marma-hatarn karotu va
yatha tatha va vidadhatu lampato
mat-prana-nathas tu sa eva naparah
SYNONYMS
aslisya—embracing with great pleasure; va—or; pada-ratam—who is fallen at
the lotus feet; pinastu—let Him trample; mam—Me; adarsanat—by not being
visible; marma-hatam—brokenhearted; karotu—Ilet Him make; va —or; yatha—as
(He likes); tatha—so; va—or; vidadhatu—let Him do; lampatah—a debauchee,
who mixes with other women; mat-prana-nathah—the Lord of My life; tu—but;
sah—He; eva—only; na aparah—not anyone else.
TRANSLATION
‘Let Krsna tightly embrace this maidservant, who has fallen at His lotus
feet. Let Him trample Me or break My heart by never being visible to Me. He is
a debauchee, after all, and car do whatever He likes, but He is still no one
other than the worshipable Lord of My heart.
TEXT 48
“আমি - কৃষ্ণপদ-দাসী, তেঁহো- রসস্মথখরাশি,
আলিঙ্গিয়৷ করে আত্মসাথ |
কিবা না দেয় দর্শন, জারেন মোর STA,
তবু তেঁহো-_ মোর প্রাণনাথ ॥ ৪৮ ॥
“ami ——krsna-pada-dasi, tenho —rasa-sukha-rasi,
alingiya kare atma-satha
kiba na deya darasana, jarena mora tanu-mana,
tabu tenho ——mora prana-natha
SYNONYMS
ami—I; krspa-pada-dasi—a maidservant at the lotus feet of Krsna; tenho—He;
rasa-sukha-rasi—the reservoir of transcendental mellows; alingiya—by
embracing; kare—makes; atma-satha—merged; kiba—or; na deya—does not
give; darasana—audience; jarena—corrodes; mora—My; tanu-mana—body and
mind; tabu—still; tenho—He; mora prana-natha—the Lord of My life.
TRANSLATION
“1 am a maidservant at the lotus feet of Krsna. He is the embodiment of
transcendental happiness and mellows. If He likes He can tightly embrace Me


--- Page 267 ---
Text 50] The Siksastaka Prayers 267
and make Me feel oneness with Him, or by not giving Me His audience, He
may corrode My mind and body. Nevertheless, it is He who is the Lord of My
life.
TEXT 49
जयि হে, শুন মোর মনের নিশ্চয় |
কিবা অনুরাগ করে, কিবা দুঃখ निग्न মারে,
মোর প্রাণেশ্বর কৃষ্ণ-__অন্য নয় ॥ ৪৯ ॥
sakhi he, Suna mora manera niscaya
kiba anuraga kare, kiba duhkha diya mare,
mora pranesvara krsna—— anya naya
SYNONYMS
sakhi he—O My dear friend; suna—just hear; mora—My; manera—of the
mind; niscaya—decision; kiba—whether; anuraga—affection; kare —shows;
kiba—or; duhkha—unhappiness; diya—bestowing; mare—kills; mora—My;
prana-isvara—the Lord of life; krspa—Krsna; anya naya—and no one else.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear friend, just hear the decision of My mind. Krsna is the Lord of My
life in all conditions, whether He shows Me affection or kills Me by giving Me
unhappiness.
TEXT 50
ছাড়ি' खख নারীগণ, মোর বশ তঙনুমন,
মোর সৌভাগ্য প্রকট করিয়া ।
তা-সবারে দেয় পীড়া, আমা-সনে করের ক্রীড়া,
সেই নারীগণে দেখা ॥ ৫০ ॥
chadi’ anya nari-gana, mora vasa tanu-mana,
mora saubhagya prakata kariya
ta-sabare deya pida, ama-sane kare krida,
sei nari-gane dekhana
SYNONYMS
chadi’—giving up; anya—other; nari-gana—women; mora—My; vasa—con-
trol; tanu-mana—mind and body; mora—My; saubhagya—fortune; prakata
kariya—manifesting; ta-sabare —unto all of them; deya pida—gives distress; ama-


--- Page 268 ---
268 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
sane —with Me; kare krida—performs loving activities; sei nari-gane —unto these
women; dekhana—showing.
TRANSLATION
‘Sometimes Krsna gives up the company of other gopis and becomes con-
trolled, mind and body, by Me. Thus He manifests My good fortune and gives
others distress by performing His loving affairs with Me.
TEXT 51
কিবা তেঁহো লম্পট, শঠ, शष, जकन,
অন্য নারীগণ করি” সাথ ।
মোরে দিতে মনঃপীড়॥ মোর আগে করে ক্রীড়া,
वु ঙেঁহো_ মোর প্রাণনাথ ॥ ৫১ ॥
1063 tenho lampata, satha, dhrsta, sakapata,
anya nari-gana kari’ satha
more dite manah-pida, mora age kare krida,
tabu terlho —— mora prana-natha
SYNONYMS
kiba—or; tenho—He; lampata—debauchee; satha—deceitful; dhrsta—obsti-
nate; sakapata—with a cheating propensity; anya—other; nari-gana—women;
kari’—accepting; satha—as companions; more—unto Me; dite—to give; manah-
pida—distress in the mind; mora age—in front of Me; kare krida—performs
loving affairs; tabu—still; tenho —He; mora prana-natha—the Lord of My life.
TRANSLATION
‘Or, since after all He is a very cunning, obstinate debauchee with a pro-
pensity to cheat, He takes to the company of other women. He then indulges
in loving affairs with them in front of Me to give distress to My mind.
Nevertheless, He is still the Lord of My life.
TEXT 52
না গণি আপন-তুঃখ, जटव বাষ্ছি ভার সখ,
ভার স্থখ-আমার Steg |
মোরে যদি দিয় দুঃখ, তার হৈল মহাস্থখ,
সেই তুঃখ--মোর AAG ॥ ৫২ ॥


--- Page 269 ---
Text 53] The Siksastaka Prayers 269
na gani apana-duhkha, sabe vanchi tanra sukha,
tanra sukha——amara tatparya
more yadi diya duhkha, tanra haila maha-sukha,
sei duhkha——mora sukha-varya
SYNONYMS
na—not; gani—I count; dpana-duhkha—own personal misery; sabe—only;
vanchi—I desire; tanra sukha—His happiness; tanra sukha—His happiness; amara
tatparya—the aim of My life; more—unto Me; yadi—if; diya duhkha—giving dis-
tress; tanra—His; haila—there was; maha-sukha—great happiness; sei duhkha—
that unhappiness; mora sukha-varya—the best of My happiness.
TRANSLATION
‘‘1 do not mind My personal distress. | only wish for the happiness of Krsna,
for His happiness is the goal of My life. However, if He feels great happiness in
giving Me distress, that distress is the best of My happiness.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that a devotee does not care about
his own happiness and distress; he is simply interested in seeing that Krsna is
happy, and for that purpose he engages in various activities. A pure devotee has
no way of sensing happiness except by seeing that Krsna is happy in every
respect. If Krsna becomes happy by giving him distress, such a devotee accepts
that unhappiness as the greatest of all happiness. Those who are materialistic,
however, who are very proud of material wealth and have no spiritual knowledge,
like the prakrta-sahajiyas, regard their own happiness as the aim of life. Some of
them aspire to enjoy themselves by sharing the happiness of Krsna. This is the
mentality of fruitive workers who want to enjoy sense gratification by making a
show of service to Krsna.
TEXT 53
যে নারীরে वाट কৃষ্ণ, তার রূপে AG,
তারে না পাঞ হুয় তুঃখী |
মুই তার পায় পড়ি”, লঞা वां হাতে ধরি”,
ক্রীড়া कत्रा) ভারে করে IN ॥ ৫৩ ॥
ye narire vanche krsna, tara rape satrsna,
tare na pana haya duhkhi
mui tara paya padi’, lana yana hate dhari’,
krida karana tanre karon sukhi


--- Page 270 ---
270 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
SYNONYMS
ye narire—the woman whom; variche krspna—Krsna desires to have in His com-
pany; tara rape satrspa—attracted to her beauty; tare—her; na pana—not
getting; haya duhkhi—becomes unhappy; mui—I; tara paya padi’—falling down
at her feet; lana yana—taking, go; hate dhari’—catching the hand; krida—
pastimes; karana—bringing about; tanre—Lord Krsna; karon sukhi—!l make
happy.
TRANSLATION
11 Krsna, attracted by the beauty of some other woman, wants to enjoy
with her but is unhappy because He cannot get her, | fall down at her feet,
catch her hand and bring her to Krsna to engage her for His happiness.
TEXT 54
कख] FL করে CAF, কৃষ্ণ পায় সন্তোষ,
FY পায় তাড়ন-ভৎ সনে |
যথাযোগ্য করে মান, কৃষ্ণ তাতে IY পান,
ছাড়ে মান অল্প-সাধনে ॥ ৫৪ ॥
kanta krsne kare rosa, (८5/12 paya santosa,
sukha paya tadana-bhartsane
yatha-yogya kare mana, krsna tate sukha pana,
chade mana alpa-sadhane
SYNONYMS
kanta—the beloved; krspne—unto Lord Krsna; kare rosa—shows anger; krsna
paya santosa—Krsna becomes very happy; sukha paya—obtains happiness;
tadana-bhartsane —by chastisement; yatha-yogya—as it is suitable; kare mana—
shows pride; krspna—Lord Krsna; tate—in such activities; sukha pana—obtains
happiness; chade mana—gives up pride; alpa-sadhane —by a little endeavor.
TRANSLATION
“When a beloved gopi shows symptoms of anger toward Krsna, Krsna is
very satisfied. Indeed, He is pleased when chastised by such a gopi. She shows
her pride suitably, and Krsna enjoys that attitude. Then she gives up her pride
with a little endeavor.


--- Page 271 ---
Text 56] The Siksastaka Prayers 271
TEXT 55
সেই নারী Few কেলে, कृक-मर्यं ব্যথা জানে,
তবু FL করে গাড় (त्रास ।
নিজ-সুখে মানে weg পড়,ক তার শিরে বাজ,
কৃষ্ণের মাত্র চাহিয়ে সন্তোষ ॥ ৫৫ ॥
sei nari jiye kene, krspa-marma vyatha jane,
tabu krsne kare gadha rosa
nija-sukhe mane kaja, paduka tara Sire vaja,
krsnera matra cahiye santosa
SYNONYMS
sei nari—that woman; jiye—lives; kene—why; krspa-marma—Krsna's heart;
vyatha—unhappy; jane—knows; tabu—still; krspe—unto Krsna; kare —does;
gadha rosa—deep anger; nija-sukhe —in her own happiness; mane —considers;
kaja—the only business; paduka—Ilet there fall; tare —of her; sire—on the head;
vaja—a thunderbolt; krsnera—of Krsna; matra—only; cahiye—we want; san-
tosa—the happiness.
TRANSLATION
“Why does a woman continue to live who knows that Krsna’s heart is
unhappy but who still shows her deep anger toward Him? She is interested in
her own happiness. | condemn such a woman to be struck on the head with a
thunderbolt, for we simply want the happiness of Krsna.
PURPORT
A devotee who is satisfied only with his own sense gratification certainly falls
down from the service of Krsna. Being attracted by material happiness, he later
joins the prakrta-sahajiyas, who are considered to be nondevotees.
TEXT 56
যে গোপী মোর করে দ্বেষে, কৃষ্ণের করে সম্ততোষে,
FR যারে করে অভিলাষ ।
মুই ত।র ঘরে যা, তারে সেবে৷ দাসী হঞা,
তবে মোর স্থখের উল্লাস ॥ ৫৬ ॥


--- Page 272 ---
272 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
ye gopi mora kare dvese, krspera kare santose,
krsna yare kare abhilasa
mui tara ghare yana, tare sevory 0351 hana,
tabe mora sukhera ullasa
SYNONYMS
ye gopi—any gopi who; mora—unto Me; kare dvese—shows envy; krsnera
kare santose —but satisfies Krsna; krsma—unto Lord Krsna; yare—unto whom;
kare —does; abhilasa—desiring; mui—I; tara—her; ghare yana—going to the
house; tare sevon—shall render service unto her; dasi hana —becoming a maid-
servant; tabe—then; mora—My; sukhera ullasa—awakening of happiness.
TRANSLATION
“If a gopi envious of Me satisfies Krsna and Krsna desires her, | shall not
hesitate to go to her house and become her maidservant, for then My happi-
ness will be awakened.
TEXT 57
কুঞ্ী-বিত্রের রমণী, পতিত্রতা-শিরোমণি,
পতি লাগি” टकला বেশ্যার সেবা |
স্তস্তিল সূর্যের গতি, জীয়াইল go পতি,
তুষ্ট কৈল মুখ্য তিন-দেব। ॥ ea ॥
kusthi-viprera ramani, pativrata-siromani,
pati lagi’ kaila vesyara seva
stambhila sdaryera gati, jiyaila mrta pati,
tusta kaila mukhya tina-deva
SYNONYMS
kusthi-viprera—of the brahmana who suffered from leprosy; ramani—the wife;
pati-vrata-siromani—the topmost of chaste women; pati lagi’—for the satisfac-
tion of her husband; kaila—performed; vesyara seva—service to a prostitute;
stambhila—stopped; sdryera gati—the movement of the sun; jiyaila—revived;
mrta pati—the dead husband; tusta kaila—satisfied; mukhya—the principal; tina-
deva—three deities or demigods.
TRANSLATION
“The wife of a brahmana suffering from leprosy manifested herself as the
topmost of all chaste women by serving a prostitute to satisfy her husband.


--- Page 273 ---
Text 58] The Siksastaka Prayers 273
She thus stopped the movement of the sun, brought her dead husband back to
life and satisfied the three principal demigods [Brahma, Visnu and
Mahesvaral.
PURPORT
The Aditya Purana, Markendeya Purana and Padma Purana tell about a
brahmana who was suffering from leprosy but had a very chaste and faithful wife.
He desired to enjoy the company of a prostitute, and therefore his wife went to
her and became her maidservant, just to draw her attention for his service. When
the prostitute agreed to associate with him, the wife brought her the leprotic hus-
band. When that leper, the sinful son of a brahmana, saw the chastity of his wife,
he finally abandoned his sinful intentions. While coming home, however, he
touched the body of Markendeya Rsi, who thus cursed him to die at sunrise.
Because of her chastity, the woman was very powerful. Therefore when she
heard about the curse, she vowed to stop the sunrise. Because of her strong
determination to serve her husband, the three deities —namely Brahma, Visnu and
Mahesvara—were very happy, and they gave her the benediction that her hus-
band would be cured and brought back to life. This example is given herein to
emphasize that a devotee should engage himself exclusively for the satisfaction of
Krsna, without personal motives. That will make his life successful.
TEXT 58
“কৃষ্ণ-_-মোর জীবন, কৃষ্ণ-_ মোর ্রাণধন,
কৃষ্ণ _- মোর প্রাণের পরাণ ।
হৃদয়-উপরে ধরে”, সেবা করি” স্থখী করে”,
এই মোর সদা রহে ধ্যান ॥ ৫৮ ॥
“krsna——mora jivana, krsna——mora prana-dhana,
krsna——mora pranera parana
hrdaya-upare dharon, seva kari’ sukhi karon,
ei mora sada rahe dhyana
SYNONYMS
krsna—Lord Krsna; mora jivana—My life and soul; krspa—Lord Krsna; mora
prana-dhana—the wealth of My life; krsna—Lord Krsna; mora pranera parana—
the life of My life; hrdaya-upare—on My heart; dharon—I hold; seva kari’—
serving; sukhi (६2/00 --| make happy; ei—this; mora—My; sada—always; rahe —
remains; dhyana—meditation.


--- Page 274 ---
274 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
‘Krsna is My life and soul. Krsna is the treasure of My life. Indeed, Krsna is
the very life of My life. | therefore keep Him always in My heart and try to
please Him by rendering service. That is My constant meditation.
TEXT 59
মোর JY — সেবনে, কৃষ্ণের সুখ ANC,
অতএব দেহ দেঙ দান |
কৃষ্ণ মোরে “কান্ত” করি”, কহে মোরে “প্রাণেশ্বরি,”
মোর হয় “দাসী”-অভিমান ॥ ৫৯ ॥
mora sukha——sevane, krspera sukha——sarigame,
ataeva deha dena dana
krspa more ‘kanta’ kari’, kahe more ‘pranesvari’,
mora haya ‘dasi’-abhimana
SYNONYMS
mora sukha—My happiness; sevane —in service; krsnera sukha—Krsna’'s happi-
ness; sarigame —by union with Me; ataeva—therefore; deha—My body; dena—I
offer; dana—as charity; krspna—Lord Krsna; more —Me; kanta kari’—accepting as
beloved; kahe —says; more—to Me; prana-isvari—the most beloved; mora—
My; haya—there is; dasi-abhimana—considering His maidservant.
TRANSLATION
“My happiness is in the service of Krsna, and Krsna’s happiness is in union
with Me. For this reason, | give My body in charity to the lotus feet of Krsna,
who accepts Me as His loved one and calls Me His most beloved. It is then that
1 consider Myself His maidservant.
TEXT 60
कोख-८नव।-शशर्, সঙ্গম হৈতে मभू,
তাতে সাক্ষী FTE SFA |
নারায়ণ-হুদি স্থিতি, তবু পাদসেবায় মতি,
সেবা করে “দাসী১-অভিমানী ॥ ৬০ ॥
kanta-seva-sukha-pura, sangama haite sumadhura,
tate saksi——Ilaksmi thakurani


--- Page 275 ---
Text 61] The Siksastaka Prayers 275
narayana-hrdi sthiti, tabu pada-sevdaya mati,
seva kare ‘dasi’-abhimani
SYNONYMS
kanta-seva-sukha-para—the service of the Lord is the home of happiness;
sangama haite su-madhura—sweeter than direct union; tate—in that; saksi—evi-
dence; laksmi thakurani—the goddess of fortune; narayana-hrdi—on the heart of
Narayana; sthiti—situation; tabu —still; pada-sevaya mati—her desire is to serve
the lotus feet; seva kare—renders service; dasi-abhimani—considering herself a
maidservant.
TRANSLATION
‘Service to My lover is the home of happiness and is more sweet than direct
union with Him. The goddess of fortune is evidence of this, for although she
constantly lives on the heart of Narayana, she wants to render service to His
lotus feet. She therefore considers herself a maidservant and serves Him con-
stantly.””
TEXT 61
এই রাধার বচন, বিশুদ্ধণ্রেম-লক্ষণ,
আস্বাদয়ে ল্রীগৌর-রায় |
ভাবে মন নহে স্থির, সাস্তিকে ব্যাপে শরীর,
মন-দেহু ধরণ না যায় ॥ ৬১ ॥
ei radhara vacana, visuddha-prema-laksana,
asvadaye $ri-gaura-raya
bhave mana nahe sthira, sattvike vyape sarira,
mana-deha dharana na yaya
SYNONYMS
ei—this; radhara vacana—the statement of Srimati Radharant; visuddha-prema-
laksana—the symptoms of pure love of Krsna; asvadaye —tastes; sri-gaura-rdya—
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhave —because of this ecstasy; mana nahe
sthira—the mind is not steady; sattvike —the symptoms of transcendental love;
vyape —spread over; sarira—the body; mana-deha—mind and body; dharana—
sustaining; na ydya—is not possible.
TRANSLATION
These statements by Srimati Radharani show the symptoms of pure love for
Krsna tasted by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In that ecstatic love, His mind was


--- Page 276 ---
276 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
unsteady. Transformations of transcendental love spread throughout His en-
tire body, and He could not sustain His body and mind.
TEXT 62
ত্রজের faeces, — যেন TTR, EW (ङ्म,
আত্ম-স্থখের যাহ! না হি गक्ष ।
সে প্রেম জানা'তে লোকে, প্রভু কৈল। এই ম্লোকে,
পদে বকৈলা অর্থের নির্বদ্ধ ॥ ৬২ ॥
vrajera visuddha-prema, — yena jamba-nada hema,
atma-sukhera yahan nahi gandha
se prema jana’te loke, prabhu kaila ei sloke,
pade kaila arthera nirbandha
SYNONYMS
vrajera—of Vrndavana; visuddha-prema—the pure love of Krsna; yena—like;
jambda-nada hema—the golden particles found in the jambua River; atma-
sukhera—of personal sense gratification; yahan—where; nahi gandha—there is
not even a scent; se prema—that love of Godhead; jana‘te loke—to advertise
among the people; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—has written; ei
Sloke —this verse; pade—in different steps; kaila arthera nirbandha—has clarified
the real meaning.
TRANSLATION
The pure devotional service in Vrndavana is like the golden particles in the
River Jamba. In Vrndavana there is not a trace of personal sense gratification.
It is to advertise such pure love in this material world that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has written the previous verse and explained its meaning.
TEXT 63
এইমত মহাপ্রভু ভাবাবিষ্ট ङ |
প্রলাপ করিলা তত্তৎ শ্লোক পড়িয়া ॥ ৬৩ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhavavista hana
pralapa karila tat-tat sloka padiya
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhava-avista
hana—being overwhelmed by ecstatic love; pralapa karila—said crazy words; tat-
tat —appropriate; sloka padiya—by reading the verse.


--- Page 277 ---
Text 65] The Siksastaka Prayers 277
TRANSLATION
Thus overwhelmed by ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like a
madman and recited suitable verses.
TEXT 64
পূর্বে অষ্ট-শ্লোক করি” লোকে fowl দিলা |
সেই অষ্ট-শ্লোকের অর্থ আপনে আস্বাদিল। ॥ ৬৪ ॥
parve asta-sloka kari’ loke siksa dila
sei asta-slokera artha apane asvadila
SYNONYMS
purve—formerly; asta-sloka kari’—composing eight verses; loke Siksa dila—
gave instruction to the people in general; sei—those; asta-slokera—of the eight
stanzas; artha—the meaning; dpane asvadila—personally tasted.
TRANSLATION
The Lord had formerly composed these eight verses to teach people in
general. Now He personally tasted the meaning of the verses, which are called
the Siksastaka.
TEXT 65
প্রভুর “শিক্ষাষ্টক”-শ্লোক যেই পড়ে, শুনে |
FLW প্রেমন্ডক্তি তার বাড়ে দিনে-দিনে ॥ ve ॥
prabhura ‘Siksastaka’-sloka yei pade, Sune
krsne prema-bhakti tara bade dine-dine
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $iksa-astaka—of the eight instructions;
Sloka—the verses; yei—anyone who; pade—recites; sune—or hears; krsne—
unto Lord Krsna; prema-bhakti—ecstatic love and devotion; tara—his; bade —in-
creases; dine-dine—day after day.
TRANSLATION
If anyone recites or hears these eight verses of instruction by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, his ecstatic love and devotion for Krsna increase day by day.


--- Page 278 ---
278 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 66
যত্যপিহ প্রভু- কোটাসমুদ্র-গম্ভীর ।
নানা-ভাব-চন্ছ্োদয়ে হয়েন অস্থির ॥ ৬৬ ॥
yadyapiha prabhu ——koti-samudra-gambhira
nana-bhava-candrodaye hayena asthira
SYNONYMS
yadyapiha—although; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; koti-samudra-
gambhira—as deep as millions of oceans; nana—various; bhava—of ecstatic
emotions; candrodaye—because of the moonrise; hayena—sometimes
becomes; asthira—restless.
TRANSLATION
Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is as deep and grave as millions of
oceans, when the moon of His various emotions rises, He becomes restless.
TEXTS 67-68
যেই যেই শ্লোক জয়দেব, ভাগবতে |
রায়ের নাটকে, যেই আর কর্ণাম্বতে ॥ ৬৭ ॥
সেই সেই ভাবে শ্লোক করিয়া পঠনে।
সেই সেই ভাবাবেশে করেন আস্বাদনে ॥ ৬৮ ॥
yei yei sloka jayadeva, bhagavate
rdyera natake, yei ara karpamrte
sei sei bhave sloka kariya pathane
sei sei bhavavese karena asvadane
SYNONYMS
yei yei—whatever; sloka—verses; jayadeva—Jayadeva Gosvami; bhagavate —
in Srimad-Bhagavatam; rayera natake—in the drama made by Ramananda Raya;
yei—whatever; dra—also; karnamrte—in the book named Krsna-karnamrta, writ-
ten by Bilvamangala Thakura; sei sei bhave—in those ecstatic emotions; sloka—
verses; kariya pathane—reading regularly; sei sei—in that particular; bhava-
avese —ecstatic love; karena asvadane —He tastes.


--- Page 279 ---
Text 70] The Siksastaka Prayers 279
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu read the verses of Jayadeva’s Gita-govinda,
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, of Ramananda Radya’s drama Jagannatha-vallabha-
nataka and of Bilvamangala Thakura’s Krsna-karnamrta, He was overwhelmed
by the various ecstatic emotions of those verses. Thus He tasted their pur-
ports.
TEXT 69
দ্বাদশ বৎসর এঁছে দশ।- রাত্রি-দিনে |
কৃষ্ণরস আস্বাদয়ে তুইবন্ধু-সনে ॥ ৬৯ ॥
dvadasa vatsara aiche dasa——ratri-dine
krsna-rasa asvadaye dui-bandhu-sane
SYNONYMS
dvadasa vatsara—for twelve years; aiche dasa—such a condition; ratri-dine —
day and night; krspa-rasa—transcendental bliss and mellows in connection with
Krsna; asvadaye —He tastes; dui-bandhu-sane—with two friends, namely Rama-
nanda Raya and Svarapa Damodara Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
For twelve years, Sri Caitanya remained in that state day and night. With His
two friends, He tasted the meaning of those verses, which consist of nothing
but the transcendental bliss and mellows of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 70
সেই जव লীলারস আপনে অনন্ত |
সহজ্-বদনে বণি” নাহি পা”ন অন্ত ॥ ৭০ ॥
sei 5303 lila-rasa apane ananta
sahasra-vadane varni’ nahi pa’na anta
SYNONYMS
sei saba—all these; lila-rasa—transcendental mellows of ऽन Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s pastimes; apane —personally; ananta—the Personality of Godhead
Ananta; sahasra-vadane—with His thousands of faces; varni’—describing; nahi —
not; pa’na—gets; anta—the limit.


--- Page 280 ---
280 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
Even Anantadeva, who has thousands of faces, could not reach the end of
describing the transcendental bliss of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s pastimes.
TEXT 71
জীব ক্ষুদ্রেবুদ্ধি কোন্‌ তাহা পারে বর্ণিতে ?
তার এক कन] স্পশি আপন! শোধিতে ॥ ৭১ ॥
jiva ksudra-buddhi kon taha pare varnite?
tara eka kana sparsi apana sodhite
SYNONYMS
jiva—living being; ksudra-buddhi—limited intelligence; kon—who; taha—
that; pare—is able; varnite—to write; tara—of that; eka kana—one particle;
sparsi—I touch; apana sodhite —to correct myself.
TRANSLATION
How, then, could an ordinary living being with very little intelligence de-
scribe such pastimes? Nevertheless, | am trying to touch but a particle of
them just to rectify my own self.
TEXT 72
যত চেষ্টা, যত প্রলাপ,-_ নাহি गोन्नावान्न |
সে সব বর্ণিতে aw হয় সুবিস্তার ॥ ৭২ ॥
yata cesta, yata pralapa,——nahi paravara
sei saba varnite grantha haya suvistara
SYNONYMS
yata cesta —all activities; yata pralapa—all crazy talking; nahi paravara—there
was no limit; sei saba—all of them; varnite—to describe; grantha—the book;
haya—would be; su-vistara—very voluminous.
TRANSLATION
There is no limit to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s activities and His words of
madness. Therefore describing them all would greatly increase the size of this
book.


--- Page 281 ---
Text 75] The Siksastaka Prayers 281
TEXT 73
बृन््ोवन-कंज প্রথম যে aT afore ।
সেইসব লীলার আমি সূত্রমাত্র কৈল ॥ १७ ॥
vrndavana-dasa prathama ye lila varnila
sei-saba lilara ami satra-matra kaila
SYNONYMS
vrndavana-dasa—Vrndavana dasa Thakura; prathama—at first; ye —whatever;
lila—pastimes; varnila—described; sei-saba—all of those; lilara—of the pastimes;
ami—I; satra-matra kaila—prepared only the synopsis.
TRANSLATION
Whatever pastimes Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has first described 1 have
merely summarized.
TEXT 74
ভার STE ‘SACHA সংক্ষেপে কহিল |
লীলার वांरूटनए গ্রন্থ তথাপি বাড়িল ॥ ৭৪ ॥
tanra tyakta ‘avasesa’ sanksepe kahila
lilara bahulye grantha tathapi badila
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; tyakta—left out; avesesa—remainders; sanksepe kahila—I| have de-
scribed very briefly; lilara bahulye—because of the numerousness of the
pastimes; grantha—this book; tathapi—still; badila—has increased.
TRANSLATION
I have only very briefly described the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
not described by Vrndavana dasa Thakura. Nevertheless, because those tran-
scendental pastimes are so numerous, the size of this book has increased.
TEXT 75
অতএব সেইসব नौल। না পারি বর্ণিবারে ।
সমাপ্তি fag লীলাকে করি” নমনস্কারে ॥ ৭৫ ॥


--- Page 282 ---
282 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
ataeva sei-saba lila na pari varnibare
samapti karilun lilake kari’ namaskare
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; sei-saba—all those; lila—pastimes; na pari—I am not able;
varnibare —to narrate; samadapti karilun—now | have finished; lildke—to the
pastimes; kari’ namaskare —offering my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
It is impossible to describe all the pastimes elaborately. | shall therefore
end this description and offer them my respectful obeisances.
TEXT 76
যে কিছু ofa] এই দিগ.দরশন |
এই অনুসারে হুবে তার আস্বাদন ॥ ৭৬ ॥
ye kichu kahilun ei dig-darasana
ei anusare habe tara asvadana
SYNONYMS
ye kichu—whatever; kahilun—I| have said; ei—this; dik-darasana—just to
make an indication; ei anusare—in this way; habe—there will be; tara—of that;
asvadana—tasting.
TRANSLATION
What I have described gives merely an indication, but by following this in-
dication one may obtain a taste of all the pastimes of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 77
প্রভুর গম্ভীর-লীল৷ न। পারি বুঝিতে ।
বুদ্ধি-প্রবেশ নাহি তাতে, না পারি বর্ণিতে ॥ ৭৭ ॥
prabhura gambhira-lila na pari bujhite
buddhi-pravesa nahi tate, na pari varnite
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of 57 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gambhira—deep; lila—the pastimes;
na pari—| am not able; bujhite—to understand; buddhi-pravesa nahi—my intelli-


--- Page 283 ---
Text 79] The Siksastaka Prayers 283
gence cannot penetrate; tate—because of this; na pari—I am not able; varnite —
to describe properly.
TRANSLATION
॥ cannot understand the very deep, meaningful pastimes of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. My intelligence cannot penetrate them, and therefore ॥ could
not properly describe them.
TEXT 78
जव শ্রোতা বৈষ্ণবের বন্দিয়। চরণ |
চৈতন্যচরিত্র-বর্ণন কৈন্যু' সমাপন ॥ ৭৮ ॥
saba srota vaisnavera vandiya carana
caitanya-caritra-varnana kailun samapana
SYNONYMS
saba srota—all readers; vaisnavera—of the Vaisnavas; vandiya carana—offering
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet; caitanya-caritra—of the characteristics
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; varnana—description; kailun—! have done;
samapana—finishing.
TRANSLATION
After offering my respectful obeisances to the lotus feet of all my Vaisnava
readers, | shall therefore end this description of the characteristics of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 79
অআকাশ--অনন্ত, তাতে যৈছে পক্ষিগণ |
যার যত শক্তি, তত করে আরোহণ ॥ ৭৯ ॥
akasa——ananta, tate yaiche paksi-gana
yara yata sakti, tata kare arohana
SYNONYMS
akasa—the sky; ananta—unlimited; tate—in that sky; yaiche—just as; paksi-
gana—all types of birds; yara—of someone; yata sakti—whatever power; tata—
that much; kare arohana—rises up and up.


--- Page 284 ---
284 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
The sky is unlimited, but many birds fly higher and higher according to
their own abilities.
TEXT 80
এঁছে মহাপ্রভুর नोन- नङ ওর-পার |
“জীব” ङ.थ] কেবা AF পারে বর্ণিবার ? ৮০ ॥
aiche mahaprabhura lila—— nahi ora-para
11৮3” hana keba samyak pare varnibara?
SYNONYMS
aiche—similarly; mahaprabhura lila—the pastimes of $rT Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
nahi ora-para—there is no limit above or below; jiva haina—being an ordinary
living entity; keba—who; samyak —fully; pare —is able; varnibara—to describe.
TRANSLATION
The pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are like the unlimited sky. How,
then, can an ordinary living being describe them all?
TEXT 81
যাবৎ বুদ্ধির গতি, ততেক afi’ |
সমুদ্রের মধ্যে যেন এক कन षटु डेल" ॥ ৮১ ॥
yavat buddhira gati, tateka varnilun
samudrera madhye yena eka kana chunilun
SYNONYMS
yavat—as far; buddhira gati—the limit of my intelligence; tateka—that far; var-
nilun—I1 have described; samudrera madhye—in the midst of the great ocean;
yena—ijust like; eka kapna—one particle; chunilun—I\ have touched.
TRANSLATION
॥ have tried to describe them as far as my intelligence allows, as if trying to
touch a drop in the midst of a great ocean.
TEXT 82
নিত্যানম্দ-কুপাপ।ত্র -বৃন্দাবন-দাস।
চেৈতন্যলীলায় ८ टङ्‌। হয়েন “আদিব্যাল” ॥ ৮২ ॥


--- Page 285 ---
Text 83] The Siksastaka Prayers 285
nityananda-krpa-patra— vrndavana-dasa
caitanya-lilaya tenho hayena ‘adi-vyasa’
SYNONYMS
nityananda—of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; krpa-patra—the favorite devotee;
vrndavana-dasa—Vrndavana dasa Thakura; caitanya-lilaya—in the pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tenho—He; hayena—is; adi-vyasa—the original
Vyasadeva.
TRANSLATION
Vrndavana dasa Thakura is Lord Nityananda’s favorite devotee, and
therefore he is the original Vyasadeva in describing the pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that all writers after Vrndavana
dasa Thakura who are pure devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and who have
tried to describe the Lord's activities are to be considered like Vyasa. Srila
Vrndavana dasa Thakura is the original Vyasadeva in describing caitanya-lila, and
all others who follow in his footsteps by describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
pastimes are also to be called Vyasadeva. The bona fide spiritual master is called
Vyasa because he is a representative of Vyasa. Worshiping the birthday of such a
spiritual master is called Vyasa-puja.
TEXT 83
ভার আগে चनि जव লীলার ভাণ্ডার |
তথাপি खन्न বর্ণিয়। ছাড়িলেন আর ॥ ৮৩ ॥
tanra age yadyapi saba lilara bhandara
tathapi alpa varniya chadilena ara
SYNONYMS
tanra age —before him; yadyapi—although; saba—all; lilara—of the pastimes;
bhandara—full store; tathapi—still; alpa—very little; varniya—describing;
chadilena—he left; dra—the others.
TRANSLATION
Although Vrndavana dasa Thakura has within his jurisdiction the full store
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s pastimes, he has left aside most of them and de-
scribed but a small portion.


--- Page 286 ---
286 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 84
যে কিছু वर्म, সেহ সংক্ষেপ করিয়া ।
লিখিতে না পারেন, তবু রাখিয়াছেন লিখিয়। ॥ ৮৪॥
ye kichu varnilun, seha sanksepa kariya
likhite na parena, tabu rakhiyachena likhiya
SYNONYMS
ye kichu varnilun—whatever | have described; seha—them; sariksepa—
briefly; kariya—doing; likhite na parena—Vrndavana dasa Thakura was not able
to describe; tabu —still; rakhiyachena—has kept; likhiya—recording in writing.
TRANSLATION
What | have described was left aside by Vrndavana dasa Thakura, but
although he could not describe these pastimes, he gave us a synopsis.
TEXT 85
mes dal লিখিয়াছে স্থানে-স্থানে |
সেই বচন खन, সেই পরম-প্রমাণে ॥ ৮৫ ॥
caitanya-mangale tenho likhiyache sthane-sthane
sei vacana suna, sei parama-pramane
SYNONYMS
caitanya-marngale—in the book named Caitanya-mangala; ternho—Vrndavana
dasa Thakura; likhiyache—has written; sthane-sthane—in several places; sei
vacana suna—please hear those statements; sei parama-pramane—that is the
foremost proof.
TRANSLATION
In his book named Caitanya-mangala [Caitanya-bhagavatal, he has de-
scribed these pastimes in many places. | request my readers to hear that book,
for that is the best evidence.
TEXT 86
সংক্ষেপে FEY, বিস্তার न) যায় কথনে।
বিস্তারিয়। বেদব্যাস করিব বর্ণনে ॥ ৮৬ ॥


--- Page 287 ---
Text 871 The Siksastaka Prayers 287
sanksepe kahilun, vistara na yaya kathane
vistariya veda-vyasa kariba varpane
SYNONYMS
sanksepe kahilun—I have described very briefly; vistara na yaya kathane—it is
not possible to describe them in full; vistariya—elaborating; veda-vyasa—a repre-
sentative of Vyasadeva; kariba—will do; varpane —describing.
TRANSLATION
1 have described the pastimes very briefly, for it is impossible for me to de-
scribe them in full. In the future, however, Vedavyasa will describe them
elaborately.
TEXT 87
देष्टङक्रगन्रटन ইহ লিখিয়াছে স্থানে-স্থানে |
সত্য কহেন,-_ “আগে ব্যাস করিব ATH ॥ ৮৭ ॥
caitanya-mangale 103 likhiyache sthane-sthane
satya kahena,—— ‘age vyasa kariba varnane’
SYNONYMS
caitanya-mangale —in the book named Caitanya-marigala; iha—this statement;
likhiyache—has written; sthane-sthane—in many places; satya—the truth;
kahena—he says; age—in the future; vyasa kariba varnane—Vyasadeva will de-
scribe them more elaborately.
TRANSLATION
In Caitanya-mangala, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has stated in many
places the factual truth that in the future Vyasadeva will describe them
elaborately.
PURPORT
The statement age vydasa kariba varpane is similar to a text in the Caitanya-
bhagavata (First Chapter, text 180) in which Vrndavana dasa Thakura says:
Sesa-khande caitanyera ananta vilasa
vistariya varnite achena veda-vyasa
“The unlimited pastimes of Sri Caitanya will be described by Vyasadeva in the
future.” Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that these statements indi-


--- Page 288 ---
288 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
cate that in the future, other representatives of Vyasadeva will elaborately de-
scribe Lord Caitanya’s pastimes. The purport is that any pure devotee in the dis-
ciplic succession who describes the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is con-
firmed to be a representative of Vyasadeva.
TEXT 88
দচৈতন্য-লীলাম্বত-সিদ্ধু _ प्रका क्रि-नमांन |
তৃষ্ণান্ুরূপ ঝারী ভরি” ঙেঁহে। কৈলা পান ॥ ৮৮ ॥
caitanya-lilamrta-sindhu — dugdhabdhi-samana
trsnanurapa jhari bhari’ tenho kaila pana
SYNONYMS
caitanya-lild-amrta-sindhu —the ocean of nectarean pastimes of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dugdha-abdhi-samana—exactly like the ocean of milk; trsna-
anurapa—according to one’s thirst; jhari—the pitcher; bhari’—filling; tenho —he;
kaila pana—drank.
TRANSLATION
The ocean of nectarean pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is like the
ocean of milk. According to his thirst, Vrndavana dasa Thakura filled his
pitcher and drank from that ocean.
TEXT 89
ভার ঝারী-শেষাব্বত কিছু মোরে দিলা ।
ততেকে ভরিল পেট, তৃষ্ণা! মোর গেলা ॥ ৮৯ ॥
tanra jhari-sesamrta kichu more dila
tateke bharila peta, trsna mora gela
SYNONYMS
tanra jhari-sesa-amrta—the remnants of the milk of Vrndavana dasa Thakura’s
pitcher; kichu—some; more dila—has given to me; tateke—by those remnants;
bharila peta—my abdomen is filled; trsna mora gela—now my thirst has gone.
TRANSLATION
Whatever remnants of milk Vrndavana dasa Thakura has given me are suffi-
cient to fill my belly. Now my thirst is completely satiated.


--- Page 289 ---
Text 92] The Siksastaka Prayers 289
TEXTS 90-91
আমি- অতভিক্ষুদ্র জীব, পঞ্ষী রাঙ্গাটুনি ।
সে যৈছে তৃষ্ণায় পিয়ে সমুদ্রের পানী ॥ >° ॥
তৈছে আমি এক कम Boe লীলার ।
এই দৃষ্টান্তে জ।নিহ প্রভুর লীলার বিস্তার ॥ >> ॥
ami ——ati-ksudra jiva, paksi ranga-tuni
se yaiche trspaya piye samudrera pani
taiche ami eka kana chunilun lilara
ei drstante janiha prabhura lilara vistara
SYNONYMS
2701-1; ati-ksudra jiva—a very insignificant living being; paksi ranga-tuni—just
like a little bird with a red beak; se—he; yaiche—just as; trspdya—in thirst;
piye—drinks; samudrera pani—the water of the sea; taiche—in the same way;
ami—I; eka kapna—one small particle; chunilun—touched; lilara—of the pastimes
of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei drstinte—by this example; janiha—all of you
know; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; lildra vistira—expansion of the
pastimes.
TRANSLATION
1 am a very insignificant living being, like a small red-beaked bird. Just as
such a bird drinks the water of the sea to quench its thirst, so | have touched
only a drop of the ocean of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s pastimes. From this ex-
ample, you may all understand how expansive are the pastimes of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 92
“আমি लिशि?-- ङ बिथ] করি অনুমান ।
আমার শরীর কান্টপুতলী-সমান ॥ ৯২ ॥
‘ami likhi’, —eha mithya kari anumana
amadra sarira kastha-putali-samana
SYNONYMS
ami likhi—| write; eha mithya—this is false; kari anumana—I can infer; amara
Sarira—my body; kastha-putali-samana—is exactly like a wooden doll.


--- Page 290 ---
290 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
1 infer that “I have written” is a false understanding, for my body is like a
wooden doll.
TEXT 93
বৃদ্ধ জরাতুর আমি सक्त, বধির ।
হস্ত হালে, মনোবুদ্ধি নহে মোর স্থির ॥ ৯৩ ॥
vrddha jaratura ami andha, badhira
hasta hale, manobuddhi nahe mora sthira
SYNONYMS
vrddha—an old man; jara-atura—troubled by invalidity; ami—I; andha—blind;
badhira—deaf; hasta hale—my hands tremble; manah-buddhi—mind and intelli-
gence; nahe—not; mora—my; sthira—steady.
TRANSLATION
1 am old and troubled by invalidity. | am almost blind and deaf, my hands
tremble, and my mind and intelligence are unsteady.
TEXT 94
নানা-রোগগ্রস্ত, -চলিতে বসিতে না পারি |
সঞ্চরোগ-পীড়া-ব্যাকুল, রাত্রি-দিনে মরি ॥ ৯৪ ॥
nana-roga-grasta, —calite vasite na pari
panca-roga-pida-vyakula, ratri-dine mari
SYNONYMS
nana-roga-grasta—affected by so many diseases; calite —to walk; vasite —to sit
down; na pari—! am not properly able; pafica-roga-pida-vyakula—always dis-
turbed by five kinds of disease; ratri-dine —day or night; mari —I can die any time.
TRANSLATION
I am infected by so many diseases that | can neither properly walk nor
properly sit. Indeed, | am always exhausted by five kinds of disease. | may die
at any time of the day or night.


--- Page 291 ---
Text 98] The Siksastaka Prayers 291
TEXT 95
পূর্বেগ্রন্থে ইহা করিয়াছি निटवकन।
তথাপি লিখিয়ে, শুন ইহার কারণ ॥ ৯৫ ॥
[001৮9 granthe 103 kariyachi nivedana
tathapi likhiye, suna ihara karana
SYNONYMS
parve—previously; granthe—in the book; iha—this; kariyachi nivedana—I
have submitted to the readers; tathapi—still; likhiye—I| write; sSuna—please hear;
ihara karana—the reason for this.
TRANSLATION
॥ have previously given an account of my inabilities. Please hear the reason
why | nevertheless still write.
TEXTS 96-98
वोट विन्त, Atos, লরীনিত্যানন্দ |
Bes, Dew, আর প্রীশোত্ববৃন্দ ॥ ৯৬ ॥
Brazel, Amt, ল্রীসনাতন |
জ্রীরঘুনাথ-দাস Rew, ল্রীজীবচরণ ॥ ৯৭ 1
ই“হা-সবার চরণ-কৃপায় লেখায় আমারে |
আর এক হুয় - তেঁহে। অতিকৃপা৷ করে ॥ ৯৮ ॥
$ri-govinda, sri-caitanya, $ri-nityananda
sri-advaita, sri-bhakta, ara sri-srotr-vrnda
$ri-svarapa, Sri-rapa, sri-sanatana
sri-raghunatha-dasa sri-guru, sri-jiva-carana
inha-sabara carana-krpaya lekhaya amare
ara eka haya, — tenho ati-krpa kare
SYNONYMS
$ri-govinda—S$ri Govindadeva; $ri-caitanya—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $ri-
nityananda—Lord Nityananda; sri-advaita—Advaita Acarya; sri-bhakta—other
devotees; ara—also; sri-srotr-vinda—the readers of this book; $ri-svarapa—


--- Page 292 ---
292 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
Svariapa Damodara Gosvami; $ri-rapa—Sr Rapa Gosvami; $ri-sanatana—Sri
Sanatana Gosvami; sri-raghunatha-dasa—Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; sri-
guru—my spiritual master; sri-jiva-carana—the lotus feet of Sri Jiva Gosvami; inha
sabara—of all of them; carana-krpaya—by the mercy of the lotus feet; lekhaya—
causes to write; amdre—me; dra eka—another one; haya—there is; ternho—He;
ati-krpa kare —shows me very great favor.
TRANSLATION
1 am writing this book by the mercy of the lotus feet of Sri Govindadeva, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Nityananda, Advaita Acarya, other devotees and
the readers of this book, as well as Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, Sri Rapa
Gosvami, Sri Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, who is my
spiritual master, and Sri Jiva Gosvami. | have also been specifically favored by
another Supreme Personality.
TEXT 99
জীমদনগোপাল মোরে লেখায় আজ্ঞা कच्चि" ।
কহিতে না TIN, তবু রহিতে না পারি ॥ >> ॥
sri-madana-gopala more lekhaya ajna kari’
kahite na yuydaya, tabu rahite na pari
SYNONYMS
sri-madana-gopala—the Madana-mohana Deity of Vrndavana; more—me;
lekhaya—causes to write; djna kari’—by giving the order; kahite—to say; na
yuydya—is not befitting; tabu—still; rahite—to remain silent; na pari—I am not
able.
TRANSLATION
Sri Madana-mohana Deity of Vrndavana has given the order that is making
me write. Although this should not be disclosed, I disclose it because | am
unable to remain silent.
TEXT 100
না কহিলে হয় মোর কৃতস্মতা-দোষ |
छ कत्रि বলি' শ্রোতা, না করিহ রোষ ॥ ১০০ ॥
na kahile haya mora krta-ghnata-dosa
dambha kari bali’ srota, na kariha rosa


--- Page 293 ---
Text 102] The Siksastaka Prayers 293
SYNONYMS
na kahile—if | do not say; haya—there is; mora—my; krta-ghnata-dosa—fault
of ingratitude; dambha kari—! am proud; bali’—taking as; srota—O readers; na
kariha rosa—do not be angry.
TRANSLATION
If 1 did not disclose this fact, | would be guilty of ingratitude to the Lord.
Therefore, my dear readers, please do not consider me too proud and be
angry at me.
TEXT 101
তোমা-সবার एत्र -शूनि TRY বন্দন |
তাতে दडक्र-नौोन। হৈল যে কিছু লিখন ॥ ১০১ ॥
toma-sabara carana-dhali karinu vandana
tate caitanya-lila haila ye kichu likhana
SYNONYMS
toma-sabara—of all of you; carana-dhali—the dust of the feet; karinu van-
dana—I have prayed to; tate —for that reason; caitanya-I/ila—the pastimes of Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; haila—there was; ye—whatever; kichu—some;
likhana—writing.
TRANSLATION
It is because | have offered my prayers unto the lotus feet of all of you that
whatever | have written about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has been possible.
TEXT 102
এবে অন্ত্যলীলাগণের করি অনুবাদ |
“অনুবাদ” কৈলে পাই লীলার SRT ॥ ১০২ ॥
ebe antya-lila-ganera kari anuvada
‘anuvada’ kaile pai lilara ‘asvada’
SYNONYMS
ebe—now; antya-lila-ganera kari anuvada—I| beg to repeat all the facts of this
Antya-lila; anuvada kaile—if it is repeated; pai—I get; lilara—of the pastime;
asvada—taste.


--- Page 294 ---
294 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
Now let me repeat all the pastimes of the Antya-lila, for if | do so I shall taste
the pastimes again.
TEXT 103
व्येयम পরিচ্ছেদে-_ রূপের कड ग्र-मिनन ।
তার মণ্যে তুইনাটকের বিধান-শ্রবণ | ১০৩ ॥
prathama paricchede —ripera dvitiya-milana
tara madhye dui-natakera vidhana-sravana
SYNONYMS
prathama paricchede —in the First Chapter; ripera—of Rapa Gosvami; dvitiya-
milana—the second meeting with Lord Caitanya; tara madhye—within that
chapter; dui-natakera—of the two dramas; vidhana-sravana—hearing of the pro-
cess of writing.
TRANSLATION
The First Chapter describes how Ripa Gosvami met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for the second time and how the Lord heard his two dramas
[Vidagdha-madhava and Lalita-madhaval.
TEXT 104
তার মণ্যে শিব।নন্দ-দঙ্গে কুকুর আইলা |
ভু তারে TW কহাঞা মুক্ত করিল। ॥ ১০৪ ॥
tara madhye sivananda-sange kukkura aila
prabhu tare krsna kahana mukta karila
SYNONYMS
tara madhye —in that chapter; sivananda-sarige —with Sivananda Sena; kuk-
kura—the dog; aila—came; prabhu—S5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tare—unto him
(the dog); krsna kahana—inducing to chant Krsna; mukta karila—liberated.
TRANSLATION
That chapter also describes the incident of Sivananda Sena’s dog, who was
induced by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to chant the holy name of Krsna and was
thus liberated.


--- Page 295 ---
Text 107] The Siksastaka Prayers 295
TEXT 105
দ্বিতীয়ে_ছোট-হরিদ।সে করাইল।৷ fame |
তার মধ্যে শিব।নন্দের আম্চর্য দর্শন ॥ ১০৫ ॥
dvitiye——chota-haridase karaila siksana
tara madhye Sivanandera ascarya darsana
SYNONYMS
dvitiye—in the Second Chapter; chota-haridase —junior Haridasa; karaila sik-
sana—He taught very strictly; tara madhye—within that chapter; sivanandera—
of Sivananda Sena; ascarya darsana—the wonderful vision.
TRANSLATION
In the Second Chapter the Lord instructively punished Junior Haridasa. Also
in that chapter is the wonderful vision of Sivinanda Sena.
TEXT 106
তৃতীয়ে-_হরিদাসের মহিম। «vw ।
দামোদর-পণ্ডিত কৈল। AFA व। कए ॥ ১০৬ ॥
trtiye—— haridasera mahima pracanda
damodara-pandita kaila prabhure vakya-danda
SYNONYMS
trtiye —in the Third Chapter; haridasera—of Thakura Haridasa; mahima pra-
canda—very forceful glories; damodara-pandita—Damodara Pandita; kaila—
made; prabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vakya-danda—impudence of
chastising by words.
TRANSLATION
In the Third Chapter is a description of the forceful glories of Haridasa
Thakura. That chapter also mentions how Damodara Pandita spoke words of
criticism to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 107
প্রভু AUX দিয়। কৈল। ত্রন্মাগ-মোচন।
হরিদ।স করিল। নামের মহিমা-স্থাপন ॥ ১০৭ ॥


--- Page 296 ---
296 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
prabhu ‘nama’ diya kaila brahmanda-mocana
haridasa karila namera mahima-sthapana
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nama diya —delivering the holy name;
kaila—did; brahmanda-mocana—the liberation of the universe; haridasa—
Haridasa; karila—did; namera—of the holy name; mahima-sthapana—the estab-
lishment of the glories.
TRANSLATION
The Third Chapter also tells how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered every-
one by bestowing upon the universe the holy name of the Lord, and it de-
scribes how Haridasa Thakura established the glories of the holy name by his
practical example.
TEXT 108
চতুর্থে _শ্রীসনাতনের দ্বিতীয়-মিলন।
দেহুত্য।গ হৈতে তার করিলা রক্ষণ ॥ ১০৮ ॥
caturthe —sri-sanatanera dvitiya-milana
deha-tyaga haite tanra karila raksana
SYNONYMS
caturthe—in the Fourth Chapter; sri-sanatanera—of Sanatana Gosvami;
dvitiya-milana—visiting for the second time; deha-tyaga haite —from committing
suicide; tanra karila raksana—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu protected him.
TRANSLATION
The Fourth Chapter describes Sanatana Gosvami’s second visit with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and how the Lord saved him from committing suicide.
TEXT 109
জ্যৈষ্ঠ-মাসের got তারে কৈল৷ পরীক্ষণ |
শক্তি সঞ্চারিয়। পুনঃ পাঠাইলা বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১০৯ ॥
jyaistha-masera dhape tanre kaila pariksana
Sakti sancariya punah pathaila vrndavana


--- Page 297 ---
Text 1111 The Siksastaka Prayers 297
SYNONYMS
jyaistha-masera—of the month of May-June; dhape—in the sunshine; tarre —
him; kailda—did; pariksana—examining; sakti—potency; saicariya—giving him;
punah—again; pathaila vrndavana—sent back to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
The Fourth Chapter also tells how Sanatana Gosvami was tested in the
sunshine of Jyaistha [May and June] and was then empowered and sent back
to Vrndavana.
TEXT 110
পঞ্চমে-_ eimai প্রভু কৃপা করিল। ।
রায়-দ্বার| কৃষ্ণকথা ভারে শুনাইল। ॥ ১১০ ॥
pancame — pradyumna-misre prabhu krpa karila
raya-dvara krsna-katha tanre sunaila
SYNONYMS
paiicame—in the Fifth Chapter; pradyumna-misre—unto Pradyumna Misra;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa karild—showed mercy; raya-dvara—
with the help of Ramananda Raya; krsna-katha—topics of Krsna; tarre sunaila—
made him hear.
TRANSLATION
In the Fifth Chapter, the Lord showed His favor to Pradyumna Misra and
made him hear topics of Krsna from Ramananda Raya.
TEXT 111
তার মধ্যে ^वाोरोगः-कदिन्र নাটক-উপেক্ষণ |
স্বক্মূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞি কৈল। বিগ্রহের মহিমা-স্থাপন ॥১১১
tara madhye ‘bangala’-kavira nataka-upeksana
svardpa-gosani kaila vigrahera mahima-sthapana
SYNONYMS
tara madhye—within that chapter; bangala-kavira—of a poet from Bengal;
nataka-upeksana—the rejection of the drama; svarapa-gosani—Svartupa
Damodara Gosvami; kaila—did; vigrahera—of the Deity; mahima-sthapana—the
establishment of the glories.


--- Page 298 ---
298 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
Also in that chapter, Svaripa Damodara Gosvami rejected the drama of a
poet from Bengal and established the glories of the Deity.
TEXT 112
सट - त्रपूनाय-्ाज প্রভুরে মিলিলা |
নিত্যানন্দ-আ্ঞায় চিড়া-মহোৎসব टेकन। ॥ ১১২ ॥
sasthe —raghunatha-dasa prabhure milila
nityananda-ajiaya cigda-mahotsava kaila
SYNONYMS
sasthe—in the Sixth Chapter; raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
prabhure milila—met Lord 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityananda-ajiaya—by the
order of Nityananda Prabhu; cida-mahotsava kaila—performed the festival of
chipped rice.
TRANSLATION
The Sixth Chapter describes how Raghunatha dasa Gosvami met Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and performed the chipped rice festival in accordance
with Nityananda Prabhu’s order.
TEXT 113
ছামোদর-স্বরূপ-ঠা এ Sica जबन्निन |
গোবধন-শিলা” ङश मोना" তারে দিল ॥ ১১৩ ॥
damodara-svarapa-thani tanre samarpila
‘govardhana-sila’, ‘gunja-mala’ tanre dila
SYNONYMS
damodara-svartpa-thani—to the care of Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; tarnre
samarpila—the Lord entrusted him; govardhana-sila—the stone from Govardhana
Hill; guija-mala—the garland of small conchshells; tanre dila—delivered to him.
TRANSLATION
The Lord entrusted Raghunatha dasa Gosvami to the care of Svariapa
Damodara Gosvami and gave Raghunatha dasa the gift of a stone from
Govardhana Hill and a garland of small conchshells.


--- Page 299 ---
Text 116] The Siksastaka Prayers 299
TEXT 114
সপ্তম-পরিচ্ছেদে- INS SHA মিলন |
नानो-मटङ কৈলা Sia গর্ব খণ্ডন ॥ ১১৪ ॥
saptama-paricchede —vallabha bhattera milana
nana-mate kaila tanra garva khandana
SYNONYMS
saptama-paricchede —in the Seventh Chapter; vallabha bhattera milana—the
meeting of Vallabha Bhatta with 311 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nana-mate—in various
ways; kaila—did; tanra—his; garva—pride; khandana—dismantling.
TRANSLATION
The Seventh Chapter tells how Sri Caitanya met Vallabha Bhatta and dis-
mantled his false pride in various ways.
TEXT 115
অষ্টমে - त्रागषटल्न-गुज्ञोत्र আগমন |
তার ভয়ে কৈল। প্রভু Em সন্কোচন ॥ ১১৫ ॥
astame ——ramacandra-purira dgamana
tanra bhaye kaila prabhu bhiksa sankocana
SYNONYMS
astame—in the Eighth Chapter; ramacandra-purira agamana—the arrival of
Ramacandra Puri; tarra bhaye —because of fear of him; kaila—did; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhiksa sannkocana—minimizing His eating.
TRANSLATION
The Eighth Chapter describes the arrival of Ramacandra Puri and how Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu minimized His eating due to fear of him.
TEXT 116
নবমে — গোপীনাথ-পট্টনায়ক-মোচন |
ত্রিজগতের লোক প্রভুর পাইল দরশন ॥ ১১৬ ॥
navame — gopinatha-pattanayaka-mocana
trijagatera loka prabhura paila darasana


--- Page 300 ---
300 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
SYNONYMS
navame—in the Ninth Chapter; gopinatha-pattanayaka-mocana—the
deliverance of Gopinatha Pattandyaka, the brother of Ramananda Raya; tri-
jagatera—of the three worlds; loka—the people in general; prabhura—of Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; paila darasana—got the audience.
TRANSLATION
In the Ninth Chapter is a description of how Gopinatha Pattanayaka was
delivered and how the people of the three worlds were able to see Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 117
দশমে- কহিল্যু' ভক্ত দত্ত-আস্বাদল।
রাঘব-পণ্ডিতের ङो] ঝালির সাজন ॥ ১১৭ ॥
dasame ——kahilun bhakta-datta-asvadana
raghava-panditera tahan jhalira sajana
SYNONYMS
dasame—in the Tenth Chapter; kahilun—I have described; bhakta-datta-
asvadana—the tasting of the food given by the devotees; raghava-panditera—of
Raghava Pandita; tahan—therein; jhalira sajana—the assortment in the bags.
TRANSLATION
In the Tenth Chapter | have described how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tasted
the food given by His devotees, and | have also described the assortments in
the bags of Raghava Pandita.
TEXT 118
তার মধ্যে গোবিশ্দের কৈল। পরীক্ষণ |
তার মধ্যে পরিমুণা-নৃত্যের বর্ণন ॥ ॥ ১১৮ ॥
tara madhye govindera kaila pariksana
tara madhye parimunda-nrtyera varnana
SYNONYMS
tara madhye —within that chapter; govindera—of Govinda, His personal assis-
tant; kaila—did; pariksana—testing; tara madhye—in that chapter; parimunda-
nrtyera varnana—description of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s dancing in the
temple.


--- Page 301 ---
Text 120] The Siksastaka Prayers 301
TRANSLATION
Also in that chapter is a description of how the Lord examined Govinda and
how He danced in the temple.
TEXT 119
একাদশে- হুরিদাস-ঠাকুরের निवी |
रुङ-वां< गन यो] (FIBA গৌর SAT ॥ ১১৯
ekadase — haridasa-thakurera niryana
bhakta-vatsalya yahan dekhaila gaura bhagavan
SYNONYMS
ekadase—in the Eleventh Chapter; haridasa-thakurera niryana—the disap-
pearance of Srila Haridasa Thakura; bhakta-vatsalya—affection for the devotee;
yahan—wherein; dekhaila—exhibited;  gaura  bhagavan—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The Eleventh Chapter describes the disappearance of Haridasa Thakura and
how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, showed
His affection for His devotees.
TEXT 120
দ্বাদশে--জগদানম্দের তৈল-ভঞ্জন |
নিত্যানন্দ टेकन। শিব।নন্দেরে তাড়ন ॥ ১২০ ॥
dvadase —jagadanandera taila-bhanjana
nityananda kaila sivanandere tadana
SYNONYMS
dvadase —in the Twelfth Chapter; jagadanandera—of Jagadananda Pandita;
taila-bhanjana—breaking the oil pot; nityananda—Lord Nityananda; kaila—per-
formed; sivanandere taidana—the chastisement of Sivananda Sena.
TRANSLATION
In the Twelfth Chapter are descriptions of how Jagadananda Pandita broke
a pot of oil and how Lord Nityananda chastised Sivananda Sena.


--- Page 302 ---
302 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 121
लट्न्रानटने-जनणानन्त মথুর। वादेः আইলা |
মহাপ্রভু দেবদাসীর গীত ॐनिन्‌।॥ ১২১ ॥
trayodase —jagadananda mathura yai’ aila
mahaprabhu deva-dasira gita sunila
SYNONYMS
trayodase—in the Thirteenth Chapter; jagadananda—)agadananda Pandita;
mathurd yai’—going to Mathura; 4ild—returned; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; deva-dasira—of the deva-dasi dancing girl; gita sunila—heard the
song.
TRANSLATION
In the Thirteenth Chapter, Jagadananda Pandita went to Mathura and
returned, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by chance heard a song sung by a
deva-dasi dancing girl.
TEXT 122
রঘুনাথ-ভট্টাচার্যের তাহাই मिनन |
প্রভু তারে कुशे] করি” পাঠাইল। বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১২২ ॥
raghunatha-bhattacaryera tahani milana
prabhu tanre krpa kari’ pathaila vrndavana
SYNONYMS
raghunatha-bhattacaryera—of Raghunatha Bhatta; tahani—there; milana—
meeting; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre —to him; krpa kari’—showing
causeless mercy; pathaila vindavana—sent to Vindavana.
TRANSLATION
Also in the Thirteenth Chapter, Raghunatha Bhatta met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who by His causeless mercy sent him to Vrndavana.
TEXT 123
চতুর্দশে-_দিব্যোল্মাদ-আরম্ভ বর্ণন |
“শরীর” @A প্রভুর, “মন” গেলা বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১২৩ ॥


--- Page 303 ---
Text 125] The Siksastaka Prayers 303
caturdase —divyonmada-arambha varpana
‘Sarira’ etha prabhura, ‘mana’ gela vrndavana
SYNONYMS
caturdase —in the Fourteenth Chapter; divya-unmada-arambha—the beginning
of the spiritual trance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; varnana—describing; sarira—
the body; etha —here; prabhura—of Sn Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mana—the mind;
gela—went; vrndavana—to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
The Fourteenth Chapter describes the beginning of the Lord's spiritual
trance, in which His body was at Jagannatha Puri but His mind was in
Vrndavana.
TEXT 124
তার মধ্যে AGA সিংহুত্বারে পতন |
অস্থি-সদ্ধি-ত্যাগ, অনুভাবের BEA ॥ ১২৪ ॥
tara madhye prabhura sirhha-dvare patana
asthi-sandhi-tyaga, anubhavera udgama
SYNONYMS
tara madhye —in that chapter; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sirhha-
dvare patana—falling down by the Sirhha-dvara gate; asthi-sandhi—of the joints
of the bones; tyaga—release; anubhavera udgama—the awakening of a trance
and emotion.
TRANSLATION
Also in that chapter is a description of how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell
down in front of the Sirmha-dvara gate of Jagannatha temple, His bones sepa-
rated at the joints, and how various transcendental symptoms awakened.
TEXT 125
চটক-পর্বত দেখি” প্রভুর ধাবন |
তার মধ্যে প্রভুর কিছু প্রলাপ-বর্ণন ॥ ১২৫ ॥
cataka-parvata dekhi’ prabhura dhavana
tara madhye prabhura kichu pralapa-varnana


--- Page 304 ---
304 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
SYNONYMS
cataka-parvata—the hill known as Cataka-parvata; dekhi’—seeing; prabhura
dhavana—the running of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tiara madhye—in that
chapter; prabhura—of ৩11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kichu—some; pralapa var-
nana—talking like a madman.
TRANSLATION
Also in that chapter there is a description of how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
ran toward Cataka-parvata and spoke like a madman.
TEXT 126
পঞ্চদশ-পরিচ্ছেদে -উত্যান-বিলাসে |
বৃজ্দাবনভ্ঞমে যাহ করিল। প্রবেশে ॥ ১২৬ ॥
pancadasa-paricchede — udyana-vilase
vrndavana-bhrame yahan karila pravese
SYNONYMS
pancadasa-paricchede—in the Fifteenth Chapter; udyana-vilise—in His
pastimes within the garden; vrndavana-bhrame—His taking the garden to be
Vrndavana; yahan—where; karila pravese—He entered.
TRANSLATION
In the Fifteenth Chapter is a description of how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
entered a garden on the shore of the sea, mistaking the garden for Vrndavana.
TEXT 127
তার মধ্যে প্রভুর পঞ্চেন্দ্রিয়-আকর্ষণ |
তার মধ্যে कत्रिन। রাসে কৃষ্ণ-অস্বেষণ ॥ ১২৭ ॥
tara madhye prabhura pancendriya-akarsana
tara madhye karila rase krspa-anvesana
SYNONYMS
tara madhye—within that; prabhura—of ৩11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; parica-in-
driya-akarsana—the attraction of the five senses; tara madhye—within that
chapter; karila—did; rase—in the rasa dance; krsna-anvesana—searching for
Krsna.


--- Page 305 ---
Text 129] The Siksastaka Prayers 305
TRANSLATION
Also in that chapter is a description of the attraction of Lord Caitanya’s five
senses to Krsna and how He searched for Krsna in the rasa dance.
TEXT 128
(सोर्टम्भ-- को निणोटम প্রভু कृभ। THe
বৈষ্ণবোচ্ছিষ্ট খাইবার ফল দেখাইলা ॥ ১২৮ ॥
sodase——kalidase prabhu krpa karila
vaisnavocchista khaibara phala dekhaila
SYNONYMS
sodase—in the Sixteenth Chapter; kali-dase—unto Kalidasa; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa karila—showed favor; vaisnpava-ucchista khaibara—
of eating the remnants of food left by Vaisnavas; phala dekhaila—showed the
result.
TRANSLATION
The Sixteenth Chapter tells how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed His
mercy to Kalidasa and thus demonstrated the result of eating the remnants of
the food of Vaisnavas.
TEXT 129
শিবালম্দের বালকে শ্লোক করাইলা |
লসিংহদ্বারে घातौ প্রভুরে কৃষ্ণ দেখাইলা ॥ ১২৯ ॥
Sivanandera balake sloka karaila
simha-dvare dvari prabhure krsna dekhaila
SYNONYMS
divanandera—of Sivananda Sena; bdlake —the son; $loka kardili—made to
compose a verse; simha-dvare—at the Sirhha-dvara gate of the Jagannatha
temple; dvari—the doorkeeper; prabhure —unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna
dekhaila—showed Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
॥ also describes how Sivananda’s son composed a verse and how the
doorkeeper of the Sirmha-dvara showed Krsna to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 306 ---
306 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 130
মহাপ্রসাদের ङा] गङ्िम। বর্ণিল |
কৃষ্ণাধরাম্বতের ফল-শ্লোক আস্বাদিলা ॥ ১৩০ ॥
maha-prasadera tahan mahima varnila
krsnadharamrtera phala-sloka asvadila
SYNONYMS
maha-prasadera—of the remnants of the food of the Lord, maha-prasada;
tahan—there; mahima—the glories; varpila—described; krsna-adhara-amrtera—
of the nectar from the lips of Krsna; phala-sloka—the verse mentioning the result;
asvadila—tasted.
TRANSLATION
Also in that chapter, the glories of maha-prasada are explained, and a verse
is tasted describing the effect of nectar from the lips of Krsna.
TEXT 131
সপ্তদশে- গাভী-মধ্যে প্রভুর পতন |
কুমমাকার-অনুভাবের তাহাই উদগম ॥ ১৩১ ॥
saptadase——gabhi-madhye prabhura patana
karmakara-anubhavera tahani udgama
SYNONYMS
saptadase—in the Seventeenth Chapter; gabhi-madhye—among the cows;
prabhura patana—the falling down of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karma-akara-
anubhavera—of ecstatic emotion in the form of a tortoise; tahani—there;
udgama—awakening.
TRANSLATION
In the Seventeenth Chapter, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell among the cows
and assumed the form of a tortoise as His ecstatic emotions awakened.
TEXT 132
ক্বষ্চের শঞ্দ-ওণে প্রভুর मन SHEA |
“্কাস্ত্রঙ্গ তে” শ্লোকের অর্থ আবেশে করিল। ॥১৩২॥


--- Page 307 ---
Text 134] The Siksastaka Prayers 307
krspnera sabda-gune prabhura mana akarsila
“ka stry anga te” slokera artha avese karila
SYNONYMS
krsnera —of Lord Krsna; sabda-gune—by the qualities of the sound; prabhura—
of ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mana—the mind; dkarsila—was attracted; ka stry
anga te slokera—of the verse beginning with the words ka stry anga te; artha—
the meaning; avese—in ecstasy; karila—described.
TRANSLATION
Also in the Seventeenth Chapter, the attributes of Krsna’s sound attracted
the mind of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who described in ecstasy the meaning
of the “3 stry anga te’’ verse.
TEXT 133
ভাব-শাবলে্য পুনঃ কৈল। <न श॑न |
কর্ণাম্ত-শ্লেকের অর্থ टेकन। বিবরণ ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
bhava-sabalye punah kaila pralapana
karnamrta-slokera artha kaild vivarana
SYNONYMS
bhava-sabalye—from the aggregate of all ecstatic emotions; punah—again;
kaila pralapana—He talked like a madman; karpamrta-slokera—of a verse from
Krspa-karpamrta; artha—the meaning; (८211 vivarana—described in detail.
TRANSLATION
Due to the conjunction of various ecstatic emotions, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu again began speaking like a madman and described in detail the
meaning of a verse from Krsna-karnamrta.
TEXT 134
অষ্টাদশ পরিচ্ছেদে - ATE ASH |
কৃষ্ণ-গোপী-জলকেলি SI দরশন ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
astadasa paricchede —samudre patana
krsna-gopi-jala-keli tahan darasana


--- Page 308 ---
308 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
SYNONYMS
astadasa paricchede—in the Eighteenth Chapter; samudre patana—the Lord's
falling into the ocean; krsna-gopi-jala-keli—the water pastimes of Krsna and the
gopis; tahan darasana—seeing there.
TRANSLATION
In the Eighteenth Chapter, the Lord fell into the ocean, and in ecstasy He
saw the pastimes of the water fight between Krsna and the gopis.
TEXT 135
তাহাই দেখিল। কৃষ্ণের বল্য-ভোজন |
জালিয়া উঠাইল, প্রভু wigs ख-रुवन ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
tahani dekhila krsnera vanya-bhojana
jaliya uthaila, prabhu aila sva-bhavana
SYNONYMS
tahani—there; dekhila—He saw; krsnera—of Krsna; vanya-bhojana—a picnic
in the forest; jaliya—a fisherman; uthaila—caught Him; prabhu—the Lord; adila—
returned; sva-bhavana—to His own residence.
TRANSLATION
In that dream, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw Krsna’s picnic in the forest. As
Lord Caitanya floated in the sea, a fisherman caught Him, and then the Lord
returned to His own residence.
TEXT 136
উনবিংশে-_ভ্িত্ত্যে প্রভুর মুখসংখঘর্ষণ |
কষ্ণের বিরহ-স্ফুতি-প্রলাপ-বর্ণন ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
anavirnse ——bhittye prabhura mukha-sangharsana
krsnera viraha-spharti-pralapa-varnana
SYNONYMS
anavimse —in the Nineteenth Chapter; bhittye—on the walls; prabhura
mukha-sangharsana—the rubbing of the face of the Lord; krsnera viraha-spharti—
the awakening of separation from Krsna; pralapa-varnana—and talking like a crazy
person.


--- Page 309 ---
Text 138] The Siksastaka Prayers 309
TRANSLATION
In the Nineteenth Chapter is a description of how Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu rubbed His face against the walls and spoke like a madman
because of separation from Krsna.
TEXT 137
বসস্ত-রজনীতে পুণ্পোত্যানে বিহুরণ ।
কৃষ্ণের সৌরভ্য-শ্লেকের অর্থ-বিবরণ ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
vasanta-rajanite puspodyane viharana
krsnera saurabhya-slokera artha-vivarana
SYNONYMS
vasanta-rajanite—on a spring night; puspa-udyane—in a flower garden;
viharana—the wandering; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; saurabhya-slokera—of a verse
about the bodily fragrance; artha-vivarana—describing the meaning.
TRANSLATION
That chapter also describes Krsna’s wandering in a garden on a spring
night, and it fully describes the meaning of a verse about the scent of Krsna’s
body.
TEXT 138
বিংশ-পরিচ্ছেদে _ নিজ-'শিক্ষাষ্টক” পড়িয়া ।
তার অর্থ আস্বাদিল। প্রেমাবিষ্ট ङग ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
virsa-paricchede — nija-‘sSiksastaka’ padiya
tara artha asvadila premavista hana
SYNONYMS
virhsa-paricchede—in the Twentieth Chapter; nija-siksastaka padiya—reciting
His own Siksastaka verses; tara artha—their meaning; asvadila—tasted; prema-
avista hana —being absorbed in ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
In the Twentieth Chapter, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited His own
eight stanzas of instruction and tasted their meaning in ecstatic love.


--- Page 310 ---
310 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 139
ভক্তে' শিখাইতে যেই শিক্ষাষ্টক কহিলা |
সেই CRF IRCA অর্থ পুনঃ साख किन्‌] ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
bhakte Sikhaite yei siksastaka kahila
sei Slokastakera artha punah asvadila
SYNONYMS
bhakte—the devotees; sikhaite—to teach; yei—that which; siksa-astaka—
eight instructions; kahila—described; sei sloka-astakera—of the same eight
verses; artha—the meaning; punah asvadila—again He tasted.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu composed those eight stanzas to instruct the
devotees, but He also personally tasted their meaning.
TEXT 140
মুখ্য-মুখ্য-লীলার অর্থ Ey কথন |
“অনুবাদ” হৈতে স্মরে গ্রন্থ-বিবরণ ॥ ১৪০ ॥
mukhya-mukhya-lilara artha karilun kathana
‘anuvada’ haite smare grantha-vivarana
SYNONYMS
mukhya-mukhya-lilira—of the chief pastimes of Lord Sr Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; artha—the meaning; karilun—have done; kathana—describing;
anuvada haite—by repeating them again; smare—one remembers; grantha-
vivarana—the description in the book.
TRANSLATION
॥ have thus described the principal pastimes and their meaning, for by such
repetition one can remember the descriptions in the book.
TEXT 141
এক এক পরিচ্ছেদের কথা৷ — AHF AFA |
মুখ্য-মুখ্য TFG, কথা না যায় বিস্তার ॥ ১৪১ ॥
eka eka paricchedera katha — aneka-prakara
mukhya-mukhya kahilun, katha na yaya vistara


--- Page 311 ---
Text 144] The Siksastaka Prayers 311
SYNONYMS
eka eka paricchedera—of every chapter; katha—description; aneka-prakara—
different varieties; mukhya-mukhya kahilunn—| have repeated only the principal
ones; katha—discussions; na ydya—not possible; vistara—expansion.
TRANSLATION
In every chapter there are various topics, but I have selected only those that
are principal, for not all of them could be described again.
TEXTS 142-143
শ্রীরাধা-সহ “न्नोगलनटमाङ्मः |
वोच्नोधा-जङ “শ্রীগো বিম্দ'-চরণ ॥ ১৪২ ॥
ोत्राषा-मर्‌ Aer “জীগোপীনাথ” |
এই তিন ঠাকুর হয় “গৌড়িয়ার নাথ” ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
$ri-radha-saha ‘sri-madana-mohana’
$ri-radha-saha ‘sri-govinda’-carana
$ri-radha-saha srila ‘sri-gopinatha’
ei tina thakura haya ‘gaudiyara natha’
SYNONYMS
$ri-radha-saha—with  Srimati  Radharani;  sri-madana-mohana—the Deity
Madana-mohanaji; sri-radha-saha—with Srimati Radharani; $ri-govinda-carana—
the lotus feet of Sri Govindaji; s$ri-radha-saha—with Srimati Radharant; 5112 $ri-
gopinatha—the all-beautiful and opulent Gopinathaji; ei tina—all these three;
thakura—Deities; haya—are; gaudiydra natha—worshipable by all the Caudiya
Vaisnavas.
TRANSLATION
The Vrndavana Deities of Madana-mohana with Srimati Radharani, Govinda
with Srimati Radharani, and Gopinatha with Srimati Radharani are the life and
soul of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas.
TEXTS 144-146
জীকুষ্দচৈতন্ত, Ags নিত্যানন্দ।
জীঅইদ্বৈত-আচার্খ, শ্রীগৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ১৪৪ ॥


--- Page 312 ---
312 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
Bret, wet, লীলনাতন |
Ber ল্রীরঘুলাথ, ATTA ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
নিজ-শিরে ধরি” এই সব।র চরণ ।
যাহা হৈতে হয় जव বাছচ্ছিত-পুতব্লণ ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
$ri-krsna-caitanya, $ri-yuta nityananda
$ri-advaita-acarya, sri-gaura-bhakta-vrnda
$ri-svarapa, Sri-rapa, Sri-sanatana
$ri-guru sri-raghunatha, sri-jiva-carana
nija-sire dhari’ ei sabara carana
yaha haite haya saba varnchita-parana
SYNONYMS
$ri-krsna-caitanya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sri-yuta nityananda—Lord
Nityananda; sri-advaita-acarya—Sri Advaita Prabhu; sri-gaura-bhakta-vrnda—the
devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $ri-svartpa—Svaripa Damodara Gosvam;
$ri-rapa—Sri Rapa Gosvami; sri-sanatana—Srila Sanatana Gosvami; $ri-guru—the
spiritual master; sri-raghunatha —Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; $ri-jiva-carana—the
lotus feet of Srila Jiva Gosvami; nija-Sire dhari’—catching on my head; ei sabara
carana—the lotus feet of all of them; yaha haite—by which action; haya—there
is; saba—all; vanchita-parana—the fulfilling of desires.
TRANSLATION
So that my desires may be fulfilled, | place the lotus feet of these per-
sonalities on my head: Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, with Lord Nityananda,
Advaita Acarya and Their devotees, as well as Sri Svariipa Damodara Gosvami,
Sri Ripa Gosvami, Sri Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, who
is my spiritual master, and Srila Jiva Gosvami.
PURPORT
Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was the instructing spiritual master of Krsnadasa
Kavirdja Gosvami and has therefore been described as sri-guru.
TEXT 147
সবার एव्रन-कृगं1-- QF উপাধ্যায়ী”।
মোর বাণী-শিষ্য॥, তারে বছত নাচাই ॥ ১৪৭ ॥


--- Page 313 ---
Text 148] The Siksastaka Prayers 313
sabara carana-krpa—- ‘guru upadhyayr
mora vani——Sisy3, tare bahuta nacai
SYNONYMS
sabara—of all of them; carana-krpa—the mercy of the lotus feet; guru
upadhyayi—my teacher of Vedic instruction; mora vani—my words; sisya—the
disciples; tare —them; bahuta nacai—! made dance in various ways.
TRANSLATION
The mercy of their lotus feet is my spiritual master, and my words are my
disciples that | have made dance in various ways.
PURPORT
Upadhyayi, or upadhydya, refers to one who teaches when approached
(upetya adhiyate asmat). In the Manu-sarmhita it is said:
eka-desarn tu vedasya
vedargany api va punah
yo ‘dhyapayati vrtty-artham
upadhyayah sa ucyate
“One who teaches others a part of the Vedas or literatures supplementary to the
Vedas may be called upadhyaya.” Upadhyaya also refers to one who teaches art.
TEXT 148
শিষ্যার শ্রম দেখি” छक्र নাচান त्रोयिन्‌।।
“কপ” না নাচায়, “বাণী” वजिग्न রহিল ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
Sisyara srama dekhi’ guru nacana rakhila
‘krpa’ na nacaya, ‘van vasiya rahila
SYNONYMS
sisyara—of the disciples; srama—the fatigue; dekhi’—seeing; guru—the
spiritual master; nacana rakhila—stopped causing the dancing; krpa—mercy; na
nacaya—does not make dance; vani—the words; vasiya—sitting down; rahila—
remain silent.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the fatigue of the disciples, the spiritual master has stopped making
them dance, and because that mercy no longer makes them dance, my words
now sit silently.


--- Page 314 ---
314 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 149
অনিপুণা বাণী আপনে নাচিতে না জানে ।
যত নাচাইলা, নাচি” করিল বিশ্রামে ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
anipuna ৮301 apane nacite na jane
yata nacaila, naci’ karila visrame
SYNONYMS
anipuna vani—inexperienced words; apane—by themselves; nacite—to
dance; na—not; jane—know how; yata—whatever; nacaila—caused to dance;
naci’—after dancing; karila visrame—took rest.
TRANSLATION
My inexperienced words do not know how to dance by themselves. The
mercy of the guru made them dance as much as possible, and now, after
dancing, they have taken rest.
TEXT 150
जव শ্রোতাগণের করি চরণ বন্দন |
যী-সবার চরণ-ক্বপ। —WTST কারণ ॥ ১৫০ ॥
saba srota-ganera kari carana vandana
yan-sabara carana-krpa——subhera karana
SYNONYMS
saba—all; srota-ganera—of the readers; kari—| do; carapa vandana—
worshiping the lotus feet; yan-sabara—of all of whom; carana-krpa—the mercy
of the lotus feet; subhera karana—the cause of all good fortune.
TRANSLATION
I now worship the lotus feet of all my readers, for by the mercy of their lotus
feet there is all good fortune.
TEXT 151
চৈতন্তযচরিতামৃত যেই जन শুনে |
তার চরণ gol TCH মুনি প।নে ॥ ১৫১ ॥
caitanya-caritamrta yei jana sune
tanra carana dhuia karon mudi pane


--- Page 315 ---
Text 153] The Siksastaka Prayers 315
SYNONYMS
caitanya-caritaimrta—the description of Lord जा Caitanya’s pastimes; yer jana
Sune—anyone who hears; tanra carana—his lotus feet; dhufia—washing;
karon—do; 117८471 -; pane —drinking.
TRANSLATION
If one hears the pastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as described in
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, | wash his lotus feet and drink the water.
TEXT 152
শ্রোতার পদরেণু FCA | মন্তক-ভুষণ |
তোমরা এ-অম্ৃত পিলে সফল হৈল শ্রম ॥ ১৫২ ॥
$rotara pada-renu karon mastaka-bhasana
tomara e-amrta pile saphala haila srama
SYNONYMS
srotara—of the audience; pada-renu—the dust of the lotus feet; karorn—I
make; mastaka-bhasana—a decoration on my head; tomara—all of you; e-
amrta—this nectar; pile—have drunk; sa-phala—successful; haila—has become;
Srama—my labor.
TRANSLATION
1 decorate my head with the dust of the lotus feet of my audience. Now you
have all drunk this nectar, and therefore my labor is successful.
TEXT 153
জ্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্বত কহে কৃষ্ণণাল ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—S$rila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade —at the lotus feet; yara—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdgja Gosvami.


--- Page 316 ---
316 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri [003 and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
TEXT 154
চরিতমনম্বৃতমেতচ্ছীলদৈত छविटसशंः
শুভদমণশুভনাশি শ্র্ধয়াস্বাদয়েদ্যঃ |
তদমলপদপত্থে ভূঙ্গতামেত্য সোইয়ং
nafs রসমুদচৈচৈঃ প্রেমমাধবীকপুরম্‌ ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
caritam amrtam ০030 chrila-caitanya-visnoh
Subhadam asubhanasi sraddhayasvadayed yah
tad-amala-pada-padme bhrigatam etya so ‘yam
rasayati rasam uccaih prema-madhvika-param
SYNONYMS
caritam—the character; amrtam—nectarean; etat—this; srila—most opulent;
caitanya—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; visnoh—of He who is Lord Visnu Himself,
the Supreme Personality of Codhead; subhadam—giving auspiciousness; asubha-
nasi—destroying all inauspiciousness; sraddhaya—with faith and love;
asvadayet—should taste; yah—anyone who; tat-amala-pada-padme—at the
spotless lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhrrigatam etya—
becoming like a bumblebee; sah—that person; ayam—this; rasayati—tastes;
rasam —transcendental mellow; uccaih—a large quantity; prema-madhvika—of
the wine of ecstatic love; param —full.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya-caritamrta is filled with the activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. It invokes all good for-
tune and destroys everything inauspicious. If one tastes the nectar of
Caitanya-caritamrta with faith and love, | become like a bumblebee tasting
the honey of transcendental love from his lotus feet.
TEXT 155
জ্ঞীমন্মদনগোপাল-গোবিষ্দদেব-তুষ্টয়ে ।
চৈতন্কযাপিতমস্তবেতদচ্চৈতন্যচরিত।ম্বতম্‌ ॥ ১৫৫ ॥


--- Page 317 ---
Text 156] The Siksastaka Prayers 317
$riman-madana-gopala-
govindadeva-tustaye
caitanyarpitam astv etac
caitanya-caritamrtam
SYNONYMS
$rimat—all-beautiful; madana-gopala—of the Deity Madana-mohana; govin-
da-deva—of the Deity 5 Govindadeva in Vrndavana; tustaye—for the satisfac-
tion; caitanya-arpitam—offered to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; astu—let it be;
etat—this book; caitanya-caritamrtam—containing the nectarean activities of
Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Since this book, Caitanya-caritamrta, is now complete, having been written
for the satisfaction of the most opulent Deities Madana-mohanaji and Govin-
daji, let it be offered at the lotus feet of Sri Krsna Caitanyadeva.
TEXT 156
পরিমলবাসিতভুবনং
স্বরসোম্মাদিত-রসম্ঞভ-রোলদ্বম্‌ |
গিরিধরচরণাস্তোজং
কঃ शकन AMAT: সমীহতে ङग्‌ ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
parimala-vasita-bhuvanar
svarasonmadita-rasajia-rolambam
giridhara-caranambhojam
kah khalu rasikah samihate hatum
SYNONYMS
parimala—with the scent; vasita—perfumed; bhuvanam—the whole world;
sva-rasa-unmadita—inspired by their own mellows; rasa-jia—devotees; rolam-
bam—Ilike bumblebees; giridhara-carana-ambhojam—the lotus feet of Lord
Giridhari; kah—who; khalu—certainly; rasikah—a realized soul; samihate
hatum—endeavors to give up.
TRANSLATION
Realized devotees are like bumblebees maddened by their own mellows at
Krsna’s lotus feet. The scent of those lotus feet perfumes the entire world.
Who is the realized soul that could give them up?


--- Page 318 ---
318 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Antya-lila, Ch. 20
TEXT 157
শাকে সিদ্ধগ়িবাণেন্দৌ৷ জ্যৈষ্ঠে বৃন্দাবনান্তরে |
সূর্খাহেহসিতপঞ্চম্যাং গ্রন্থোহয়ং Adi গতঃ॥১৫৭ ॥
Sake sindhv-agni-vanendau
jyaisthe vrndavanantare
saryahe ’sita-paficamyam
grantho ‘yam parpatam gatah
SYNONYMS

$ake—in the Sakabda Era; sindhu-agni-vanendau—in 1537; jyaisthe—in the
month of Jyaistha (May-June); vrndavana-antare—in the forest of Vrndavana;
starya-ahe—on the day of the sun (Sunday); asita-paficamyam—on the fifth day
of the dark fortnight; granthah—book; ayam—this (Caitanya-caritamrta); par-
natam —completion; gatah —achieved.

TRANSLATION

In Vrndavana in the year 1537, Sakabda Era, in the month of Jyaistha [May-
June], on Sunday, the fifth day of the waning moon, this Caitanya-caritamrta
has been completed.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sei Caitanya-caritamrta, Antya-lila,
Twentieth Chapter, describing the meaning of Siksastaka and how the Lord tasted
it Himself.

END OF THE ANTYA-LILA


--- Page 319 ---
Concluding Words

Today, Sunday, November 10, 1974 —corresponding to the 10th of Karttika,
Caitanya Era 488, the eleventh day of the dark fortnight, the Rama-ekadasi—we
have now finished the English translation of ऽ Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami's Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta in accordance with the authorized order of His Divine Grace
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Gosvami Maharaja, my beloved eternal spiritual
master, guide and friend. Although according to material vision His Divine Grace
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Prabhupada passed away from this ma-
terial world on the last day of December, 1936, | still consider His Divine Grace to
be always present with me by his vani, his words. There are two ways of associ-
ation—by vani and by vapu. Vapi means words, and vapu means physical
presence. Physical presence is sometimes appreciable and sometimes not, but
"301 continues to exist eternally. Therefore we must take advantage of the ৮301
not the physical presence. Bhagavad-gita, for example, is the vani of Lord Krsna.
Although Krsna was personally present five thousand years ago and is no longer
physically present from the materialistic point of view, Bhagavad-gita continues.

In this connection we may call to memory the time when | was fortunate
enough to meet His Divine Grace Srila Prabhupada, sometime in the year 1922.
Srila Prabhupada had come to Calcutta from Sridhama Mayapur to start the mis-
sionary activities of the Gaudiya Matha. He was sitting in a house at Ulta Danga
when through the inducement of an intimate friend, the late Sriman
Narendranatha Mallika, | had the opportunity to meet His Divine Grace for the
first time. | do not remember the actual date of the meeting, but at that time | was
one of the managers of Dr. 8০595 laboratory in Calcutta. | was a newly married
young man, addicted to Gandhi's movement and dressed in khadi. Fortunately,
even at our first meeting, His Divine Grace advised me to preach the cult of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu in English in the Western countries. Because at that time |
was a complete nationalist, a follower of Mahatma Gandhi's, | submitted to His
Divine Grace that unless our country were freed from foreign subjugation, no one
would hear the message of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu seriously. Of course, we
had some argument on this subject, but at last | was defeated and convinced that
ऽपरा Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s message is the only panacea for suffering humanity. |
was also convinced that the message of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was then in the
hands of a very expert devotee and that surely the message of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu would spread all over the world. | could not, however, immediately
take up his instructions to preach, but | took his words very seriously and was al-
ways thinking of how to execute his order, although | was quite unfit to do so.

319


--- Page 320 ---
320 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

In this way | passed my life as a householder until 1950, when | retired from
family life as a vanaprastha. With no companion, | loitered here and there until
1958, when | took sannyasa. Then | was completely ready to discharge the order
of my spiritual master. Previously, in 1936, just before His Divine Grace passed
away at Jagannatha Puri, | wrote him a letter asking what | could do to serve him.
In reply, he wrote me a letter, dated 13 December 1936, ordering me, in the same
way, to preach in English the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as | had heard it
from him.

After he passed away, | started the fortnightly magazine Back to Godhead
sometime in 1944 and tried to spread the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
through this magazine. After | took sannyasa, a well-wishing friend suggested that
| write books instead of magazines. Magazines, he said, might be thrown away,
but books remain perpetually. Then | attempted to write Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Before that, when | was a householder, | had written on Srimad Bhagavad-gita and
had completed about eleven hundred pages, but somehow or other the
manuscript was stolen. In any case, when | had published Srimad-Bhagavatam,
First Canto, in three volumes in India, | thought of going to the U.S.A. By the
mercy of His Divine Grace, | was able to come to New York on September 17,
1965. Since then, | have translated many books, including S$rimad-Bhagavatam,
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Teachings of Lord Caitanya (a summary) and many others.

In the meantime, | was induced to translate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta and publish
it in an elaborate version. In his leisure time in later life, His Divine Grace Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura would simply read Caitanya-caritamrta. It was his
favorite book. He used to say that there would be a time when foreigners would
learn the Bengali language to read Caitanya-caritamrta. The work on this transla-
tion began about eighteen months ago. Now, by the grace of 67 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and His Divine Crace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, it is
finished. In this connection | have to thank my American disciples, especially
Sriman Pradyumna dasa Adhikari, Sriman Nitai dasa Adhikari, Sriman Jayadvaita
dasa Brahmacari and many other boys and girls who are sincerely helping me in
writing, editing and publishing all these literatures.

| think that His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura is always seeing
my activities and guiding me within my heart by his words. As it is said in $Srimad-
Bhagavatam, tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye. Spiritual inspiration comes from
within the heart, wherein the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His Paramatma
feature, is always sitting with all His devotees and associates. It is to be admitted
that whatever translation work | have done is through the inspiration of my
spiritual master because personally | am most insignificant and incompetent to do
this materially impossible work. | do not think myself a very learned scholar, but |
have full faith in the service of my spiritual master, His Divine Grace Srila Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura. If there is any credit to my activities of translating, it
is all due to His Divine Grace. Certainly if His Divine Grace were physically present


--- Page 321 ---
Concluding Words 321
at this time, it would have been a great occasion for jubilation, but even though
he is not physically present, | am confident that he is very pleased by this work of
translation. He was very fond of seeing many books published to spread the Krsna
consciousness movement. Therefore our society, the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness, has formed to execute the order of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and His Divine Grace Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura.

It is my wish that devotees of Lord Caitanya all over the world enjoy this
translation, and | am glad to express my gratitude to the learned men in the
Western countries who are so pleased with my work that they are ordering in ad-
vance all my books that will be published in the future. On this occasion,
therefore, | request my disciples who are determined to help me in this work to
continue their cooperation fully, so that philosophers, scholars, religionists and
people in general all over the world will benefit by reading our transcendental
literatures such as Srimad-Bhagavatam and Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, dated
November 10, 1974, at the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Hare Krsna Land, Juhu,
Bombay.


--- Page 322 ---
References

The statements of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta are all confirmed by standard Vedic
authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this book on the
pages listed. Numerals in bold type refer the reader to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
translations. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
AdityaPurana, 273
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya (Bhaktivinoda Thakura), 1,119,179, 243
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 232
Caitanya-bhagavata (Vrndavana dasa Thakura), 287
Caitanya-caritamrta (Krsnadasa Kavirdja), 247,248
Garuda Purana, 18
Cauranga-stava-kalpavrksa (Raghunatha dasa), 43-44, 216-217
Govinda-lilamrta (Krsnadasa Kaviraja), 58, 223-224
Hari-bhakti-vilasa (Sanatana Gosvami), 12
Lalita-madhava (Rapa Gosvami), 195
Mahabharata, 15,16, 48, 107
Manu-samhita, 313
Markendeya Purana, 273
Nrsiriha Purana, 28-29
Padma Purana, 17, 18, 273
Skanda Purana, 48
Srimad-Bhagavatam, 13, 17, 57, 107, 130, 201, 233-237, 237-240, 247-248, 320
Tattva-sagara, 18

323


--- Page 323 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by his own example.
Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva—Lord Caitanya’s “simultaneously one and different” doctrine,
which establishes the inconceivable simultaneous existence of the Absolute Truth as
both personal and impersonal.
Arati—ceremony of worshiping the Lord by the offering of various auspicious articles such as
incense, flowers, water, fans, ghee lamps, foodstuff, etc.
Ardha-bahya—half-external consciousness.
Avaisnava—a nondevotee.
Avatara—(lit.,, one who descends) an incarnation of the Lord who descends from the spiritual
sky to the material universe with a particular mission described in scriptures.
B
Bhagavan —(bhaga—opulence; van—possessing) the possessor of all opulences, which are
generally six —wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation; an epithet
of the Supreme Person.
Brahman—(1) the infinitesimal spiritual soul; (2) the all-pervading impersonal aspect of
Krsna; (3) the Supreme Personality of Godhead; (4) the total material substance.
Brahmana —the intelligent class of men, according to the system of social and spiritual orders.
Bramajyoti—(brahma—spiritual; jyoti—light) the impersonal effulgence emanating from the
body of Krsna.
[भ
Cakravaki—the female counterpart of the cakra bird. When the male cakra bird and the
female cakravaki bird are separated they make mournful sounds during the night.
Candalas —dog-eaters; the lowest class of human beings.
D
Dama —self-control.
Damodara— (Dama —rope; udara—belly or waist) a name of Krsna given to him when he was
bound around the waist with a rope by mother Yasoda.
Dharma —that which is the natural established order of things or that which is the natural es-
tablished function of the living being.
G
Gauracandra—(gaura—golden; candra—moon) a name of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
denoting his appearance to be like that of a golden moon.
325


--- Page 324 ---
326 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Copis —pure devotees of Krsna who were related to Him as cowherd girl friends in the mood
of conjugal love.
Govinda —the name of Krsna which means “He who pleases the senses and the cows.”
Jhani—one who is engaged in the cultivation of knowledge (especially by philosophical
speculation). Upon attaining perfection, a jAani surrenders to Krsna.
K
Khadi—cotton cloth.
Krsna-katha —narrations spoken by or about Krsna.
Ksatriya—the administrative or protective occupation according to the system of four social
and spiritual orders.
Kunkuma —a sweetly-flavored reddish powder which is thrown on the bodies of worshipable
persons.
M
Madana-mohana—the name of Krsna which means “He who charms Cupid.”
Madhava—a name of Krsna comparing him to the sweetness of springtime or the sweetness
of honey.
Madhupati—name of Krsna in Dvaraka.
Maha-bhagavata—a devotee in the highest stage of devotional life.
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Maha-prasada—See: prasada.
Mantra—(manas—mind; tr—to deliver) a pure sound vibration to deliver the mind from its
material inclinations.
Maya —(ma—not; ya—this) illusion; an energy of Krsna's which deludes the living entity into
forgetfulness of the Supreme Lord.
Mlecchas—class of men outside the four social and spiritual divisions of Vedic society whose
standards of morality, religion, ways of living etc. are abominable.
Mukunda —the name of Krsna which means “the giver of liberation.”
N
Narayana —the four-handed expansion of the Supreme Lord Krsna.
P
Pandita—a learned scholar.
Paramatma—the Supersoul, the localized aspect of the Supreme Lord within the heart of all
living entities.


--- Page 325 ---
Glossary 327

Pika—the Indian cuckoo bird.

Prakrti—material nature (lit, that which is predominated) There are two prakrtis —apara-
prakrti, the material nature, and para-prakrti, the spiritual nature (living entities) —
which are both predominated over by the Supreme Lord.

Prasada— (lit, mercy) food offered to Krsna, which becomes spiritual when offered and
which

Prasada— (lit, mercy) food offered to Krsna, which becomes spiritual when offered and
which can purify the living entity.

৪

Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha -- (sat —eternal existence; cit—knowledge; ananda—bliss; vigraha—
form) the eternal form of the Supreme Lord, which is full of bliss and knowledge; or,
the eternal transcendental form of the living entity.

Sama —control of one’s senses.

Sankirtana-yajiia—the sacrifice prescribed for the age of Kali; that is, congregational chanting
of the name, fame and pastimes of the Supreme Lord.

Sastra—revealed scripture.

Satya—truthfulness.

Sirhha-dvara—the lion gate outside the Jagannatha temple in Puri.

Srivatsa—white hair on the chest of Lord Visnu representing the goddess of fortune Laksmi.

Suka—parrot.

Sukrti—pious activities performed by the mercy of Krsna.

uU

Upadhyaya —a teacher who makes a living teaching Sanskrit grammar.

Uttamasloka —the name of Krsna which means “one who is praised by chosen words and
verses.”

Vv

Vaikunthas — (lit., without anxiety) the eternal planets of the spiritual sky.

Vaisnava—a devotee of the Supreme Lord Visnu, or Krsna.

Vaisya—the class of men involved in business and farming, according to the system of four
social and spiritual orders.

Vali—name of a monkey who was the son of Indra, the king of heaven, and elder brother of
Sugriva, the monkey king in the epic Ramayana.

Vani —the words of the spiritual master, which exist eternally.

Vapu—the physical presence of the spiritual master.

Vrajendra—Nanda Maharaja, the foster father of Lord Krsna.

Vrndavana—the site of Krsna's transcendental village pastimes, exhibited when He was
present on earth about five thousand years ago.


--- Page 326 ---
328 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Vyasa-pijd—worship of the appearance day of the bona fide spiritual master, who repre-
sents Vyasa, the compiler of Vedic literature.
Y
Yadupati—the name of Krsna which means “King of the Yadu dynasty.”
Yavanas—a class of untouchable men who are outside of the four spiritual and social divi-
sions of Vedic society. A term usually referring to the Mohammedans.
Yoga-maya—the internal potency of the Lord, which hides Him from nondevotees.


--- Page 327 ---
Bengali Pronunciation Guide
BENGALI DIACRITICAL EQUIVALENTS AND PRONUNCIATION
Vowels
wa আঃ: i Hi Bu Ba चैः
RN T গর € ঞ ai S o ॐ au
71 m (anusvara) ॐ 7} ( candra-bindu) ° h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutterals: ६.1 ka 9 kha না ga q gha 8 na
Palatals: চ ca চু cha GF ja A jha «EP 73
Cerebrals: ট ta উঠ tha © da B dha 6 na
Dentals: S$ ta থ tha क्तं da कु dha न्‌ na
Labials: भं? स्‌ 7112 वतु ७३ छ bha अ ma
Semivowels: Yya Ara Hla वतु ५३
Sibilants: =f sa सु sa HA sa Rha
Vowel Symbols
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
~
ta fi Nr su नऽ < £1 Ge ट ८1० ८१०५
For example: चक ka क्कि वषै ki Pu Fo Fr
Fu (क Wai কো टकौ ka
329


--- Page 328 ---
330 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
The letter ৫ is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virgma (क) indicates that there is no final vowel. <$ k
The letters above should be pronounced as follows:
8 —like the © in hot; sometimes like the ০ in go; 9 —like the d in dawn.

final ৫ is usually silent. dh —like the dh in good-house.
a —like the ৫ in far. n —like the n in gnaw.
i,T —like the ee in meet. t—as in ralk but with the tongue against th
u, ए —like the ८८ in rule. the teeth.
1 —like the ri in rim. th—as in hor-house but with the tongue agains
ঢু —like the ree in reed. the teeth.
€ —like the ai in pain; rarely like 6 in bet. d—as in dawn but with the tongue against the
ai —like the oi in boil. teeth.
o —like the 0 in go. dh—as in good-house but with the tongue
au —like the ow in owl. against the teeth.
tm —(anusvara)like the ng in song. n—as in nor but with the tongue against the
h —(visarga) a final / sound like in Ah. teeth.
7 — (candra-bindu) a nasal n sound. p —like the p in pine.

like in the French word bon. ph —like the ph in philosopher.

k —like the k in kite. b _like the b in bird
kh —like the kh in Eckhart. bh —like the bk in rub-hard.
8 —like the g in got. m —like the m2 in mother.
gh —like the gh in big-house. y —like the injaw. स्‌
n —like the n in bank. y —like the y in year. §
€ —like the ch in chalk. 7 —like the 7 in run.
ch —like the chh in much-haste. 1 —like the 0 in Jaw i
j —like the; in joy. v —like the 8 in bird or like the w in dwarf.
jh —like the geh in college-hall. 5, $ —like the sh in shop.
it —like the n in bunch. s _like the s in sun.
t —like the ८ in ralk. h—like the # in home.
th —like the th in 1101-7 0086.

This is a general guide to Bengali pronunciation. The Bengali transliterations in this
book accurately show the original Bengali spelling of the text. One should note, however,
that in Bengali, as in English, spelling is not always a true indication of how a word is pro-
nounced. Tape recordings of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
chanting the original Bengali verses are available from the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness, 3764 Watseka Ave., Los Angeles, California 90034.


--- Page 329 ---
. °
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete alphabetical listing of the first and third line of each four-line
verse and both lines of each two-line verse in Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. In the first column the trans-
literation is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the chapter-verse references
and page number for each verse are to be found.
A alaukika krspa-Iila, divya-sakti tara 19.103 231
alaukika prabhura ‘cesta, ‘pralapa’ $uniya 19.106 232
ama inha 1275 aila balatkara kari’ 17.27 90
scambite sphure krsnera mathuragamana 19.32 193
acambite sunena prabhu krspa-venu-gana 17.10 83 amanina manadena 20.21 253
acaryadi bhakta-gane milila prasada diya 1916 186  amara dharma-bhaya kari’, rahi’ yadi 16.127 63
acarya-gosani prabhure sandesa kahila 19.17 186 amdra durdaiva, —name nahi anuraga!!” 20.19 252
acaryera thani giya 2/75 magila 19.17 186 amara name pada-padma dhariha tanhara 19.6 182
acetana padiyachena, —yena kusmanda 17.17 86  amara sarira kastha-putali-samana 20.92 289
achuka narira kaya,  kahite vasiye 16.123 60 ami—ati-ksudra jiva, paksi ranga-tuni 20.90 289
adbhuta-dayalu caitanya—adbhuta-vadanya! 17.68 114  ‘ami—bada ojha jani bhata chadaite’ 18.61 145
adbhuta nigadha premera madhurya-mahima 17.67 114  amiha bujhite nari tarajara artha’ 19.28 191
adharamrta nija-svare,  saricariya sei bale, 16.127 63 “ami—krsna-pada-dasi, tenho—rasa- 20.48 266
adharera ei riti, ara suna kuniti, 16.130 65 ‘ami likhi’,—ehamithyakari anumana 2092 289
adhareraguna saba ihate 527८5111 16.112 54 ami—nica-jati, amara nahi krsna-bhakti 16.29 15
agama-sastrera vidhi-vidhane kusala 19.25 190 “ami — nica-jati, tumi, —atithi sarvottama 16.18 9
age dekhi hasi’ krsna antardhana 19.86 221  ami—nica-jati, tumi—susajjana raya” 16.23 11
age paila krsne, tanre punah harana 19.87 221 amra bheta diya tanra carana vandila 16.15 8
aho bata sva-paco ‘to gariyan 16.27 14 amra-phala lana tenho gela tanra sthana 16.14 7
‘aho Suna, gopi-gana, bale (100 tomara 16.125 61 anandambudhi-vardhanan prati-padarir 20.12 249
aho vidhatas tava na kvacid daya 19.45 201 aneka karila yatna, na haya cetana 17.19 87
aiche dayalu data loke nahi $uni anya 17.68 114  aneka-ksane mahaprabhu (22115 cetana 17.20 87
aiche mahaprabhura lila— nahi ora-para 20.80 284 aneka-lokera vaiichd —aneka-prakara 20.17 252
aichesloka kare, —lokera camatkara mana 16.75 38 aneka ‘sukrte’ iha hanache samprapti 16.114 55
aiche vicitra kriga kari’, tire ila 18.100 166 ani’ karaya tomdara dasi,  suni’ loka kare 16.128 63
aiksava, karpara, marica, € 1३1८2, lavanga, 16.108 53 anipuna vani apane nacite na jane 20.149 314
aisa tumi mora sange, karana darasana’ 16.82 41 anista-sankavina kara mane nahi ana 18.39 136
aitota haite samudra dekhena d&cambite 18.26 130 “anista-sankini bandhu-hrdayani bhavanti 18.40 136
3jfiddeha’,—brahmana-ghare anna 1275 diye 1619 9  antaranga bhakta laya kari’ kona chala 16.44 25
akantha-vapujale paise, ~mukha-mitrajale 18.92 160  ‘antar-dasi’, ‘bahya-dasa’, ‘ardha-bahya’ 18.77 152
akasa—ananta, tate yaiche paksi-gana 20.79 283 antar-dasara kichu ghora, kichu bahya-jidgna 18.78 152
akase kahena prabhu, sakase kahena 18.79 153 ‘antardhana ha-ila prabhu’, —niscaya karila 18.38 135
‘akrtarthan’ kene karis dara? 19.47 202 antarvanibhir apy asya 19.105 232
‘akrara kare tomara 0059,  amaya kene 19.49 203 anthi-cosa sei patuya-kholate bhariya 16.36 21
alaksite yai’ sindhu-jale jhanpa dila 18.28 131  anudghatya dvara-trayam uru ca bhitti- 17.72 116
alaukika asvade sabara vismita haila 16.107 52 ‘anuvada’ haite smare grantha-vivarana 20.140 310
alaukika-gandha-svada, anya-vismarana 16.113 55 ‘anuvada’ kaile pai lilara ‘asvada’ 20.102 293
alaukika gadha-prema-cesta haya jana 17.66 113 anya aiche haya, amaya nahi aiche 16.29 15
331


--- Page 330 ---
332 1, Caitanya-caritamrta

anya-katha, anya-mana,  bahire anya 17.37 96 B

anya udyane kiba unmade padila? 18.35 134

anyera durlabha prasada tanhare karila 16.49 27  badamatsya bali’ ami uthailun yatane 1848 140
apandra hasi lagi’,  naha narira vadha- 16.133 66 bahir-dvare ache kalidasa pratyasa 16.55 29
apanara karma-dosa, tore kiba kari 19.50 204  bahire jadima, antare dnanda-vihvala 17.17 86
apanare kare sarsari jiva-abhimana 20.31 259  bahire ucchista-garte phelaili 16.36 21
apani sodhite tara chonye eka kana’ 18.23 729  babhir nrsirhho hrdaye 1157700 16.53 29
30373 vind anya madhurya karaya 16.111 54 bahirvase soyaila valuka chadana 18.73 150
2/22/1€ nacaye, —tine nace eka-thani 1818 127 bahu-janma punya kare, = {2606 ‘sukrti’ 16.131 65
apani asvadi’ prabhu dekhaila sima 17.67 114 bahu-malya prasada sei vastu sarvottama 16.91 45
aparicita satrura mitra, rakhe utpala—e baga 18.98 164 bahu sammanakaila kalidasere dekhiya 16.16 8
ara dina kahena prabhu, — ‘pada, puridisa’ == 16.73 37  bahya-krtyakarena, preme garagara 16.103 51
ara eka haya, — tenho 2८1-/6{95 kare 2098 291  baisa ‘pahica’-pache upara daksina- 16.50 27
arambhild jala-keli, anyo’nye jala 18.85 156 baisa ‘pahaca’-tale ache eka nimna 16.41 23
ara saba govindera ancale bandhila 16.92 46 ‘baula’ haa ami kailury dharma-nasa 19.9 183
‘ardha-bahye’ iti-uti karena darasane 18.76 151 baulake kahiha, —hate na vikaya caula 19.20 188
‘ardha-bahye’ kahena prabhu pralipa-vacane 18.79 153  baulake kahiha —iha kahiyache baula” 19.21 188
ardha-ratri gonaila krsna-katha-range 17.4 80  baulake kahiha, —kaya nahika aula 19.21 188
0/3 kaupina dara kari’ Suska parana 18.73 150 baulakekahiha,— loka ha-ila baula 19.20 188
are vidhi akaruna, dekhana krspanana, 19.48 203 bhagavatera sloka pade madhura kariya 17.30 91
are vidhi, tui bada-i nithura 19.47 202 bhagavatera slokera artha karite 17.32 93
aslisya va padaratarh pinastu mam 20.47 266 bhagya-vase kabhu pdya, abhagye kabhu 17.45 101
asokera tale krsne dekhena dcambite 19.85 221 bhaksanerakrama kari’,  dhariyache 18.103 168
astadasa paricchede —samudre patana 20.134 307  bhaksyeraparipati dekhi’,  krsna haila 18107 170
astame —ramacandra-purira 3gamana 20.115 299 bhakta-bhava angikare taha asvadite 18.17 126
asthi-sandhi chade, haya ati dirghakara’ 18.69 148 bhakta-bhukta-avasesa, — tina maha-bala 16.60 32
asthi-sandhi chutile carma kare nada-bade 18.53 142 bhakta-gana 1375 vicara kaila ara dine 19.66 212
asthi-sandhi-tyage, anubhavera udgama 20.124 303 bhakta-gana prabhu-sarige rahe cari-mase 16.77 39
asvada dure rahu, yara gandhe mana mate 16.90 45 bhakta-gana-sange sada prema-vihvale 16.3 2
asvada dare rahu, yara gandhe mate mana 16.111 54 bhakta-pada-dhali ara bhakta-pada-jala 16.60 32
asvada kariya dekha, —sabara pratita 16110 54  bhakta-premira yata dass, ye 8৪0 prakara = 18.16 126
asvadite preme matta ha-ila sabara mana 16.115 56 ‘bhakta-sesa’ haila ‘maha-maha- 16.59 31
asvadyasvadayan bhaktan 16.1 1 bhakta-vatsalya yahan dekhaila 20.119 301
ataeva sei-saba lila na pari varnibare 20.75 282 bhaktera prema-vikara dekhi’ krspera 18.15 126
“atahpara ara na kariha punar-bara 16.47 26 bhakte sik haite yei siksastak a kahila 20.139 310
ati-bahulya-bhaye grantha na (८2110) 1811 124 bhava jani’ pade riya gopira vacana 16.139 69
ati-dainye punah mage dasya-bhakti-dina == 20.31 = 259  bhavanurdpa gita gaya svaropa 17.5 81
ati-dirgha Sithila tanu-carma natkaya 1872 150  bhojanakarile patra phelana yaya 16.12 6
atisayokti, virodhabhasa, dui alankara 1899 165 bhame padi’ kabhu marccha, kabhu gadi’ 187 122
autsukyera pravinye,  jiti’ anya bhava- 17.58 109  bhamete padila prabhu marcchita hana 19.87 221
ayi nanda-tanuja kinkararir 20.32 259 bhamite padi’ ache prabhu dirgha saba 18.71 149
ayogya (1275 (303 keha sada pana kare 16.137 68 bhanimali-jati, ‘vaispnava’— ‘jhadu’ tarra 16.14 7
ayogyera deoyaya krsnadharamrta-phala 16.138 68 bhurkte svayarh yad avasista-rasarn 16.140 69


--- Page 331 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 333
bhata nahe —tenho krsna-caitanya-bhavagan 18.64 146 D
bhata-preta dmara na lage ‘nrsirhha’- 1857 143
bhata-preta-jiiane tomara haila 1866 147 dadhad bhittau sasvad vadana-vidhu- 19.76 216
brahmadi ०९५० yara nahi paya sima 16.76 38  dainyodvega-arti utkantha, santosa 205 245
dambha kari bali’ 50८8, na kariha rosa 20.100 292
brahmadi-durlabha ei nindaye ‘amrta’ 16.97 48 damodara-pandita kaila prabhure vakya- 20.106 295
brahmana-vaisnava yata—chota, bada 16.10 5 damodara-svarapa-thafi tanre samarpila 20.113 298
buddhi-pravesa nahi tate, na pari 20.77 282
darsana-matre manusyera paise sei kaya 18.51 141
‘dasa’ kari’ vetana more deha prema- 20.37 261
^ dasame —kahilun bhakta-datta-dsvidana == 20.117 300
deha jiye (5/5 ५1/१९, 01 ei jivane, 19.43 200
cahiye bediite aiche ratri-sesa haila 18.38 135  deha-tyage haite tanra karila 20.108 296
caitanya-caritimrta,  amrta haite 16.151 76
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa 17.73 117 dekhena—eka jaliya aise kandhe jala 1844 138
dekhena, —jagannatha haya murali-vadana 16.85 42
caitanya-caritamrta kahe 10050390353 18.121 177  dekhi’ smi pralapa kailun —hena laya 18118 175
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa 19.112 241 dekhi’ anandita haild gaura bhagavan 19.83 220
caitanya-caritdmrta kahe krsnadasa 20153 315 “dekhi ei updye, krsna-asachadi’ 17.55 107
caitanya-caritimrta— nitya-natana 19.111 241 dekhi, —gosthe venu bajaya vrajendra- 17.23 88
caitanya-caritamrta yei jana sune 20.151 314  dekhi, —jala-krida karena vrajendra- 1880 153
caitanya-caritra-varnana kailurh samapana 20.78 283  dekhi, —krspa rasa karena gopigana-sane 18117 175
caitanya-lilamrta-sindhu—dugdhabdhi 20.88 288  deutijvaliya karenaprabhura 17.14 85
caitanya-lildya tertho hayena ‘adi-vyasa’ 20.82 285 dhana, jana nahi magon, kavita 20.30 258
caitanya-mangale iha likhiyache sthane- 2087 287  dhanyasyayan navah prema 19.105 232
caitanya-marngale tenho likhiyache 20.85 286 dharma chadaya venu-dvare,  hane katdksa- 17.36 95
caitanya-prabhura ei krpara mahima 16.76 38  dipajvali’ ghare gels, dekhi’ prabhura 19.61 210
caitanyarpitam astv etac 20.155 317 drutam gaccha drasturi priyam iti tad- 16.87 43
cakravaka-mandala,  prthak prthak 1895 162 dui-prakare sahisnuta kare vrksa-sama 20.22 254
canda dharite ८8/0९, yena hana ‘'vamana’ 18.19 127 dui slokera artha kare praldpa kariya 16.120 59
candra-kantye uchalita taranga ujjvala 1827 131 = darakaile nahi chide prabhura $ri-arga- 17.18 86
caritamamrtam etac chrila-caitanya- 20.154 316 0013 patha uthana ghare nana na 1872 150
cataka-parvata dekhi’ prabhura dhavana 20.125 303 dvadasa vatsara diche 0353 —ratri-dine 20.69 279
cataka-parvate 8০13, kiba konarkete?” 1836 135 dvadasa vatsare ye ye lila ksane-ksane 18.11 124
caturdase —divyonmada-arambha 20.123 303 dvadase —jagadanandera taila-bharijana 20.120 301
caturthe — $ri-sanatanera dvitiya-milana 20.108 296 dvara cahi” buli’ sighra bahira ha-ite 19.63 211
cetana ha-ile hasta-padabahire sila 17.21 88 dvara nahi’ pana mukha lage cari-bhite 19.64 211
ceto-darpana-marjanarh bhava-mahadavagni- 20.12 = 249  dvitiye —chota-haridise karaila siksana 20.105 295
chada’ krsna-katha adhanya, kaha naya- 17.55 107
chadi’ anya nari-gana, mora vasa tanu- 20.50 267 E
chaya rtu-gana yahan vasanta pradhana 19.83 220
cirdyu-parvata-dike kata-jana gels 18.41 137 ০86 amaya kari’rosa, kahi’ pati-tysge 17.36 95
ebe antya-lila-ganera kari anuvada 20.120 293
citta-suddhi, sarva-bhakti-sddhana-udgama 20.13 249 ebe bhaya gela, tomara mana haila sthire 18.67 147
casi’ casi’ cosa anthi phelila 16.35 21 eho vrajendra-nandana,  vrajera kona 16.142 70
casite casite haya premete ullasa 16.37 22 ei anusare habe tara dsvadana 20.76 282


--- Page 332 ---
334 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
ei aparadha tumi na la-iha amara 19.10 183 ei trijagat bhari’, 3006 yata yogya 17.34 94
ei bhata nrsimha-name capaye dvigune 18.58 144  eivepu ayogya ati, sthavara ‘purusa-jati, = 16.144 72
ei buddhye mahaprabhura premavesa haila 16.95 47 ei ৮০00 kailajanmantare? 16.143 71
ei cari-lila-bhede,  gaila ei paricchede, 19.101 230
‘ei dravye eta 5৮303 kahan haite &ila? 16.94 46  eivrajeraramani, kamarka-tapta- 19.38 196
eka anjali, dui aijali, tina aijali pila 16.46 25
ei drstante janiha prabhura lilara vistara 20.91 289  eka-bara yara nayane lage, 5303 (33 19.40 198
ei ihara manah-katha—kari anumana” 16.72 37
ei jaliya jale kari’ toma uthaila 18.113 173  eka-barayei Sune, vydpirahe'tirakipe, 17.43 99
“ei krsnera virahe, udvege mana sthira 17.52 105  ekadase—haridasa-thakurera niryina 20.119 301
ei lila mahaprabhura raghunatha-dasa 19.75 216  eka-dinaprabhu gel jagannatha-darasane = 16.80 40
eka-dina prabhu svarapa-ramananda-sarge 17.4 80
ei lila nija-granthe raghunatha-dasa 16.86 43 eka-dina prabhu tanha pada praksalite 16.45 25
ei 115 sva-granthe raghunatha-dasa 17.71 115
ei-mata gaurahari, gandhe kaila mana curi, 19.99 228 eka-dinera lilara tabu nahi paya anta 18.13 125
ei-mata gaura-riya,  visade kare haya 19.53 206  eka-dinera lilaratabunahipaya sesa 18.14 125
ei-mata hana yei krspa-nama laya 2026 256  eka-dine yata haya bhavera vikara 17.64 112
eka eka paricchedera katha—aneka-prakara 20.141 310
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhavavista hana 20.63 276 eka-kale vaisakhera paurpamasi-dine 19.78 217
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhramite bhramite 18.26 130
ei-mata mahaprabhu pana cetana 19.102 230 eka narikela nana-jati, eka amra nana 18.104 168
ei-mata mahaprabhu prati-ratri-dine 17.63 112 ekanrsirha-marti achena uthite vama- 16.50 27
ei-mata mahaprabhu rahena nilacale 16.3 2 ekaratrye buli’ matsya mariye nirjane 1857 143
eka-sakhi sakhi-gane dekhaya sei range 18.82 154
ei-mata mahaprabhu ratri-divase 17.3 80 eka vancha haya, —yadikrpakari’ kara 16.22 4
ei-mata mahaprabhu ratri-divase 19.77 217
ei-mata mahaprabhu vaise nilacale 20.3 244 ekeka-hasta-pada tara, tina tina hata 1852 141
ei-mata rasa-lildya haya yata sloka 18.9 123 eke prema, are bhaya, —dviguna asthira 18.63 146
ei-mata rasera sloka-sakala-i padild 18.24 129 e-saba—tomara kutinati, 00393 ei 16.133 66
eta bali’ jagamohana gels dhari’ tara hata 16.83 41
ei-mata tanra ucchista khaya lukana 16.13 7 eta bali’ prabhu ti-sabare vidaya dila 16.101 50
ei-mata vilapite ardha-ratri gela 19.55 207
ei-mata yata vaispava vaise gauda-dese 16.38 22 eta bali’ sabe phire prabhure cahiya 18.37 135
ei-mate mahaprabhu krspa-premavese 19.3 180 eta bhava eka-thani karila udaya 20.44 264
ei-mate mahaprabhu nilicale vaise 18.3 121 eta bhave radhara mana asthira ha-ila 20.45 265
etadrsitava krpa bhagavan mamapi 20.16 251
ei-mate nana-bhave ardha-ratri haila 17.8 82 etakahi’ gaura-prabhu bhavavista hana 16.120 59
ei nivedana tarira carape mara 19.19 187
ei prema sada jage yahara antare 19.104 231 eta kahi’ krodhavese,  bhavera tarange 17.39 97
ei radhara vacana,  visuddha-preme- 20.61 275 e-ta nari rahu dare,  vrksa saba tara tire, 16.147 74
ei $abdamrta cari, yara haya bhagya 17.48 102  etasuni’jagadananda hasite lagila 1922 188
eta $uni’ svarapa-gosani saba tattva jani’ 1860 145
ei sloka kari’ tenho karila prak asa 16.73 37
ei sloka Suni’ prabhu bhavavista 16.141 70 etavatd vancha-parana karilury tomara” 16.47 26
ei ta’ kahilun ‘karmakrti’-anubhava 17.70 115 eteka cintite radhara nirmala hrdaya 20.43 264
ei ta’ kahilun prabhura samudra-patana 18.120 176 ০093 kahite prabhura kevala ‘bahya’ haila 18.110 172
‘ei tarajara artha bujhite narila’ 19.24 189  etekapralipa kari’, premavese gaurahari, 16150 76
ei tina-seva haite krspa-prema haya 16.61 32 etha govinda mahaprabhura sabda na 17.13 84
ei tina thakura haya ‘gaudiyara natha’ 20.143 311 etha krsna-radha-sane,  kaila ye achila 18.93 161


--- Page 333 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 335
G hare narira tanu-mana, = 1858 kare 19.96 226
haridasa karila namera mahima-sthapana 20.107 296
gabhi-gana-madhye yai’ prabhure paila 17.15 85 hari-dhvani kari’ sabe kaila asvadana 16.115 56
gabhi saba caudike surnke prabhura 17.18 86 harse prabhu kahena, — “suna svardpa- 208 246
gadgada vani, roma uthila sakala 18.50 140 hase, kande, nace, gaya, bale ‘hari’ ‘hari’ 18.44 138
gambhirara bhittye mukha ghasite lagila 19.58 208
gambhirira dvare govinda karila $ayana 17.9 83 hasta hale, manobuddhi nahe mora sthira 20.93 290
hema-kilitacandana,  taha kari’ gharsana, 19.95 226
gambhirate svarapa-gosani prabhure 19.55 207 hena-kale ‘gopala-vallabha’-bhoga 16.88 44
gandha asvadite prabhu ha-ila pagala 19.89 222  hena-kale more dhari’, maha-kolahala kari’, 18.109 171
gandharva-palibhir anudruta avisad vah 18.25 130 hena kale tumi-saba kolahala kari’ 17.27 90
gandha-taila-mardana, = amalaki-udvartana, 18.100 166
gargajala, amrtakeli,  piyasagranthi, 18.106 169 hena krspadhara-sudha, ye kaila amrta 16.144 72
hiranyakasipor vaksah- 16.52 28
garudera pache rahi’ karena darasana 16.85 42 hrdaya-upare dharor,  seva kari’ sukhi 20.58 273
gauda-dese haya yata vaispavera gana 16.9 5 hurikara kariya prabhu tabahi uthila 18.75 151
gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse kairichena 17.71 115
gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse kariyache 19.75 216
‘gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse’ kariyachena 1686 43 1
gayane sangama-gita, prabhura phiraila 19.54 207 ihan dunhara ulta sthiti, dharma haila 18.97 163
ghare asi’ madhyahna kari’ karila bhojana 16.54 29 ‘ihar kene tomara amare lana aila?’ 18.111 172
gharma-vrsti sahe, anera karaye raksana 20.24 255 103) svarapadi-gana prabhu na dekhiya 18.33 133
ghumana padena, taiche karena $ayana 19.71 214 jhara satyatve pramana éri-bhagavate 19.107 233
giridhara-carapambhojari 20.156 317 hare 77310 krspa-nama kahaite!” 1670 36
gon-goni-sabda karena, —svarapa sunila 19.60 209 iha yei nahi Sune, se kana janmila kene, 17.48 102
gopa-lilaya paila yei prasada-vasane 19.12 184 iha yei Sune, paya caitanya-carana 18.120 176
gopi-bhavahrdaye, tara vakye vilapaye, 19.53 206 iha yei sune, tara judaya mana-kana 17.66 113
gopi-gana, kaha saba kariya vicare 16.143 71 inha-sabara carana-krpaya lekhaya amare 20.98 291
gopi-gana-saha vihara, hasa, parihasa 17.26 90. irsys, utkantha, dainya, praudhi, vinaya 20.44 264
gopyahkim acarad ayari (६८९1217 sma vepur 16.140 69 istagosthi kata-ksana kari’ tarra 16.17 9
gosanire sayana karai’ durhe ghare gela 17.8 82 Tsvara-sevaka puche, — ‘ki artha ihara’? 16.96 47
‘govardhana-sila’, ‘gunja-mala’ tanre 20.113 298 = jtara-raga-vismaraparh nnarn 16117 57
govinda-virahe sunya ha-ila tribhuvana 2041 263 0 bruvanari vidurari—initariy 19.70 214
govindere mahaprabhu kairache niyama 16.43 24 iti-uti anvesiya sirhha-dvare gela 17.15 85
ito nrsirhhah parato nrsirhho 16.53 29
govindere thare prabhu kahena janiya 1655 29
gundica-mandire gela, kiba narendrere? 18.36 135
‘guru’ hand taru-lataya sikhaya nicana 19.81 219 J
jagadananda nadiya giya matare milila 19.15 185
H ‘jagannatha dekhite kiba devalaye gela? 18.35 134
‘jagannatha-vallabha’ nama udyana-pradhane 19.79 218
ha ha krspa prana-dhana, ha ha 17.60 110  jagannathera sevaka dekhi’ samvarana kaila = 16.95 == 47
ha ha sakhi, ki kari upaya! 17.53 106
ha ha syama-sundara, ha ha pitambara- 17.60 110 jagannathera uttama prasada aniya yatane 19.13 184
haila gopi-bhavavesa, kailarase paravesa, 17.33 93 jala-kararga lana govinda yaya prabhu-sane 16.40 23
‘hare krsna’ ‘krsna’ kari’ pasaka calaya 16.7 4 jala khasaite tara anga-sparsa ha-ila 18.49 140


--- Page 334 ---
336 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
jala-krid kari’ kaila vanya-bhojane 18.118 175  kahan na paya, tabe rahe lukana 16.11 6
jala vahite eka mrtaka mora jale aila 18.47 139 kahan se cadara thama,  sikhi-pifichera 19.39 197
jale sveta-tanu, valu lagiyache gaya 18.71 149 kahan se murali-dhvani,  navabhra-garjita 19.42 19
jaliya kahe, — (1037) eka manusya na 18.47 139 kaha tanre uthanacha, dekhaha amare” 18.67 147
jaliya kahe,—“prabhure dekhyachon bara- = 18.68 148 ‘kaha rama-riya, kichu sunite haya mana’ 16139 69
jaliyara cesta dekhi’ sabara camatkara 18.45 138 kaha, sakhi, ki kari upaya? 17.42 99
jaliydra mukhe suni’ painu asiya 18.114 173 kahe — “ye jagat mare, se pasila antare, 17.57 108
jaliyare kichu kaya sumadhura vani 18.60 145  kahiha tanhare —‘tumi karaha smarana 19.7 182
jaliya uthaila, prabhu aila sva-bhavana 20135 308  kahitei ha-ila smrti, 0106 haila krsna- 17.56 108
janiyao 5৮3/0/03 gosani prabhure puchila 19.24 189 kahite kahite prabhura dainya badila 20.27 256
jayddvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda 16.2 2 kahite kahite prabhura mana phiri’ gela 16.134 67
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda 17.2 80 kahite na yuyadya, tabu rahite na pari 2099 292
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda 18.2 120 kaila jagate venu-dhvani, siddha-mantra 17.35 94
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vinda == 19.2 180  kala-desa-niyama nahi, sarva siddhi 2018 252
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda == 20.2 244  kalara patuya-khola haite mra 16.34 20
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda 20.2 244  kalidasa aiche sabara nila avasese 16.38 22
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda 16.2 2 kalidasa asi’ tahan patilena hate 16.45 25
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nitydnanda 17.2 80 kalidasa kahe, — “thakura, krpa kara more 16.20 10
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda 18.2 120 kalidase maha-krpa kaila alaksite 16.64 33
jaya jaya $ri-caitanya jaya nityananda 19.2 180  kalidase paoyaila prabhura krpa-sima 16.57 30
jhadu-thakura ghara yai’ dekhi amra-phala == 16.33 = 20  kalidasere dila prabhura Sesa-patra-dane 1656 30
jhadu-thakura kahe tanre madhura vacane 16.17 9 “kalindi dekhiya ami gelana vrndavana 1880 153
jhadu-thakura tabe tanra anuvraji ila 16.30 19 kanha karon, kahan yana, 13037 gele 17.53 106
jhalamala kare, —yena ‘yamunara jala’ 18.27 131 kanha yamuna, vindavana,  kanha krsna, 18.109 171
jiniya tamala-dyuti,  indranila-sama kanti 19.41 198 ‘kanhe kaila ei tumi? —svarapa puchila 19.62 21C
jiva chara kahan tara paibeka anta? 18.21 128
kanta-seva-sukha-para,  sargama haite 2060 274
jiva dina ki karibe tahara varpana? 17.65 113 kanta krspe kare rosa, = krsna paya 20.54 270
jiva hana kare yei tahara varnana 18.23 129 kantha-dhvani-ukti Suni’ mora karnollasa 17.26 9
1৮3” hana keba samyak pare varnibara? 20.80 284  “kantheragambhira dhvani, navaghana- = 17.41 9
jiva ksudra-buddhi kon taha pare varnite? 20.71 280 kanty-amrta yeba piye,  nirantara piya 19.36 19:
jive sammana dibe jani’ ‘krsna’-adhisthana 20.25 255
jyaistha-masera dhape tarre kaila 20.109 296 karite aiche vilapa,  uthila udvega, bhava 17.49 10:
kariya age bauri, nacaya jagat-nari, 19.96 227
karpamrta-$lokera artha kaila vivarana 20133 307
K ‘karpa trsndya mare, pada rasayana, suni’ 17.29 91
karpara-lipta kamala, tara yaiche parimala, 19.94 225
kabhu bhavavese rasa-lilanukarana 186 122
kabhu bhavonmade prabhu iti-uti dhaya 18.7 122 karpara-sane carcaange, parva argera 19.95 226
kabhu dubana rakhe, kabhu bhasana 18.31 132 kaste samvarana karena, avesa saghana 16.103 51
kabhu dubaya, kabhu bhasdya tararigera 18.29 131 ka stry ariga te kala-padamrta-venu-gita- 17.31 92
kabhu 8 ০/)-8 ০1) kare, kabhu rahe acetana 18.54 142 “ka stry anga te” slokera artha avese 20.132 307
kabhu nace, kabhu gaya, bhavavese 16150 76  kastarika-nilotpala, tara yei parimala, 19.92 224
“kaha, jaliya, ei dike dekhila eka-jana? 18.46 139  kata-ksane prabhura kane sabda parasila 18.75 151
‘kaha gela prabhu?’ kahe camakita haa 18.33 133 kautukete tenho yadi pasaka khalaya 16.7 4
kahan gele toma pai, tumikahe,—tahan 17.61 111 ke bujhite pare ei caitanyera nata? 18.30 132


--- Page 335 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 337
kehakare vijana,  keha pada-samvahana, 18.108 171 = krspa udasina ha-ila karite pariksana 20.42 263
keha mukta-kesa-pasa, age kaila adhovasa, 18.91 159 krsna-varpari tvisakrsnar 20.12 247
khaite suite yatha (3003 nama laya 2018 252  krspa yara na paya anta, keba chara dra? 1815 126
khanda-ksirisara-vrksa, ~ghare kari’ nana 18.106 169  krsna ye khaya tambala, kahe tara nahi 16.132 66
khandibe adhyatmikadi kutarkadi-duhkha 19.110 240  krsne kene kari rosa, = dpana durdaiva 19.52 205
kharamuja, ksirika, tala, kesura, pani- 18.105 169  krsne prema-bhakti tira bade dine-dine 20.65 277
kiba anuraga kare, = (८108 duhkha diya mare, 20.49 267 krsnera adharamrta ithe safcarila’ 16.94 46
kiba brahma-daitya, kiba bhata, kahane na 1851 141 krsnera kalaha radha-sane, gopi-gana 1892 160
kiba na deya darasana,  jarena mora tanu- 20.48 266  krsnera mukha-hasya-vani, tyage (303 satya 17.33 93
kiba tenho lampata,  satha, dhrsta, 20.51 268  krspera prasada, tate ‘saksi’ kalidasa 16.63 33
kim iha krpumah kasya bhamah krtar 17.51 104 krsnera sabda-gune prabhura mana akarsila 20.132 307
kona dese kara khyati,  vrndavana saba- 18.105 169  krsnera saurabhya-slokera artha-vivarana 20.137 309
kona dine kona bhave sloka-pathana 20.7 246  krsnera se sabda-gune,  harila 3marakane = 17.42 99
konarkera dike prabhure tarange lana yaya 18.31 132 krsnera sri-anga-gandhe bhariche udyane 19.88 222
kon prakare karimu ami tomara sevana? 16.18 9 krspera viccheda-dasa dviguna badila 19.30 192
koti-amrta-svada pana prabhura camatkara 16.93 46  krspera viraha-spharti-pralapa-varpana 20.136 308
koti-yuga paryanta yadi likhaye ganesa 18.14 125 krsnera ucchista haya ‘maha-prasada’ nama 16.59 31
krodha-arisa santa haila, utkantha 16.134 67 krsnera yante parna-krpa, sei taha paya 16.99 49
krpa kari’ kara more pada-dhili-sama 20.34 260 krsnera ye bhukta-sesa, tara ‘phela’-nama 16.98 49
4003 73 nacaya, ‘Vapi’ vasiya rahila 20.148 313 krsnere nicaya prema, bhaktere nicaya 18.18 127
krpate karila aneka-namera pracara 20.17 253 krtartha ha-inu, mora saphala jivana 16.21 10
krpaya tava pada-parkaja- 20.32 259  ksaneke karite pana, 1৫301 nila anya 19.48 203
krsna dek hi’ mahaprabhu dhana calila 19.86 221 ksaneke prabhura bahya haila, svarapere 17.62 111
krspadharamrta sada antare smarana 16.102 50 ksane ksane uthe premdra taranga ananta 18.21 128
krsnadharamrtera phala-sloka asvadila 20.130 306 ksane mana sthira haya, (306 mane 17.54 106
krsna-gandha-lubdha radha sakhire ye kahila 19.90 223  ksata haya, rakta pade, na pai yiite” 19.64 211
krsna-gopi-jala-keli tahan darasana 20.134 307 kunjere calila krsna 1103 karibare 17.24 89
‘krsna kaha’ bali’ prabhu balena bara bara 16.67 35 kuranga-mada-jid-vapuh-parimalormi- 19.91 223
krsna karena—mahaprabhu magna sei range 18.32 133 karmakara-anubhavera tahani udgama 20.131 306
krsna lana kanta-gana,  kaila jalavagahana, 18.83 154 kusthi-viprera ramani,  pativrata-siromani, 20.57 272
krsna mattakari-vara, cancala kara-puskara, 18.84 155 kva me kantah krsnas tvaritam iha tari 16.87 43
“krsna—morajivana, = (८१502 -- 71012 prana- 20.58 273 kva nanda-kula-candramah kva sik hi 19.35 194
krsna more 4८30005 kari’, kahe more 20.59 274  kva rasa-rasa-tandavi kva sakhi jiva 19.35 194
krsna-nama la-ite tomara ‘ardha-bahya’ ha-ila 18.116 174
krsna-nama-‘sankete’ calaya vyavahara 16.6 4
krsna-nama vina tenho nahi kahe ana 16.5 3 L
krsna-prapti, sevamrta-samudre majjana 20.14 250
krsna-prema-kana taiche jivera sparsana 1820 127 “lalita-lavarga-lat3” pada gdoyana 19.84 220
krspa-premodgama, premamrta-asvadana 20.14 250 lapitarn gauracandrasya 201 243

likhite na parena, tabu rakhiyachena 20.84 286

krsparadha lana bale, gels kantha-daghna 18.89 158
krsna-rasa asvadaye dui-bandhu-sane 20.69 279 likhyate srila-gaurendor 171 79
krsna (303 samyak na pare janite 18.17 126 lilara bahulye grantha tathapi 20.74 281
krspa-thani mage prema-nama-sankirtana 20.35 260 lukana sei patra ani’ cati’ khaya 16.12 6


--- Page 336 ---
338 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
M mrtaka dekhite mora bhaya haila mane 18.48 140

mui maile mora kaiche jive stri-put 18.55 142
madana-mohana-nata,  pasari gandhera 19.98 228 mui tira ghare yan, tire sevor)dasihana, 20.56 272
mada-rapa dhari’ rahe uttana-nayana 18.54 142 mui tira paya padi’, = 1378 yana hate dhari’, 20.53 269
madenduvara-candanaguru-sugandhi- 19.91 223
madhura-hasya-vadane, mana-netra- 17.59 109 mukhe, gande, nike ksata ha-ila apara 19.59 209
madhura-madhura-smerakare mano- 17.51 104 mukhe phena, pulakarga, netre asru-dhara 17.16 86

mukhyamukhya kahilun, katha na yaya 20.141 310
madhyahna kariya kaila bhiksa nirvahana 16.102 50 mukhya-mukhya-lilara artha karilur kathana 20.140 310
madhye madhye apane prabhu sloka padiya 17.7 82
maha-bhagavata tenho sarala udara 16.6 4
maha-madaka haya ei krsnadharera guna 16.113 55 N
mahaprabhu deva-dasira gita sunila 20.121 302

nadaj-jalada-nisvanah sravana-karsi-sac- 17.40 97
mahaprabhu-nityananda, donhara dasera 19.109 240 na dhanarh na janam na sundariri 20.29 258
mahaprabhura ingita govinda saba jane 16.56 30 nadira Sesa-rasa pana, —mala-dvare akarsiya, 16.147 74
mahaprabhu tarra upara maha-krpa 16.39 22 “nadiyacalaha, matare kahiha namaskara 19.6 782
maha-prasadera taharn mahima varnila 20.130 306 na gani apana-duhkha, sabe vanchi tarra 20.52 269
maha-yogesvara acarya—tarajate samartha = 19.28 = 191  “nagara, kaha, tumi kariya niscaya 17.34 94
mabhisira gita yena ‘dasame’ra ese 19.108 237 nagara, suna tomara adhara-caritra 16.122 59
mahotkantha badana,  arya-patha 17.35 94 nahe pimu nirantara, tomadya mora 16.126 62
mala parana prasida dila prabhura hate 16.90 45  najanis prema-marma,  vyartha karis 19.46 202
mama janmani jamanisvare 20.29 258 na kahile haya mora krta-ghnata-dosa 20.100 292
“mana mora vama-dina, jala vina yena 17.59 110 nama-sankirtana haite sarvanartha-nasa 20.11 248
manasa-ganga, kdlindi,  bhuvana-pavani 16.146 73 nama-sankirtana—kalau parama upaya 208 246
manasei krsna-candre arpila sakala 16.33 20 nama-sankirtana kari’ karena jagarana 19.57 208
mane ha-ila lalasa, na haya dpana-vasa, 17.58 109 namaskari’ ei $loka pade bara-bara 16.51 27
mane mane jape, mukhe na kare akhyane 16.72 37  namas te nara-sirnhaya 16.52 28
mano-vege 8০913 prabhu, dekhite narila 18.34 134 na me ‘bhaktas’ catur-vedi 16.25 12
mantra padi’ sri-hasta dila tahara mathate 1861 145 namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis 20.16 251
mantra pana 1:35 age na kare prakase 16.71 36  nana-bhava-candrodaye hayena asthira 20.66 278
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitartha- 16.26 13 nana-bhava uthe prabhura harsa, soka, rosa 205 245
matare pathana taha purira vacane 19.12 184 nana-mate kaila tarra garva khandana 20.114 299
matare prthak pathana, ira bhakta-gane 19.13 184  nana-roga-grasta,—calite vasite na pari 20.94 290
mata-thani ajna la-ila maseka rahiya 19.16 186 na payakrsnerasariga, bade trsna-taranga, 17.47 102
matr-bhakta-ganera prabhu hana siromani 19.14 185 nardyana-hrdi sthiti, tabu pada-sevaya 20.60 275
matr-bhakti, praldpana,  bhittye mukha- = 19.101 230  nari-mane paise haya, yatne nahi bahiraya, 19.40 198
mitrera mitra saha-vasi, cakravake lute asi’, 19.98 164 narira nasate pase, = sarva-kala tahan vaise, 19.93 225
‘mora pada-jala yena na laya kona jana’ 16.43 24 na sahi’ karite pari,  tahe rahi mauna dhari’, 16.129 64
mora sei kala-nidhi, prana-raksa 19.43 200  navame—gopinitha-pattandyaka-mocana = 20.116 299
mora sukha—sevane,  krsnera sukhe — 20.59 274 nayanam galad-asru-dharaya 20.36 261
mora vani—Ssisya, tare bahuta nacai 20.147 313 netra bhariya tumi karaha darasana’ 16.84 42
more dite manah-pida, mora age kare 20.51 268 netra-nabhi, vadana,  kara-yuga carana, 19.94 225
more krsna dekhao’ bali’ dhare tara hata 16.81 না nibhrte vasila nana-krsna-katha-range 16.104 51
more yadi diya duhkha, = (कत 3 hailamaha- = 20.52 = 269  nijapkure pulakita, = (26596 hasya vikasita, = 16.148 74


--- Page 337 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 339
nija-sire dhari’ ei sabara carana 20.146 312  patta-vastra, alankare, samarpiya sakhi- 18.83 154
nija-sukhe mane (३3, = (००५८५८० tara sire ५३3, 20.55 = 271 = pavitra ha-inu mui painu darasana 16.21 10
nilabje hemabje theke,  yuddha haya 18.94 161 petera bhitara hasta-pada—karmera akara 17.16 86
nilacale achi ami tomara ajnate 19.11 184 pingaldra vacana-smrti,  kardila bhava-mati, 17.54 106
nilacale asi’ tabe prabhure kahila 19.22 188 pitambara—tadid-dyuti, mukta-mala— 19.39 197
113621९ mahaprabhu rahe ei-mate 16.64 33 prabhu 23/75 dila sabe gelagauda-dese 1677 39
nimagno marcchalah payasi nivasanratrim = 181 119 = prabhu kahe, — “ami nama jagate laoyailun = 16.69 35
nirantara ghumaya sankara sighra-cetana 19.73 215  prabhu kahe, — “ei saba haya ‘prakrta’ dravya 16.108 53
nirantara nasaya pase krsna-parimala 19.89 222 prabhu kahe,— “ei ye dila krsnadharamrta 1697 48
nitya asi’ tomara vandiye carana 19.7 182  prabhu kahena,— ‘icarya haya pajaka prabala 19.25 190
nityananda-ajfidya cidi-mahotsava kaila 20.112 298  prabhu kahena, — “udvege ghare na pari 19.63 211
nityanandakaila sivanandere tadana 10.120 301 prabhu kahe, —“svapne dekhi’ gelana 18117 175
nityananda-krpa-patra—yrndavana-dasa 10.82 285  prabhu matra bujhena, keha bujhite na pire 19.18 187
nivi-bandha pade khasi’,  vina-male haya 17.46 101 prabhu ‘nama’ diya kaila brahmanda-mocana 20.107 296
prabhu nija-gana laa bedana ratri-sakala 18.4 721
nivikhasayaguru-age, lajja-dharmakaraya 16.128 63

nrtya kari’ bulena prabhu nija-gana laa 19.84 220  prabhu-pade-tale Sankara karena sayana 19.68 213
napura-kinkini-dhvani,  harhsa-sarasa jini, 17.43 99  ‘prabhu-padopadhana’ bali’ tanra nama ha-ila 19.69 213
prabhu premavese karenagana, nartana 18.6 122

prabhura atyanta priya pandita-jagadananda 19.4 = 181

০ prabhura gambhira-lila na pari bujhite 20.77 282

ojha-thani yaichon,—yadi se bhata chaddya 18.56 143  prabhura ingite govinda prasada anila 16.105 52
otha na yaiha, ami nisedhi tomare 18.59 144 prabhura ‘Siksastaka’-$loka yei pade, sune 20.65 277
prabhura vicchede kara dehe nahi prana 18.39 136

prabhura yata nivedana, sakala kahila 19.15 185

P “prabhure kahiha 3/773/3 koti namaskara 19.19 187

pada-raja deha’, pada mora mathe dhara” 16.22 11 prabhure lara ghara 3113 anandita 1275 18.119 176
paditei haila marccha, kichui na jane 18.29 131 prabhure na dekhiya sarnsaya karite lagila 18.34 134
padiyachon bhavarnave maya-baddha hand = 20.33 260  prabhure sayyate ani’ susthira karaila 19.62 210
‘padma’ che luti’ nite,  ‘utpala’ cihe 18.96 163  prabhure Soyana ramanandagelaghare 19.56 208
padmini-latd—sakhi-caya, = (८2113 karo 18.91 159  prabhure uthana ghare anila bhakta-gana 17.19 87
padmotpala—acetana, cakravaka— 1897 163 prabhu tarira upara karena pada-prasarana 1968 213
paile piya peta bhare, pina pina tabe kare, 19.97 227  prabhu (3776 krpa kari’ pathaila vindavana 20.122 302
panasa, kharijura, kamals,  73/3783, jsma, = 18.104 168  prabhu tare krsna kahana mukta karila 20104 294
paricadasa-paricchede —udyana-vilase 20.126 304 prabhu uthi’ apana-kantha tahare jadaya 19.72 215
paficame —pradyumna-misre prabhu krpa 20.110 297 prahrsta-roma bhagavat-kathayarn 19.70 214
parica-roga-pida-vyakula, ratri-dine mari 20.94 290  ‘prakrta’ vastura 5৮303 sabara anubhava 16.109 53
panditeha tara cesta bujhite na pare 19.104 231  pralapa karila tat-tat $loka padiya 20.63 276
pandite na bujhe tara artha-visesa 19108 237  pralapya mukha-sargharsi 19.1 179
parama durlabha ei krsnadharamrta 16135 67  prani-matra la-ite na paya sei jala 16.44 25
parimala-vasita-bhuvanan 20.156 317  praphullita kare yei, 13803) mora candra sei, 19.38 196
pasardyaanyarasa, jagat kare atma-vasa, 16.121 59  praphullita viksa-valli,—yena vindavana 19.80 218
patni-sahita tenho dchena vasiya 16.16 8  prasadalaia prabhu-thafi kaila agamana 16.89 44


--- Page 338 ---
340 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
prasadera saurabhya-madhurya kari’ dsvadana 16.107 52 radhara utkantha-sloka padite lagila 16.118 57
prathama paricchede —rapera dvitiya-milana 20.103 294  radhara utkantha-vani, padi’ 09206 vakhani, 17.39 97
prathame yuddha ‘jalsjali’,  tabe yuddha 18.87 157  radhikadi gopi-gana-sange ekatra meli’ 1881 153
prati-dina prabhu yadi ya'na darasane 16.40 23 raghava-panditera tahan jhalira sajana 20.117 300
prati-dina tanre prabhu karena namaskara 16.51 27 raghunatha-bhattacaryera tahani milana 20.122 302
prati-vatsara prabhu tarre psthana nadiyate 19.5 181  raghunitha-dasera tenho haya jati-khuda = 16.8
prati-vrksa-valli aiche bhramite bhramite 19.85 221 rajani-divase krsna-virahe vihvale 20.3 244
pravesa karila prabhu lana bhakta-gane 19.79 218 ramadika-varangana-hrdaya-hari-varnsi-kalah 17.40 97
“prema-dhana vina vyartha daridra jivana 20.37 261 ramananda-raya sloka padite lagila 16.116 56
premara vikara varnite cahe yei jana 18.19 127 ramananda-sarvabhauma-svarapadi-gane 16.106 52
prema-sindhu-magna rahe, kabhu dube, 19.77 217 ramanandera gala dhari’karena pralipana 19.33 193
premavese mahaprabhura gara-gara mana 19.57 208  rasa-lilara eka loka yabe pade, Sune 188 123
premavese mahaprabhu yabe 3/75 dila 16.116 56  rasa-lilara gita-sloka padite sunite 185 121
premavese padili tenho samudrera jale 18.65 147  rasantaravese ha-ila viyoga-sphurana 20.38 262
premera svabhava—yahan premera 2028 256  rasavasa, gudatvaka-adi yata saba 16.109 53
premodbhavita-harsersyod- 20.1 243 ratri-dine krspa-vicchedarpave bhase 18.3 121
0/3 lagi’ kata kala karena nirodhana 19.26 190 ratri-dine rasa-gita-sloka asvadane 20.4 245
paja-nirvahana haile pache karena visarjiana = 19.27 = 191 = ratri-dine sphure krspera rapa-gandha-rasa = 16.79 = 40
pulakair nicitarh vapuh kada, 20.36 261 ratri-kale mahaprabhu calila udyane 19.78 217
punah ati-utkantha, dainya ha-ila udgama 20.35 260  raya-dvarakrsna-katha (375 sunaila 20.110 297
rdyera natake, yei ara karpamrte 2067 278
punah punah sarva-sastre phukariya kaya 16.61 32
punarapi kaila snana,  suska-vastra 18.101 166 ৪
puri-bharatire prabhu kichu pathaila 16.105 52
‘puridasa’-chota-putre sangete anila 16.65 34
parna-candra-candrikdya parama ujjvala 19.82 219  sababhaktameli’tabe prabhure sadhila 19.67 212
saba lana gela, mahaprabhure dekhaila 18.70 149
puruse kare akarsapa, = apana piyaite mana, 16.123 60  sabara artha kare, paya kabhu harsa-soka 189 123
parva-disdya cale svarapa lana kata jana 18.42 137 sabara carana-krpa—'guru upadhyayi’ 20.147 313
parvavat asi’ kaila prabhura milana 16.4 3 saba-ratri prabhu karena ucca-sankirtana 17.9 83
parvavat tabe artha karena apane 18.8 123
parvavat yatha-yogya sarira ha-ila 1721 88  saba ratri sabe bedi tomare anvesiya 18.114 173
puarve asta-sloka kari’ loke siksa dila 20.64 277 sabaraucchistatenho karila bhojana 16.9
sabare prasada dila kariya bantane 16.106 52
parve granthe iha kariyachi nivedana 2095 291 saba srota-ganera kari carapa vandana 20.150 314
parve vidure yena sri-suka varnila 19.69 213 saba srota vaisnavera vandiya carana 20.78 283
parve yena visakhare radhika puchila 19.34 194
parve yei dekhanachi dig-darasana 18.12 124 sabatyaji’ bhaji yanre, sei dpana-hate mare, 19.51 205
puspa-gandha 1378 vahe malaya-pavana 19.81 219  sabda, artha, —dui-sakti, nana-rasa kare 17.44 100
putra sange lana tenho 8112 prabhu-sthane 16.66 34 sabe ei asvada kara kari’ maha-bhakti 16.114 55
putrere (६/1 prabhura carana vandane 16.66 34 5386 eka jane taha svarapadi ‘gana’ 1822 128
sabe jaya-pardjaya, nahi kichu niscaya, jala- 18.85 156
R sabe meli’ ucca kari’ sankirtane 18.74 150
sacetana rahu dare,  acetana sacetana kare, 16.124 61
radha-bhavavese viraha bade anuksane 19.31 192  sahasra-karejalaseke, sahasra netregopi 18.88 157
radha-bhavera svabhava dna,  krsne kardaya 17.57 108 sahasra-mukha-cumbane, sahasra-vapu- 18.88 158
radha-krspa nidragels, sakhi-ganasayana 18.108 171  sahasra-mukhe varpe yadi, nahi paya para 17.64 112


--- Page 339 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 341

sahasra-vadane varni’ nahi 23473 anta 20.70 279 sata vatsarera sisu, nahi adhyayana 16.75 38
sahasra-vadane yabe kahaye ‘ananta’ 18.13 125 satya kahena, —‘age vyasa kariba varpane’ 20.87 287

sake sindhv-agni-vanendau 20.157 318 se amrtera eka-kana, karpa-cakora-jivana, 17.45 101
sakha-candra-nydya kari’ dig-darasana 17.65 113 seha bale, — ‘ei dekha $ri-purusottama 16.84 42

sakhi-gana-age praudhi-sloka ye padila 2045 265  sehakahe,— 1005 haya vrajendra-nandana = 16.82 41

sakhi-ganera nayana,  trsita cataka-gana, 1886 156 sei asta-slokera artha 32379 asvadila 2064 277
sakhi he, dekhakrsnera jala-keli-rarge 1884 155 sei bhaksya-bhojya-pana, haya amrta- 16.130 65
sakhi he, kotha krsna, karaha darasana 19.37 196  seibhave prabhu sei sloka uccarila 20.46 265
sakhi he, krspa-gandha jagat mataya 1993 225 sei dasa kahe bhakta ‘ardha-bahya’-nama 18.78 152
sakhi he, Suna mora manera niscaya 20.49 267 sei dhali lana kalidasa sarvange lepila 16.32 19
sakhi saba kare, —'krsne kara upeksana’ 20.42 263 sei dina haite prabhura dra dasa ha-ila 19.30 192
saksad-anubhave, —yena krsna-upasparsa === 16.79 = 40  se-dine asi’ avasya kariye bhaksana 198 1782
saksat dekhechon, —more paila sei bhata 18.55 142 sei dravye eta asvada, gandha lokatita 16.110 54
Sakti saicariya punah pathaila vindavana 20109 296 sei gade karena prabhu pada-praksalane 16.42 24
samanya bhagya haite tira prapti nahi haya 16.99 49 sei gandha panaprabhu haila acetane 19.88 222
samapti karilun flake kari’ namaskare 20.75 282  seigandha-vasa nasa, sada karegandhera 19.97 227
samudrera madhye yena eka kana chunilun = 20.81 = 284  sei-guna lana prabhu tarre tusta ha-ila 16.49 27
samudrera tarange 351, eta dara aila! 18112 173 sei kalidasa yabe nilacale ila 16.39 22
samudrera tire ila kata jana lana 18.37 135 sei khola, anthi, cokala case kalidasa 16.37 22
samudrera tire asi’ yukati karila 18.41 137 sei mane, —‘krspe mora nahi prema-gandha’ 20.28 256
sandhya-krtya kari’ punah nija-gana-sange == 16.104 51 sei nari jiye kene,  krsna-marma vyatha 2055 271
sange lana sakhi-gana,  radha kaila bhojana, 18.107 170 sei-saba lilara ami satra-matra kaila 20.73 281
Sankara karena prabhura pada-samvahana 19.71 214 sei saba lild-rasa dpane ananta 20.70 279
sankara-pandite prabhura sange soyaila 19.67 212 sei saba vamite grantha haya suvistara 20.72 280
sanketa-venu-nade radha ani’ (८/7 >-8&/0०/€ 17.24 89 sei seibhavavesekarenaasvadane 2068 278
Sankha-ghanta-adi saha arati bajila 16.88 44 sei sei bhave nija-sloka padiya 206 245
sankirtana haite papa-sarhsara-nasana 20.13 249 sei sei bhave sloka kariya pathane 20.68 278
sankirtana-yajiie kalau krspa-aradhana 209 247 sei loka asvadite ratri-jagarana 20.7 246
sanksepe kahilun, vistara na yaya kathane 20.86 287 sei sloka padi’ prabhu artha karila 19.90 223
sannyasa kariya sada sevena janani 19.14 185 sei loka padi’ pralapa karite l3gila 19.34 194
saptadase —gabhi-madhye prabhura patana 20.131 306 sei slokastakera artha punah asvadila 10.139 310
saptama-paricchede —vallabha bhattera 20.114 299 sei Srestha, aiche yanite krspa-bhakti haya 16.28 14
Saraj-jyotsna-sindhor avakalanaya jata- 18.1 119 sei ta’ bhatera katha kahana na yaya 1856 143
Sarat-kalera ratri, saba candrika-ujjvala 184 121 561 ta’ sumedha paya krsnera carana 209 247
Sarira dighala tara— hata panca-sata 18.52 141 sei vacana Suna, sei parama-pramane 20.85 286
“arira’ etha prabhura, ‘mana’ geld vrndavana 20.123 303 sei yanra haya, ‘phela’ paya sei dhanya” 16.100 49
sarva-bhave bhaja, loka, caitanya-carana 17.69 115  sepheliraekalava, napaya devatasaba, 16.131 65
sarvajfia-Siromani caitanya isvara 16.48 26 se prema jand'te loke, prabhu kaila ei 2062 276
sarvange pulaka, netre vahe asru-chara 16.93 46 se saba slokera artha, se saba ‘vikara’ 1810 123
sarva-ratri karena bhave mukha sangharsana 19.60 209 56 saba varnite grantha haya ati-vistara 1810 123
“sarva-sakti name dila kariya vibhaga 2019 252  se-sambandhe gopi-gana,  yare mane nija- 16.142 70
sarva-subhodaya, krsna-premera ullasa 20.11 248  Sese jala-kelira sloka padite lagila 18.24 129
sasthe —raghunatha-dasa prabhure milila 20.112 298 se sri-mukha-bhasita, amrta haite paramrta, 17.44 100


--- Page 340 ---
342 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
se vatsara Sivananda patni 1375 aila 16.65 34 ‘Suddha-bhakti’ deha’ more, krsna krpa kari’ = 20.30 258
se yaiche trsnaya piye samudrera pani 20.90 289  ‘suddha-bhakti’krsna-thanimagite lagila 2027 256
sighra dekhaha, na rahe jivana 19.37 196  sudha-jid-ahivallika-sudala-vitika-carvitah == 16119 58
simha-dvara-daksine ache tailangi-gabhi-gana 17.12 84 sadra-vaispavera ghare yaya bheta lana 16.13
sirhha-dvare dala-i asi’ karila vandane 16.80 40

Sukana maileha kare pani na magaya 20.23 252
simha-dvare dvari prabhure krspa dekhaila == 20.129 305 suka, ari, pika, bhriga kare 3/3979 19.80 218
siriha-dvarera uttara-dike kapatera ade 16.41 23 ‘sukrti-labhya pheli-lava’—balenabara-bira 16.96 = 47
sindhu-tire-nire karena prabhura anvesana 18.42 137 ‘sukrti’-sabde kahe ‘krsna-krpa-hetu pupya’ 16100 49
Sisyara srama dekhi’ guru nacana rakhila 20.148 313 Suni’ jhadu-thakurera 0303 suk ha ha-ila 16.24 11
sivananda balakere bahu yatna karila 16.68 35

Suni’ prabhu gopi-bhave avista ha-ila 17.32 93
Sivanandera balake sloka karaila 20.129 305 Suni’ sei jaliya anandita ha-ila 18.70 149
sloka suni’ mahaprabhu maha-tusta haila 16.118 57 Sunite na painu bhasana-muralira dhvani* 17.28 90
sloka uccarite tad-rapa apane ha-ila 20.46 265 Sunite na painu sei amrta-sama vani 17.28 9০
$lokera artha asvadaye dui-bandhu lana 206 245 unite unite judiya hrdaya-sravana 19.111 241
$lokera artha karena prabhu vilapa kariya 17.7 82

Suni’ thakura kahe, -- “८525 1/3 ei satya kaya 16.28 14
snana kari’ kaila jagannatha-darasana 19.102 230  Suniya svarapa-gosani lagila kahite 1670 36
sparsa-matre sei bhata hrdaye pasila 18.49 140  Suniyavismitaha-ildsababhakta-gana 19.29 192
sodase —kalidase prabhu krpa karila 20.128 305 sanyayitarn jagat sarvari 2039 262
Sraddha kari, Suna 103, Sunite maha-suk ha 19.110 240 surata-vardhanari soka-nasanar 16.117 57
sravasoh kuvalayam aksnor afijanam 16.74 37

saryahe ‘sita-paricamyari 20.157 318
$ri-advaita-acarya, sri-gaura-bhakta-vrnda 20.144 312 Suska bansera lathikhana, eta kare 16.129 64
sri-advaita, sri-bhakta, ara sri-srotr-vrnda 20.96 291 svabhavika premara svabhava karila udaya 20.43 264
$ri-govinda, $ri-caitanya, $ri-nityananda 2096 291 svakiyasya pranarbuda-sadrsa-gosthasya 19.76 216
sri-guru $ri-raghunatha, $ri-jiva-carana 20.145 312 svarapa gaya vidyapati,  gita-govinda- 17.62 111
éri-krspa-carane tanra prema upajaya 2026 256

svarapa-gosani kaila vigrahera mahima- 20111 297
sri-krspa-caitanya, $ri-yuta nityananda 20.144 312 = svardpa-gosani kichu ha-ila vimana 19.29 192
sri-krspa-caitanya yaha karena asvadana 18.22 128 svardpa-gosani prabhura bhava janiya 17.30 91
sri-madana-gopala more lekhaya ajia kari’ 2099 292 svarapa-gosaiire dekhi’ tanhare puchila 18.110 172
$riman-madana-gopala- 20.155 317  svarGpa-gosai tabe cinta paila mane 19.66 212
$ri-radhara prema-pralapa ‘bhramara-gita'te = 19.107 233
sri-radha-saha ‘sri-govinda’-carana 20.142 311 svardpa-gosaiii tabe kabhite lagila 18.111 172

svarapa-gosani tare puchena samacara 18.45 138
$ri-radha-saha srila ‘sri-gopinatha’ 20.143 311 svardpa, govinda dunhara haila 8993 duhkha 19.61 210
$ri-radha-saha ‘sri-madana-mohana’ 20.142 311 svaradpa, govinda suila gambhirara dvare 19.56 208
$ri-raghunatha-dasa sri-guru, $ri-jiva-carapa = 20.97 291 svarapakahe, —“tanra haya premera vikara 18.69 148
$ri-rdpa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 17.73 117
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 18.121 177  svarapa kahe,— “yarre tumi kara ‘bhata’-jAana18.64 146
Sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 19.112 241 svarapa, ramananda, —ei duijana-sane 20.4 245

svarapa-ramananda gaya, prabhu nace, 19100 229
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 20.153 315  svardpa-rimananda-raya, kari nana 19.100 229
$ri-svarapa, $ri-rapa, $ri-sanatana 20.97 291  svardpa,rdpa, sandtana, raghunathera 16.151 76
Sri-svarapa, sri-rdpa, sri-sanatana 20.145 312
srrigara-rasa-sara chani’, (302 candra 19.41 198 svarapa uthi’ kole kari’,  prabhura anila 17.61 111
$rotara pada-renu karon mastaka-bhasana 20.152 315 svarape kahena, —“tumi dma anila kati? 17.22 88
stambhila saryera gati,  jiyaila mrta pati, 20.57 272 svardpe puchena mani’ nija-sakhi-gana 19.33 193
sthavare paryanta krsna-nama kahailun 16.69 35 svardpere bolaila kapata khuliya 1713 84


--- Page 341 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 343
T tanra tyakta ‘avasesa’ sanksepe kahila 2074 281
‘tara yei ajAa’— bali’ mauna dharila 19.23 189
tabe kalidasa sloka padi’ sundila 16.24 11 tanre tumi uthaila apanara jale 18.65 147
tabe karibare yaya isvara-darasane 16.42 24 tanre vidaya diya thakura yadi ghare ila 16.31 19
tabe mahaprabhu tanre nisedha karila 16.46 25 tan-sabara sange dilakalidasa nama 16.5 3
tabe more krodhakari’, ~~ lajja bhaya, 16126 62
tabe prabhu karila jaganntha darasana 16.54 29  tan-sabarasangeprabhura chila bahya-jiana 16.78 39
tanadyat-sankocat kamatha iva krsnoru- 17.72 116
tabe radha soksma-mati,  janiya sakhira 18.93 161  tanu-manakariyaksobha, badiya 16.121 59
tabe svarapa-gosani sange lana bhakta-gana = 17.14 = 85 tara alpa khaoyaite sevakakarila yatana 16.91 45
tabe svardpa-gosani tanre snanakarana 18.119 176 (3/3 alpa 1275 prabhu jihvate yadi dila 16.92 46
tabe svarapa-rama-raya, kari’ nana 19.54 207
tabe yuddha ‘hrdahrdi’,  tabe haila 18.87 157 tara artha asvadila premavista hana 20.138 309
tare bale, —’kotha krsna, mora prana-natha? 16.81 41
tabhir yutah sramam apohitum anga-sanga- = 18.25 130 = (5/3 eka kana sparsi pana sodhite 20.71 280
tabu krsna-nama balaka na kare uccara 16.67 35 (33 63 13৮3 ye paya, sei bhagyavan 16.98 49
tabu preme bule kari’ prabhura anvesana 18.43 137  taraekasruti-kane, dubaya jagatera 17.41 98
tabu sei balaka krspa-nama na kahila 16.68 35
tad-amala-pada-padme bhrigatam etya 20.154 316 taraja-praheli acarya kahena thare-thore 1918 187
tarajara na jani artha, kiba (50/23 mana 19.27 191
tahadek hi’ prana (> nahi rahe dhade 18.53 142  taraja suni’ mahaprabhu isat hasila 19.23 189
tahan gele sei bhata lagibe sabre” 18.59 144  taramadhye ‘bangala’-kavira nataka- 20.111 297
tahani dek hila krspera vanya-bhojana 20.135 308 tara madhye dui-natakera vidhana-sravana 20.103 294
tahan tumi prasada pao, tabe ami jiye” 16.19 9
tahan yai’ padila prabhu hana acetana 1712 84 tara madhye govindera kaila pariksana 20118 300
tara madhye karila rase krspna-anvesana 20127 304
taha yei paya, tara saphala jivita 16.135 67  taramadhye parimunda-nrtyera varpana 20.118 300
tahara akara dekbhite bhaya lage mane 1858 144 tara madhye prabhura kichu pralipa-varpana 20.125 303
tahara lak sana Suna, svarapa-rama-raya 20.20 253 tara madhye prabhura paficendriya-akarsana 20.127 304
taiche ami eka kana chunilun lilsra 20.91 289
taiche janiha 'vikara’ ‘pralapa’ varnana 18.12 124 tara madhye prabhura sirhha-dvare patana 20.124 303
tara madhye sivananda-sange kukkura aila 20.104 294
tars cakrtarthan viyunarksy aparthakari 19.45 201 tara madhye Sivanandera dscarya darsana 20.105 295
tara age yadyapi saba lilsra bhandara 20.83 285  tarange vahiya phire, —yena suska kastha 1830 132
tanra bhaye (६2113 prabhu bhiksa sankocana = 20.115 299 tara tapasyara phala, dekha ihara 16.145 72
tanra bhaye narena bhittye mukhabja ghasite 19.74 215
{2013 bhaye narena prabhu bahire yaite 19.74 215 tarayeba udgara, tare kaya ‘amrta- 16.132 66
tare khaoyana tanra patni k haya pascate 16.35 21
(37773 bhasa-dhvanite 5111518 harila sravana 17.25 89 tare namaskari’ kalidasa vidaya magila 16.30 19
tara carapa-cihna yei thai padila 16.31 19  tarkanakariha, $una viévasa kariya 19.106 232
(3773 carana 00083 karon mui pane 20151 314  tarkera gocara nahe caritra yshara 19103 231
tanragele punah haildunmada pradhana 16.78 39
tanra jhari-sesamrta kichu more dila 20.89 288 taru-latadi jyotsnaya kare jhalamala 19.82 219
tara lagi’ ami mari,  ulati’ na cahe 19.51 205 ta-sabare deyapida, ama-sane 20.50 267
tasmai deyari tato grahyarm 16.25 12
tanra nikata eka-sthane lukana rahila 16.32 19 tate bara bara kahi,—sunabhakta-gana 16.62 33
tanra pache pache ami karinu gamana 17.25 89
tanra patnire tabe namaskara kaila 16.15 8 tate caitanya-lila haila ye kichu likhana 20.101 293
tara patni tare dena, khayena casiya 16.34 20 tate ei dravye krspadhara-sparsa haila 16.112 54
tanra sparse ha-ila tomarakrspa-premodaya 18.66 147 tate jani,—kona tapasyara ache bala 16.138 68
tanra than $esa-pitra layena magiya 16.11 6 (30913 bharila peta, trsna mora gela 20.89 288


--- Page 342 ---
344 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
tate ‘vaispavera jhuta’ khio chadi’ ghrpa- 16.58 31  udvega, ৮/5303, dainye kare pralapana 20.38 262
tate ye pralapa kaila, taha ye sunila” 18.116 174  udvega, visada, mati, autsukya, (7353, 17.49 103
tathapi alpa varniya chadilena ara 20.83 285 udvegedivasa na yaya 'ksana’ haila 20.40 263
tathapi likhiye, suna ihara karana 20.95 291 udyane udyane bhramena kautuka dekhite 18.5 121
tathapi se nirlajja, vrtha dhare prana 16.136 68  ughada-ange padiyasankara nidra 19.72 215
tenho krsna-kantha dhari,  bhase jalera 18.89 158 anavirmse bhittye prabhura mukha- 20.136 308
tenho nahena, ei ati-vikrta akara” 18.68 148  unmadacestita haya pralapa-vacane 17.63 112
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya 16.27 14 unmada-cestita tate unmada-pralapa 17.70 115
thakura kahe, —“aiche vat kahite nd yuydya = 16.23 = 11  unmada-dasayaprabhurasthira nahe 19.65 212
tina amrte hare kana, hare mana, 17.38 96 unmada-pralapa-cesta kare ratri-dine 19.31 192
tina capada mari’ kahe, —'bhata palaila 18.62 146  unmada-pralapa kare ratri-divase 193 180
tina-dasaya mahaprabhu rahena sarva-kala 18.77 152 unmadera cesta, praldpa kare premavese 17.3 80
tina-dvare kapata aiche ache ta’ lagiya 17.11 83 unmadera samarthye, sei slokera kare 17.50 104
tina haite krsna-nama-premera ullasa 16.63 33 upala-bhoga dekhiya prabhu nija-vasa ila = 16101 50
tire rahi’ dekhi ami sak hi-gana-sarige 18.82 154 upasana lagi’ devera karena avahana 19.26 190
tomara adhina ami putra se tomara 19.10 183  uthi’ dhaya vraja-jana, = (15113 cataka- 19.42 199
tomara darsane dinu mui patita pamare 16.20 10 uthila bahu raktotpala,  prthak 18.96 163
tomara e-amrte pile saphala haila srama 20.152 315  uthila padma-mandala,  prthak 18.95 162
tomdra ei dasa kene, —kahata’ karana?”’ 18.46 139 uthila visada, dainya,—pade apana- 20.15 250
tomara marccha dekhi’ sabe mane pai 18.115 174 uthitei asthi saba lagila nija-sthane 18.76 151
“tomara nitya-dasa mui, toma pasariya 20.33 260 uthiya vasilena prabhu, cahena iti-uti 17.22 88
tomdra parase ei preme matta ha-ila 18.113 173 utkanthate artha kare pralapa kariya 16.141 20
tomara seva chadi’ ami karilun sannyasa 19.9 183 uttama (1275 apanake mane trnadhama 20.22 254
tomara sevaka karor tomara sevana” 20.34 260 uttama hana vaisnava habe nirabhimana 20.25 255
tomara venu suskendhana, tara janmaya 16.124 61 uttama sarnskara (68/14 = bada bada 18.103 168
toma-sabara carana-dhali karinu vandana 20.101 293 uttama-vastu bheta 1275 tanra thani yaya 16.10
‘tora yadi lag paiye, (৪86 tore Siksa 19.46 202
trailokya-saubhagam idarh ca niriksya 70237 17.31 92 \%
trayodase—jagadananda mathura yai’ ila 20.121 302
trijagatera loka prabhura paila darasana 20.116 299  vaispavera sesa-bhaksanera eteka mahima 16.57 30
trpad api sunicena 20.21 253 vaispavera ucchistakhaitetenhohailabudi 16.8 5
trspanurapa jhari bhari’ tenho kaila pana 20.88 288  vaispave tanhara visvasa, janena antara 16.48 26
vaisnavocchista khaibara phala dekhaila 20.128 305
trtiye— haridasera mahima pracanda 20.106 295 vande sri-krsna-caitanyam 16.1 1
tui akrara-marti dhari’,  krsna nili 19.49 203
tumi jana parihasa, haya narira sarva- 17.37 96  vande tam krsna-caitanyari 19.1 179
“tumi krspa-nama-mantra (८2118 upadese 16.71 36 varsantare aila 5303 gaudera bhakta-gana 16.4 3
‘tumi mora sak ha, dekhaha—kahan 16.83 41  varsara megha-praya asru varise nayana 20.40 263
tumi marccha-chale vindavane dekha 18.115 174  varse sthira tadid-gana, = sifice Syama 1886 156
tusanale pode, yena na yaya jivana 20.41 263  vasanta-rajanite puspodyane viharapa 20.137 309
vasi’ pada capi’ kare ratri-jagarana 19.73 215
u vayu yaiche sindhu-jalera hare eka ‘kana’ == 1820 127
venu dhrsta-purusa (0272,  purusadhara 16.125 61
ucca kari’ krspa-nama kahena prabhura kane 18.74 150 venu-nada amrta-ghole, amrta-samana 17.38 96
ucca kari’ sravane kare nama-sankirtana 17.20 87 venura jhutadhara-rasa, hana lobhe 16.146 73
udgharna-dasa haila unmada-lak sana 19.32 193 venura tapa jani yabe, sei tapakari 16.149 75


--- Page 343 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 345
venure mani’ nija-jati,  aryera yena 16.148 74 yamunara bhrame prabhu dhana calila 18.28 131
venu-sabda suni’ ami gelana vrndavana 17.23 88 “yamunara bhrame tumi samudre padila! 18.112 173
vicarite saba viparita 16.122 59 yamundra 21९ maha-range karena keli 18.81 153
viccheda-duhkhita jani’ janani asvasite 19.5 181 yamunate jala-keli gopi-gana-sarnge 18.32 133
vidhire kare bhartsana,  krspe dena 19.44 200  yanapadadubkhe mari, ayogyapiye 16149 75
vidyapati, candidasa, $ri-gita-govinda 17.6 81 yan-sabara carana-krpa—subhera karana 20.150 314
virhsa-paricchede —nija-"sik sastaka’ 20.138 309 yara dhana, na kahe tare, pana kare 16.145 72
vina-malye deya gandha, gandha diya 19.98 228 ydra yata sakti, tata kare arohana 20.79 283
viprad dvi-sad-guna-yutad aravinda-nabha- 16.26 = 13 “yare cahi chadite, sei $uia ache 17.56 108
virahevyakula prabhu udvege uthila 19.58 208 yare krpa karena, tara haya ithe visvasa 19.109 240
visade vihvala sabe, nahika ‘cetana’ 18.43 137  yatacestd, yata pralapa, —nahi paravara 20.72 280
vistariya veda-vyasa kariba varnane 20.86 287 yata duhkha, yata sukha, yateka vikara 18.16 126
visvasakariya kara e-tina sevana 16.62 33 yata gopa-sundari,  krsna tata 18.90 159
vrajatula-kuldnganetara-rasali-trsna-hara- 16.119 58 yata hemabja jale bhase, tata 1894 161
“vrajendra-kula—dugdha-sindhu, 19.36 195
yata nacaila, naci’ karila visrame 20.149 314
vrajera visuddha-prema,—  yena 2062 276  yathatatha va vidadhatu lampato 20.47 266
vrddha jaratura ami andha, badhira 20.93 290  yatha-yogya kare mana,  krsna tate 20.54 270
vrksa yena katileha kichu na bolaya 20.23 254  yavat buddhira 8৪0, tateka varpilun 20.81 284
vrnda-krta sambhara,  gandha-puspa- 18.101 166 yavat jiba, tavat ami nariba chadite’ 19.11 184
vrndavana-bhrame yahan karila pravese 20126 304
ydya vrksa-lata-pase, krsna sphure 19.99 228
vindavana-dasa prathama ye lila varnila 20.73 281 ye amara prana-natha,  ekatra rahi 19.50 204
vrdavana-ramaninarh mangdanam 16.74 37 yeba laksmi-thakurani, (970০ ye 17.47 102
vindavane devi-gana,  kufja-dasi 18.102 167 ১০৮3 tumi sakhi-gana, visade 17.52 105
vrndavane taru-lata, adbhuta 18.102 167 yeba venu-kala-dhvani, eka-bara 17.46 101
vyape caudda-bhuvane, kare sarva 1992 224
ye-dine tomara iccha kardite bhojana 19.8 182
Y ye gopi mora kare dvese, krspera kare 20.56 272
yei kare, yei bole 5303, —unmada-laksana 19.65 212
yei yei sloka jayadeva, bhagavate 2067 278
yabe yei bhava prabhura karaye udaya 17.5 81 yei ye magaye, tare deya dpana-dhana 20.24 255
yadyapiha prabhu —koti-samudra- 2066 278
yaha haite haya saba varichita-parana 20.146 312 = ‘ye-janajite nahi caya, tare kene 19.44 200
yaha haite paiba krspa-premamrta-dhana 17.69 115 ye kichukahilun ei dig-darasana 20.76 282
yaha haite paiba nija vaichita saba kaja 16.58 ॐ ye kichu varnilun, seha sanksepa kariya 20.84 286
ye krsna—mora premadhina, tare 19.52 205
yahakari’asvadana, anandita mora 1899 165 ye narire vaiiche krspa, tara rape 20.53 269
yahara artha uni saba yaya duhkha-soka 20.15 250
yahara caritre prabhu payena ananda 19.4 181 ye-rape la-ile nama prema upajaya 2020 253
yair drstam tan-mukhac chrutva 17.1 79 yogya hana keha karite na paya pana 16.136 ০৪
yajnaih sankirtana-prayair 20.10 247 yogya jana nahi paya, lobhe matra mare 16.137 68
yamuna-jala nirmala,  anga kare 1890 159 yugdyitam nimesena 2039 262


--- Page 344 ---
General Index
Numerals in bold type indicate references to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
verses. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
A Amrta-pravaha-bhasya
Twentieth Chapter summarized in, 243
AbhijAana-sakuntala-nataka Anantadeva
quoted, 136 can’t describe one day of Caitanya’s
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami ecstasies, 112-113
activities of, 320 unable to describe Caitanya’s pastimes,
meeting of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati 125, 279-280
and, 319 Anger
Activities as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 245
committing sinful on strength of Krsna satisfied when gopi displays, 270
chanting, 4 Anxiety
no limit to Caitanya’s, 280 as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 103,
of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami seen by 245
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, 320 of Caitanya in separation, 208-209
of Caitanya as wild and insane, 192-193 Api bata madhu-puryam arya-putro
of Jagadananda Pandita pleased verses quoted, 236-237
Caitanya, 181 Art
of Krsna's flute, 69-70 Krsna as reservoir of, 199-200
of Krsna'’s lips as perplexing, 59-60 Association
of one in transcendental love, 231-232 of Krsna attained by chanting, 250
of pure devotee meant for Krsna'’s hap- vaniand vapu as two forms of, 319
piness, 269 Attachment
pure devotees have no motive for frui- for chanting prevented by offenses, 251
tive, 12 hearing about Krsna frees one from
Aditya Purana material, 236
cited on chastity of brahmana’s wife, to household affairs as miserable, 236
273 Austerities
Advaita Acarya already performed by one who chants
Caitanya’s message to, 186 the holy name, 14
Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of, nectar of Krsna's lips obtained on
291-292 strength of, 68-69
Agitation performed by goddess of fortune, 102
as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 243 performed by Krsna's flute, 71-72
Aitota
Caitanya wandered near temple of, 130
Akrara B
Krsna left Vindavana with, 201
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya Back to Godhead
Eighteenth Chapter in summarized in, started by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami in
119 1944, 320
Nineteenth Chapter summarized in, 179 Balarama
Sixteenth Chapter summarized, 1 Krsna left Vrndavana with, 201
347


--- Page 345 ---
348 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Bali Maharaja Body of Krsna
plundered by Vamanadeva, 235 remains fast in minds of women,
Beauty 197-198
of Krsna stuns living entities, 92 scent of, 223-229
Bhagavad-gita triumphs over blackish rain cloud, 197
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami wrote com- Brahma
mentary on, 320 can’t estimate Caitanya’s mercy, 38-39
as vaniof Krsna, 319 pleased by chastity of brahmana’s wife,
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 273
Krsnadasa Kaviraja followed instructions prasada difficult to obtain for, 48
in, 230 Brahmana
quoted on activities of one who loves anyone who constantly chants holy
Krsna, 232 name is better than, 14
translated into English by A.C. Bhakti- can’t purify himself or his family, 13
vedanta Swami, 320 characteristics of found in sadra, 16
Bhaktir asta-vidha hy esa known by his occupation, 16
verses quoted, 18 may become a Vaisnava, 18
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati one who is trained and initiated
as eternal spiritual master of A.C. becomes, 18
Bhaktivedanta Swami, 319 qualities of, 16
cited on pure devotees as writers, 285, story of leper, 272-273
287-288 twelve qualities of not sufficient for
cited on imitation of pure devotees, 4 purification, 13
cited on prakrta-sahajiyas as false devo- Brahmananda Bharati
tees, 257 received prasada of Lord Jagannatha,
cited on worship of Kalidasa and Jhadu 51-52
Thakura, 7
disappearance date of, 319 C
International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness formed to execute order Caitanya-bhagavata
of, 321 Krsnadasa Kavirdja requests readers to
Bhramara-gita hear, 286
as section of Tenth Canto of quoted on future description of
Bhagavatam, 233 Caitanya'’s pastimes, 287
Bilvamangala Thakura Caitanya-caritamrta
as author of Krsna-karnamrta, 278-279 as favorite book of Bhaktisiddhanta
Birth Sarasvati, 320
as brahmana not sufficient for cited on chanting, 247
developing devotion, 12-14 cited on incarnation who sings name of
$astric evidence for unimportance of, Krsna, 248
12-18 date of completion of, 318
Body, material destroys inauspiciousness, 316
hearing about Caitanya destroys mis- hearing of pacifies heart and ear, 241
eries of, 241 written for satisfaction of Madana-
Body of Krsna mohanaji and Govindaji Deities,
luster of, 194-195, 198-199 316-317
parts of compared to eight lotus Caitanya Mahaprabhu
flowers, 225 as merciful and magnanimous, 114


--- Page 346 ---
General Index 349
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Cupid
as Supreme Lord, 26, 220, 316 Radha thought of Krsna as, 108-109
Caitanya-caritamrta offered to lotus feet
of, 316-317
felt like Radharani, 265 D
induced the whole world to chant the
holy name, 35-36 Death
International Society for Krishna Con- as inevitable in heavenly, middle and
sciousness formed to execute order lower planets, 235
of, 321 Deity
Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of, Caitanya-caritamrta written for satisfac-
291-292 tion of, 316-317
only most fortunate relish mad words of Sri Madana-gopala worshiped by
of, 243 Jhadu Thakura, 8
three states of consciousness of, 152 Demigods
Caitanya-margala can’t estimate Caitanya’s mercy, 38-39
See: Caitanya-bhagavata prasada difficult to obtain for, 48, 65,
Candala 97,131
as devotee can deliver his family, 26 Determination
Chanting as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 103
correct method of, 253-256 Devotees
ecstatic symptoms of, 261 advanced do not advertise themselves,
frees one from undesirable habits, 248 257
of devotees roused Caitanya, 87 astonished at Caitanya, 191-192
offenses prevent attachment for, 251 bumblebees at Krsna's lotus feet, 317
of ‘Hari’ while taking prasada, 56 Caitanya maintained external con-
of holy name by trees and immovable sciousness in company of, 39
plants, 35-36 chanted Hare Krsna mantra loudly, 87
power of, 14 don’t care about their own happiness
results and effects of, 248-250 and distress, 269
salvation attainable in Kali-yuga by, drink nectar of Krsna's lips, 72-73
246-247 dust of feet of as powerful substance,
while gambling as offensive, 4 32
Charity entered Jagannatha-vallabha with
Radha gives Her body to Krsna in, 274 Caitanya, 218
Conditioned soul entreated Caitanya to stay with
as eternal servant of Krsna, 258-260 Sankara, 212-213
Conjugal love instructed by Caitanya in tasting
Krsna's body as essence of, 198-199 ecstatic love, 1-2
Krsna can't give up, 236 Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of,
Consciousness 291-292
three states of Caitanya’s, 152 obtained water that washed Caitanya’s
Culture feet, 25
Krsna as reservoir of, 199-200 seated in the heart along with Param-
Cupid वेत, 320
Covinda’s glance awakens influence of, should be recognized as bhagavatas, 17
238 should serve Krsna without personal
Krsna as enchanter of, 223-224 motives, 273


--- Page 347 ---
350 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Devotional service Ecstatic symptoms
as sweeter than direct union, 274-275 of Caitanya resembled tortoise and
Caitanya prayed for unmotivated, pumpkin, 85-86
257-260 of devotees while taking prasada, 56
chanting awakens all varieties of, of Kalidasa while eating remnants, 22
249-250 of Radha and Caitanya as the same,
devotees engage in pure, 12 264-265
in Vrndavana like gold in River Jamba, Education
276 chanting as life and soul of, 248-249
prakrta-sahajiyas can't relish, 257 not criterion of a brahmana, 16
Disciplic succession Eka-desarn tu vedasya
pure devotee in represents Vyasadeva, verses quoted, 313
288 Envy
Distress A as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 243
Caitanya recited sixth verse of Sik- hearing about Krsna frees one from, 236
sastaka in mellow of, 262
devotee does not care about his own,
269 F
Divi bhuvi ca rasayarir kah striyas
verses quoted, 234 Faith
Dr. Bose comes from service and favor of
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami once man- Caitanya and Nityananda, 240
aged laboratory of, 319 in three powerful substances, 32-33
Duty one must taste prasida with great,
of queens is good behavior, 239 55-56
Dvaraka Fear
songs of queens at, 237-240 as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 103
Dvijatvam jayate nrpnam Flute of Krsna
quoted, 18 affects women, 101-102
as messenger, 94-95
criticizes gopis, 62-64
E invites gopis, 72-73
mind and senses of, 60-61
produces deep sound, 194-195
Eagerness sound of, 199
as ecstatic symptom, 103, 245 Fruitive activity
to chant expressed by Caitanya, rejected by Caitanya, 257-258
260-261
Economic development
destroyed by topics of Krsna, 236 G
Ecstatic symptoms
imitated by prakrta-sahajiyas, 257 Gambhira
manifested by Caitanya, 46, 103, 122, as room of Caitanya, 207
149, 193 Caitanya rubbed face against walls of,
manifested while chanting the holy 208-210
name, 261 Ganesa
of Caitanya in pure love of Krsna, unable to find limit of Caitanya’s
275-276 pastimes, 125


--- Page 348 ---
General Index 351
Ganges River Govinda
as universally purifying, 73 glance of awakens influence of Cupid,
Garuda Purana 238
quoted on mleccha devotees, 18 Govinda (servant)
Gaudiya Matha carried Caitanya’s waterpot, 23
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati started mis- lay at Caitanya’s door, 83
sionary activities of, 319 lay at door of Gambhira, 208
Gaudiya Vaisnavas sent for Svarapa Damodara, 85
Vrndavana Deities are life and soul of, understood all indications of Caitanya,
311 30
Cauranga-stava-kalpavrksa Govinda-lilamrta
described pastime of Caitanya and quoted on nectar of Krsna's lips, 58
cows, 115-116 quoted on scent of Krsna's body,
quoted on Caitanya and the 223-224
doorkeeper, 43-44 Grief
quoted on Caitanya’s madness, as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 243,
216-217 245
Gita-govinda Gurukula
Caitanya’s associates sang verse from, Krsna lived at Mathura’s, 237
220
Caitanya overwhelmed by reading,
278-279 H
Ramananda Riya quotes verses from,
81 Harnsa svagatam asyatanm piba payo
sung by Svarapa Damodara, 111-112 verses quoted, 239-240
Goddess of fortune Happiness
as evidence of superiority of service to burden of material destroyed, 59-60
union, 274-275 devotee doesn't care for his own, 269
effects of Krsna’s flute on, 97-98, 102 devotees attracted by material join
serves Krsna's lotus feet, 234 prakrta-sahajiyas, 271
Copis of Radha and Krsna, 274
breasts of resemble cakravaka birds, Hari
162-165 holy name of chanted by devotees, 56
Caitanya overwhelmed with ecstasy of, Hari-bhakti-vilasa
92-93, 206 quoted on qualifications of a devotee,
chastised Krsna in anger, 93-96 12
compared to she-elephants, 155 Hari-nama-bale pape pravrtti
compared to streaks of lightning, 157 quoted, 4
ignore regulative principles, 94-95 Hearing
Krsna as ornament for, 37-38 about Caitanya destroys three miseries,
Krsna pleased when chastised by, 270 240-241
lips of Krsna as property of, 61-62, 71 of Siksastaka increases love for Krsna,
mouths of as Krsna's spittoons, 65-66 277
pastimes of Krsna with in Yamuna, 130, Hiranyakasipu
154-166 cut by nails of Nrsirhhadeva, 28
serving Krsna as only business of, 235 Holy name
Govinda all of Supreme Lord's potencies in-
as holy name, 48, 251 vested in, 251


--- Page 349 ---
352 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Holy name Jagannatha Puri
anyone who chants is factually Aryan, Sacidevi ordered Caitanya to remain at,
14 184
anyone who constantly chants is Jagannatha-vallabha garden
greater than brahmana, 14 Caitanya entered, 218
Caitanya revived by sound of, 151 Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka
chanted by devotees while taking Caitanya overwhelmed by reading,
prasada, 56 278-279
chanted by trees and immovable plants, Jamba River
35-36 devotional service in Vrndavana com-
chanting of as means of salvation in pared to gold in, 276
Kali-yuga, 246-247 Jayadeva Gosvami
Kalidasa never uttered anything but, 3 as author of Gita-govinda, 81, 278-279
offenses against, 4 Jhadu Thakura
one who chants is intelligent, 247 belonged to bharimali (street-sweeper)
Puridasa would not utter, 35 caste, 7
Humility humble attitude of befits Vaisnava, 15
as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 245 worshiped at Sripatabati in Bhedo, 7
befits a Vaisnava, 15 ॥ worshiped Deity of $ri Madana-gopala,
Caitanya recited second Siksastaka in 8
mood of, 250-251 Jiva Gosvami
Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of,
291-292
1 Jubilation
as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 243,
Incarnations 245
of Krsna, 235, 247-248
Initiation, spiritual K
Caitanya granted Puridasa, 36
compared to alchemy, 18 Kalidasa
International Society for Krishna Conscious- as uncle of Raghunatha dasa, 5
ness ate remnants of food of all Bengali
formed to execute the order of Vaisnavas, 5, 22
Caitanya and Bhaktisiddhanta begged prasida of Jhadu Thakura, 7-12
Sarasvati, 321 Caitanya bestowed mercy upon, 22-27
chanted holy name while performing
ordinary dealings, 3-4
J drank water that washed Caitanya's
feet, 25-26
Jagadananda Pandita had full faith in Vaisnavas, 26
Caitanya derived great pleasure from, never uttered anything but holy name
181 of Krsna, 3
delivered Advaita Acarya message, 189 received remnants of Caitanya’s food,
Jagannatha Deity 29-31
as cowherd boy, 184 recited verses on qualifications of a
Caitanya saw as Krsna with His flute, 42 devotee, 12-14
Jagannatha Puri threw dice in a jest, 4
Caitanya resided at, 244 worshiped at $ripatabati in Bhedo, 7


--- Page 350 ---
General Index 353
Kaliyuga Krsna
chanting as means of salvation in, expanded Himself into as many forms
246-247 as there were gopis, 159
Karabhajana fragrance and taste of lips of, 55
quoted on chanting by incarnation of glance of, 95
Krsna, 247-248 goddesses of fortune reside at chest of,
Kim iha bahu sadanghre gayasi 236
verses quoted, 234 greatest mercy of, 33
Kirn tvacaritam asmabhir happiness of is in union with Radha, 274
verses quoted, 238 has a navel shaped like a lotus, 13
Konarka temple has no fear of killing women, 205
Caitanya carried by waves to, 133 left Vrndavana for Mathura, 201
Krsna lips of touch prasada, 46-47, 54-55
accepts role of devotee to taste ecstatic living at Gurukula in Mathura, 237
emotions, 126 makes jokes that annihilate women,
appeared within Radha’s heart, 107-108 95-96
as charitable, 235 materialists want to enjoy by sharing
as debauchee, 265-266, 268 happiness of, 269
as expert in rasa dancing, 194-195 nectar of lips of described, 57
as holy name, 251 nectar of lips of drunk by unfit, 68
as only Lord of Radha's heart, 265-266 offended the gopis, 234
as personally present five thousand one attains ecstatic love for by serving
years ago, 319 three substances, 32
as reservoir of art and culture, 199-200 Puridasa initiated into name of, 36
as son of Nanda 14431731313, 88-89, 259 Radha has right to nectar of lips of, 62
beauty of relished by Caitanya, 40 resembled a blackish cloud, 157
becomes controlled by Radha, 267-268 seen by Caitanya in Jagannatha-
bestows nectar of His hands on women, vallabha garden, 220-222
196-197 served by goddess of fortune, 235
Caitanya heard flute of, 83 smile of like camphor, 100
Caitanya’s anxiety in separation from, sounds of plunder Radha's ears, 99
208-209 Srivatsa symbol on chest of, 239
cannot give up conjugal love, 236 swan as messenger of, 240
chanting as process of worship of, 247 sweet smile of, 237
characteristics of transcendental lips of, the bumblebee sang about, 234
59-60 * the four nectarean sounds of, 102-103
chews pan, 58 thought of by Radha as Cupid, 108-109
clothing of, 197 tinkling of ornaments of attracts gopis,
compared to chief of mad elephants, 97-98
155 topics about destroy four religious prin-
compared to moon, 194-195 ciples, 236
compared to ornaments for the gopis, vibration of flute of like buttermilk,
37-38 96
curved eyebrows of attractive, 235 voice of deep as a cloud, 97-99
departure of to Mathura, 193 Yamuna and Ganges Rivers drink nectar
difficulty of giving up talks about, 235 of lips of, 73
enters Yamuna with gopis, 130 Krsnadasa Kavirdja
everyone is the resting place of, 255 as servant of Rapa Gosvami, 230


--- Page 351 ---
354 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Lotus feet of Krsna
compares himself to small, red-beaked Caitanya prays to be dust particle at,
bird, 289 259-261
describes his invalidity, 290 candala devoted to better than
describes Caitanya’s pastimes to rectify brahmana, 13
himself, 280 chanting awakens dormant love for,
offers obeisances to Vaisnava readers, 255-256
283 in hearts of queens of Dvaraka, 239
personalities by whose mercy he writes one who chants attains shelter of, 247
listed, 291-293 queens happy having been touched by,
worships lotus feet of readers, 314-315 238
Krsna-karnamrta Radha as maidservant of, 266-267
Caitanya overwhelmed by reading, scent of perfumes entire world, 317
278-279 served by Laksmi, 234
Kurari vilapasi tvar vita-nidra na sese Lotus flowers
verses, 237 faces of gopis indistinguishable from,
160
fighting between white and bluish, 162
L gopis” hands resemble red, 163-165
Krsna’'s hands resemble bluish, 162-165
Laksmi Radha floated on water like, 158-159
called unintelligent by gopis, 234 Love
Lalita-madhava as cause of incomprehensible acts,
quoted on Radha’s description of Krsna, 231-232
195 Love of God
Lamentation as pure in Vrndavana, 276
as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 103, attained by service to three substances,
245 32
burden of material destroyed, 59-60 awakened by chanting, 248
Caitanya recited second verse of Sik- Caitanya instructed devotees in tasting,
sdstaka in mood of, 250-251 1-2 টন
Liberation increased by hearing Siksastaka, 277
destroyed by topics of Krsna, 236 living entities taste only a particle of
Living entities ocean of, 128-129
hearing about Caitanya destroyed mis-
eries caused by, 241 M
holy name has all good fortune for, 249,
251
touch only a particle of ocean of love Madana-mohana Deity
for Krsna, 128-129 gave the order making Krsnadasa
Logic Kavirdja write, 292
pastimes of Krsna not in jurisdiction of, Madhupa kitava-bandho
231 verses quoted, 233
Lotus feet of Caitanya Maha-bhagavata
Advaita Acarya offers obeisances to, not to be imitated, 4
187 Mahabharata
worshiped to achieve ecstatic love, 115 cited on story of Pingala, 107


--- Page 352 ---
General Index 355
Mahabharata Mind
quoted on belief in prasada of pious, 48 hearing about Caitanya destroys mis-
quoted on occupation as standard of eries of, 241
brahmana, 16 of Caitanya unsteady, 211-212
quoted on sadra becoming brahmana, Mileccha
16 as brahmana and pandita when devo-
quoted on unimportance of birth status, tee, 18
15 Moon
Maha-mantra Caitanya’s face like, 216-217
Caitanya prayed to be able to chant, Krsna as, 194-195
260-261 of Caitanya’s emotions rising, 278
chanted by Caitanya all night, 83, 208 Mrgayur iva kapindrarir vivyadhe
how one should chant, 253-256 verses quoted, 235
Mahesvara Mukunda
pleased by chastity of brahmana’s wife, as name of Krsna, 235
273 business of to smear kurikuma on
Mantra queens, 238
chanted by Krsna's flute, 71-72
Manu-samhita
quoted on meaning of upadhyaya, 313 N
Markendeya Purana
cited on chastity of brahmana’s wife,
273 Na calasi na vadasy udara-buddhe
Markendeya Rsi verses quoted, 239
cursed leprotic brahmana, 273 Nadia
Material existence Jagadananda Pandita saw Sacidevi at,
chanting destroys sinful condition of, 182
249-250 Nanda Maharaja
miseries of stopped by chanting, family of like ocean of milk, 195
248-249 Narada Muni
mentality of, 269 quoted on real qualification of
Matter brahmanas, 17
unconscious made conscious by Krsna's Narayana
lips, 60-61 goddess of fortune lives on heart of,
Megha 51111175 tavam asi dayito 274-275
verses quoted, 239 Narendranatha Mallika
Mental speculation induced A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami to
pure devotees have no motive for, 12 meet Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, 319
Mercy Na $adra bhagavad-bhaktas
of Caitanya causeless, 38-39 verses quoted, 17
of Krsna causeless, 259 Navadvipa
of Supreme Lord bestowed in holy Jagadananda Pandita saw Sacidevi at,
names, 251 181
providence has no, 201 Netre minilayasi naktam adrsta-bandhus
Mind verses quoted, 238
Caitanya in ecstatic love could not sus- Nilacala
tain, 275-276 See: Jagannatha Puri


--- Page 353 ---
356 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Nityananda Prabhu Pastimes of Caitanya
Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of, compared to ocean of milk, 288
291-292 in Antya-lila synopsized, 293-310
service of servants of bestows faith, 240 Krsnadasa Kavirdja offers obeisances to,
Vindavana dasa Thakura as favorite 281-282
devotee of, 284-285 like the unlimited sky, 284
Nondevotees must be heard with full faith, 232-233
one should not see the faces of, 17-18 Vrndavana dasa Thakura is Vyasadeva
prakrta-sahajiyas as, 271 of, 284-285
Nrsirhhadeva Pastimes of Krsna
as all-pervasive Supreme Lord, 28-29 Caitanya fully merged in, 133
as giver of pleasure to Prahlada Maha- discussed by Caitanya and His associ-
rdja, 28 ates, 51
Caitanya recited verses to Deity of, hyperbole and reverse analogy dis-
27-29 played in, 164-165
Nrsirhha Purana not understandable by logic and argu-
quoted on prayers to Lord Nrsirmha, ment, 231
28-29 seen by Caitanya, 122
with gopisin Yamuna, 154-166
Peacefulness
Oo as brahminical quality, 16
Perfection
Offenses attained by one who chants, 252
prevent development of attachment for Phela
chanting, 251 anyone who obtains is fortunate, 48-49
Pilgrimage
already performed by one who chants
P the holy name, 14
Pingala
Padma Purana Caitanya remembered words of,
cited on chastity of brahmana’s wife, 106-107
273 Pious acts
quoted on destiny of the caste-con- nectar of Krsna's lips obtained after
scious, 18 many, 58
quoted on nondevotee brahmanas, performed by Krsna's flute, 71-72
17-18 performed by Krsna’'s mercy, 49-50
quoted on nondevotees as sadras, 17 persons without cannot believe in
Paramananda Pur? prasada, holy name, or devotees, 48
Caitanya sent gifts to Sacidevi on order prasada made available only by, 55-56
of, 184 Pleasure
received Lord Jagannatha’s prasada, in hearing topics of Caitanya, 241
51-52 Prahlada Maharaja
Paramatma Nrsirnhadeva as giver of pleasure to,
sits in the heart with all His devotees 28
and associates, 320 Prakrta-sahajiyas
Pastimes of Caitanya activities of that pollute the process of
Ananta and Ganes$a unable to describe, devotional service, 257
125, 279-280 considered to be nondevotees, 271


--- Page 354 ---
General Index 357
Prakrta-sahajiyas R
regard their own happiness as aim of
life, 269 Radha-Copinatha Deities
Prasada as life and soul of Caudiya Vaisnavas,
Caitanya constantly remembered, 50 311
ecstatic symptoms of Caitanya when Radha-Govinda Deities
tasting, 46 as life and soul of Gaudiya Vaisnavas,
fragrance of pleases the mind, 54 311
mixed with saliva of Krsna, 48 Radha-Madana-mohana Deities
must be tasted with great faith and as life and soul of Gaudiya Vaisnavas,
devotion, 55-56 311 †
of Jagannatha Deity given to Caitanya, Radharani
45 Caitanya explains eighth verse of
persons without pious acts cannot Siksastaka in mood of, 264-276
believe in, 48 Caitanya recites verse spoken by, 97,
touched by the nectar of Krsna’'s lips, 104-105
46-47, 54-55 engages others in Krsna's service,
Prayers 269-270
of Caitanya to Krsna, 256-262 hankers for scent of Krsna's body, 223
of Krsnadasa Kavirdja to lotus feet of happiness of is in service of Krsna,
readers, 293 274
Pride increase in Caitanya's ecstasy of,
given up by gopi with a little endeavor, 192-193
270 inquired from Visakha, 194
Pridelessness insane speech of to bumblebee,
as characteristic of Vaisnava, 255 233-237
Priya-rava-padani bhasase Krsna appeared in heart of, 107-108
verses quoted, 239 Krsna caused pain to, 237
Priya-sakha punar Krsna quarreled with, 160-161
verses quoted, 236 Krsna's happiness as the goal of life of,
Providence 268-269
chastised by gopis, 200-204 Krsna signaled to with His flute, 89
condemned by Radha, 194-195 made sweetmeats for Krsna, 170
took form of ^< ठा, 203-204 pastimes of Krsna and in Yamuna,
Pure devotee 154-166
as worshipable as Krsna, 12 pure heart of, 264
have no way of sensing happiness ex- quoted on nectar of Krsna's lips, 58
cept by seeing Krsna's, 269 taken into deep water by Krsna,
no one can understand activities by, 4 158-159
prakrta-sahajiyas are not, 257 thought of Krsna as Cupid, 108-109
who write of Lord's activities con- Raghunitha dasa Gosvami
sidered like Vyasa, 285, 287-288 as author of Cauranga-stava-kalpavrksa,
Puridasa 43, 115-116, 216
as son of Sivananda Sena, 34 as instructing spiritual master of
chanted holy name within his mind, Krsnadasa Kavirdja, 312
37 Kalidasa as uncle of, 5
composed and recited a verse, 37-39 Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of,
would not utter holy name, 35 291-292


--- Page 355 ---
358 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Ramacandra Sacrifice
Krsna’s acts in incarnation of, 235 already performed by one who chants
Ramananda Raya the holy name, 14
as author of Jagannatha-vallabha- in age of Kali is chanting of holy name,
ndtaka, 278-279 247
Caitanya held neck of, 193 Sakrd adhara-suddharn svam
Caitanya tasted songs and verses with, verses quoted, 234
244-245 Salvation
quoted verses complementary attainable in Kali yuga by chanting,
Caitanya’s ecstasy, 81 246-247
received prasada of Lord Jagannatha, 52 Sanatana Gosvami
recited verses from Bhagavatam, 57 exemplifies humble Vaisnava, 15
sang to Caitanya, 229 Krsnadasa Kaviraja writes by mercy of,
sang to pacify Caitanya’s heart and 291-292
mind, 206-207 Sankara Pandita
Rasa dance as ‘the pillow of अ Caitanya
Caitanya explained verses concerning, Mahaprabhu”, 213
122-123 Caitanya wrapped him with His quilt,
gopis entered arena of in ecstasy, 93 215
imitated by Caitanya, 122 Sankirtana
Krsna mitigated fatigue of in Yamuna, performed to revive Caitanya, 151
130 Sannydsa
Regulative principles Caitanya mad to accept vow of, 183
Advaita Acarya expert in, 190 in 1958 A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami ac-
ignored by gopis, 94-95 cepted, 320
Religious principles Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
destroyed by topics of Krsna, 236 received prasada of Lord Jagannatha, 52
given up by gopis, 235 Satisfaction
vanquished by Krsna's lips, 59-60 as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 245
Remembrance Self-control
as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 103 as brahminical quality, 16
Renunciation Sense gratification
of household affairs suitable, 236 destroyed by topics of Krsna, 236
Rapa Gosvami devotee falls down who is satisfied
as author of Lalita-madhava, 195 with, 271
Krsnadasa Kaviraja writes by mercy of, fruitive workers pretend to serve Krsna
291-292 for, 269
materially absorbed persons only in-
terested in, 53
no trace of in Vindavana, 276
5 Separation from Krsna
awoke distress, lamentation and
humility in Caitanya, 262
Sacidevi Caitanya continuously overwhelmed
Caitanya stayed at Jagannatha Puri on by, 244
order of, 184 Caitanya floated in ocean of, 121
gifts of Caitanya to, 184-185 Caitanya'’s in mood of Radha, 192-193


--- Page 356 ---
General Index 359
Sesa-khande caitanyera ananta vilasa $rimad-Bhagavatam
verses quoted, 287 quoted on qualifications of a devotee,
Siksastaka 13
anyone who recites or hears increases quoted on songs of queens of Dvaraka,
love for Krsna, 277 237-240
Caitanya as author of, 249 quoted on spiritual inspiration from the
eighth verse of advertises pure love, heart, 320
276 quoted on symptoms of castes in
eighth verse of quoted, 265-266 sastras, 17
fifth verse of quoted, 259 Svarapa Damodara recited from, 91-92
first verse of quoted, 248-249 Sthito brahmana-dharmena
fourth verse of quoted, 257-258 verses quoted, 16
second verse of quoted, 251 Submissiveness
sixth verse of quoted, 261 , as ecstatic symptom of Caitanya, 243
third verse of quoted, 253-254 Sadra
unhappiness and lamentation forgotten characteristics of found in brahmana, 16
hearing second verse of, 250-251 Sadra-yonau hi jatasya
Simplicity verses quoted, 16
as brahminical quality, 16 Sadra tu yad bhavel
Sitadevi verses quoted, 16
Ramacandra attached to, 235 Sukadeva Gosvami
Siva described Vidura, 213-214
Ganesa as son of, 125 Supplication
Sivananda Sena as ecstatic symptom of Radha, 264
Puridasa as son of, 34 Supreme Lord
Skanda Purana Caitanya as, 220, 316
quoted on belief in prasada by pious, expands Himself by holy. names, 251
48 explains who is His devotee, 12
Spiritual master sits in the heart with all His devotees
representative of bona fide is Vyasa, and associates, 320
285 Sarpanakha
faith of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami in Ramacandra cut off nose of, 235
service of his, 320 Susyad-ghradah karsita bata
S$rimad-Bhagavatam , verses quoted, 239
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami published Sva-pakam iva nekseta
First Canto of in India, 320 verses quoted, 17
Caitanya overwhelmed by reading, Svarapa Damodara
278-279 acts as exorcist for fisherman, 145-146
cited on story of Pingala, 107 Caitanya tasted songs and verses with,
quoted on chanting by incarnation of 244-245
Krsna, 247-248 explains intention of Puridasa, 36
quoted on gopis’ chastisement of provi- knew secret of Advaita’'s message,
dence, 201 189-190
quoted on insane speech of Radha, Krsnadasa Kavirdja writes by mercy of,
233-237 291-292
quoted on Krsna's lips, 57 made Caitanya lie down, 207
quoted on Krsna's water sports, 130 received prasada of Lord Jagannatha, 52


--- Page 357 ---
360 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Svaripa Damodara Vv
recited verses concerning rasa dance,
123 Vaisnavas
sang songs from Gita-govinda and by are already brahmanas, 18
Vidyapati, 111-112 forefathers of feel transcendental bliss,
sang songs suited to Caitanya’s emo- 74-75
tions, 81 give respect to everyone, 255
sang to pacify Caitanya’s heart and humility as proper attitude of, 15
mind, 206-207, 229 Kalidasa had full faith in, 26
searched for Caitanya, 85 of any caste can purify three worlds,
taken as gopi by Caitanya, 193 17-18
took Caitanya on his lap, 111 persons without pious acts cannot
understood ecstatic emotions of believe in, 48
Caitanya, 91-92 remnants of food of bestow ecstatic
love of Krsna, 30-33
Vaisnavera kriya-mudra vijieha
T ` quoted, 4
vali
killed by Ramacandra, 235
Tailanga Vamanadeva
Caitanya lay unconscious among cows Krsna’s acts in incarnation of, 236
of, 83 Vanaprastha
Tamala tree in 1950 A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Krsna’s body compared to, 198-199 became, 320
Tattva-sagara Vasudeva ति
quoted on spiritual initiation, 18 Krsna as son of, 239
Teachings of Lord Caitanya Vayam rtam iva jihma-vyahrtam
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami as author verses quoted, 236
of, 320 Vedas
Tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye already studied by one who chants the
quoted, 320 holy name, 14
Tolerance one who teaches called upadhyaya,
as symptom of one who chants Hare 313
Krsna, 253-256 Vedavyasa
Truthfulness See: Vyasadeva
as brahminical quality, 16 Vidura
Tvam yaksmana balavatasi grhita indo Sankara Pandita compared to, 213
verses quoted, 238 Vidyapati
songs of sung by SvarGpa Damodara,
111-112
U verses from books of quoted by Rama-
nanda Raya, 81
Visakha
Uddhava Radha inquired from, 194
carried message to the gopis, 233 Visnu
Uttamasloka pleased by chastity of brahmana’s wife,
as name of Krsna, 235 273


--- Page 358 ---
General Index 361
Visrja 5117251 pada vedmy aha Women
verses quoted, 235 Krsna responsible for killing of, 66-67
Vraja of Mathura got nectar of Krsna’'s lips,
See: Vindavana 234
Vrajendra-nandana of Vrndavana like lilies, 196-197
Krsna known as, 71 World, material
decorated Krsna and gopis, 167 as void because of separation from
Caitanya’s friends in like His own life, Krsna, 262
216-217 Caitanya’s verse advertises pure love in,
compared to garden of Jagannatha- 276
vallabha, 218 nectar of Krsna's lips diminishes lamen-
eyes of residents of like cakora birds, tation in, 57
195 Worship
fruits availbale in, 168-169 in age of Kali chanting is process of, 247
inhabitants of pursue sound of Krsna's of lotus feet of readers by Krsnadasa
flute, 199 Kaviraja, 314-315
Krsna left, 201 of the Deity by Advaita, 190
women of like lilies, 196-197
wonderful trees and creepers in, 167
Vrndavana dasa Thakura Y
as favorite devotee of Nityananda,
284-285
Vyasadeva Yad-anucarita-lila-karna-piyusa-
of Caitanya’s pastimes is Vrindavana verses quoted, 236
dasa Thakura, 284-285 Yadu dynasty
will describe Caitanya’s pastimes in the Krsna as king of, 235
future, 287 Yadupati
as name of Krsna, 235
Yamuna
Krsna and gopis enter, 130
w mistaken for sea by Caitanya, 131
pastimes of Krsna and gopis in, 154-166
water of was crystal clear, 159
Women as universally purifying, 73
body of Krsna remains fixed in minds of, Yasya yal laksanarh proktam
197-198 quoted, 17
complete annihilation of by Krsna’'s Yatha kancanatam yati
jokes, 95-96 verses quoted, 18
easily available to Krsna, 235
effects of Krsna's flute on, 101-102
effects on of scent of Krsna’'s body, z
223-229
Krsna has no fear of killing, 205 Zeal
Krsna's lips disturb minds of, 60 as ecstatic symptom of Radharani, 264


--- Page 359 ---
The Author

His Divine Crace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in this world
in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent
devotional scholar and the founder of sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic In-
stitutes), liked this educated young man and convinced him to dedicate his life to
teaching Vedic knowledge. Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven
years later (1933) at Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura requested
Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge through the English language. In
the years that followed, Srila Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-
gita, assisted the Gaudiya Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance,
started an English fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and
checked the galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and
struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never stopped;
it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion, the
Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title “Bhaktivedanta.” In
1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada retired from married life, and four
years later he adopted the vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his
studies and writing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana,
where he lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and writing.
He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At Radha-Damodara,
Srila Prabhupada began work on his life's masterpiece: a multivolume translation
and commentary on the eighteen thousand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam
(Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada came to the
United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual master. Since that time,
His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes of authoritative translations,
commentaries and summary studies of the philosophical and religious classics of
India.

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila Prabhupada
was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great difficulty that he
established the International Society for Krishna Consciousness in July of 1966.
Under his careful guidance, the Society has grown within a decade to a world-
wide confederation of almost one hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes
and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vindavana, an experimental Vedic com-
munity in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of New Vrndavana,
now a thriving farm community of more than one thousand acres, his students
have since founded several similar communities in the United States and abroad.

363


--- Page 360 ---
364 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and second-
ary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in Dallas, Texas. The
school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the beginning of 1975 the enroll-
ment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large international
center at $ridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also the site for a
planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the magnificent Krsna-
Balarama Temple and International Guest House in Vrndavana, India. These are
centers where Westerners can live to gain firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his books. Highly
respected by the academic community for their authoritativeness, depth and
clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in numerous college courses. His
writings have been translated into eleven languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust, established in 1972 exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace,
has thus become the world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian
religion and philosophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s
most recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —completed
by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months —on the Bengali religious classic Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Stila Prabhupada has circled
the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to six continents. In
spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada continues to write prolifically.
His writings constitute a veritable library of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature
and culture.


--- Page 361 ---
(continued from front flap)

Madhya-lila (the middle period), the
longest of the three, is a detailed narration of
Sri Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels
throughout India as a renounced mendicant,
teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and
mystic. Finally, Antya-lila (the final period)
concerns the last eighteen years of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s manifest presence, spent in
semiseclusion in Jagannatha Puri, Orissa.
During these final years, Sri Caitanya drifted
deeper and deeper into trances of spiritual
ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and
literary history, Eastern or Western.

, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, was a great saint and
a confidential disciple and student of
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the renowned
ascetic saint who was one of the most inti-
mate disciples of Sri Caitanya. He com-
menced work on the text while in his late
nineties and in failing health, as he vividly
describes in the text itself: “I have now be-
come too old and disturbed in invalidity.
While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot
remember anything, nor can | see or hear
properly. Still I write, and this is a great
wonder.” That he nevertheless completed,
under such debilitating conditions, the
greatest literary gem of medieval India is
surely one of the wonders of literary history.

The English translation and commentary is
the work of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished scholar and teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought.
He himself is a disciplic descendant of Sri
Caitanya, and his intimate familiarity with
the precepts of Caitanya Mahaprabhu emi-
nently qualifies him to present this impor-
tant classic to the English-speaking world.
The ease and clarity with which he ex-
pounds upon Sri Caitanya’s precepts lures
even a reader totally unfamiliar with Indian
religious tradition into a genuine under-
standing and appreciation of this profound
and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, pre-
sented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
represents a contribution of major impor-
tance to the intellectual, cultural and
spiritual life of contemporary man.


--- Page 362 ---
| ny AN > /' ১ (রি হ্জ নত IF NT, 3) ANTYA-LILA
[= fie, १५४ as. i ৬১ ” ry Volume 5
1 स) क + We চা )
lo 8 41" भ {^ Ty CAITANYA-
২ Ws 77 ON CY Ve '₹ ১. भु पवने
iy He) > (1111011
ক্রু ক १.१ न्व , ६ Ty 3
1 0 #9 gf » এ ९ ५५३ ১ ५ fe >
 ) ईडन fi | wy ~ he) 2. ४1,
+ ९६ ~< | APSR TE Ne Mgnt. ।
तनि & 4 ০৬৭ | ay, / = कि 4 4 |
0) 5 RAY x Po Thee ~. £ vs, ॐ;
qed , + ६ | \ ^ 3 #
१ ध ApS | ৬৮. ६ HIS DIVINE GRACE
৪. "क. - ৬০ व int A.C.Bhaktivedanta
It | ४4 १, ray A # 1 ४ (८, .
TN NY বই > পে नी
৬৯) 4 र ` a upada
॥ कः A পে
| च्‌ Te) il की Ah 4 f
| 3 9 + yr. न 4 id
we . ya ५ Sa EL
= | > +১
प्लक्ष कण শা আত — 24
| ~ 2 विः “pc
1 এপ দে পল খে Yh wm
| 97 Caitanya-caritamta is the authorized work on the life and teachings ग
Krsna Caitanya—the philosopher, saint, spiritual preceptor, mystic and divine
incarnation who pioneered a great social and religious movement in Sixteenth
Century India. His teachings, which embody the highest philosophical and
theolgoical truths, have affected centuries of religious and philosophical
thinkers until the present day.
This translation and commentary on the original Bengali text is the work of —
His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (pictured above), the
world's most distinguished scholar and teacher of Indian thought and culture
and author of the best-selling Bhagavad-gitd As It Is. This translation of Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta represents a contribution of major importance to the TE
intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man. (1 भ BHAKTIVEDANTA
E BOOK TRUST

