
--- Page 1 ---
.
Introduction

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is the principal work on the life and teachings of $i
Krsna Caitanya. 6 Caitanya is the pioneer of a great social and religious move-
ment which began in India a little less than five hundred years ago and which has
directly and indirectly influenced the subsequent course of religious and phi-
losophical thinking not only in India but in the recent West as well.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu is regarded as a figure of great historical significance.
However, our conventional method of historical analysis —that of seeing a man as
a product of his times —fails here. ri Caitanya is a personality who transcends the
limited scope of historical settings.

At a time when, in the West, man was directing his explorative spirit toward
studying the structure of the physical universe and circumnavigating the world in
search of new oceans and continents, $rf Krsna Caitanya, in the East, was in-
augurating and masterminding a revolution directed inward, toward a scientific
understanding of the highest knowledge of man’s spiritual nature.

The chief historical sources for the life of 57 Krsna Caitanya are the kadacas (di-
aries) kept by Murari Gupta and Svaripa Damodara Gosvami. Murari Gupta, a
physician and close associate of Sri Caitanya’s, recorded extensive notes on the
first twenty-four years of Sri Caitanya’s life, culminating in his initiation into the
renounced order, sannydsa. The events of the rest of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's for-
ty-eight years are recorded in the diary of Svaripa Damodora Gosvami, another of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s intimate associates.

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is divided into three sections called lilas, which literally
means “pastimes” —Adi-lila (the early period), Madhya-lila (the middle period)
and Antya-lila (the final period). The notes of Murari Gupta form the basis of the
Adi-lila, and Svarapa Damodara’s diary provides the details for the Madhya- and
Antya-lilas.

The first twelve of the seventeen chapters of Adi-lila constitute the preface for
the entire work. By referring to Vedic scriptural evidence, this preface establishes
Sri Caitanya as the avatara (incarnation) of Krsna (God) for the age of Kali—the
current epoch, beginning five thousand years ago and characterized by material-
ism, hypocrisy and dissension. In these descriptions, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
is identical with Lord Krsna, descends to liberally grant pure love of God to the
fallen souls of this degraded age by propagating sankirtana—literally,
“congregational glorification of God” —especially by organizing massive public
chanting of the maha-mantra (Great Chant for Deliverance). The esoteric purpose
of Lord Caitanya’s appearance in the world is revealed, his co-avataras and prin-
cipal devotees are described and his teachings are summarized. The remaining
portion of Adi-lil4, chapters thirteen through seventeen, briefly recounts his
divine birth and his life until he accepted the renounced order. This includes his
childhood miracles, schooling, marriage and early philosophical confrontations, as
well as his organization of a widespread sarikirtana movement and his civil disobe-
dience against the repression of the Mohammedan government.

vi


--- Page 2 ---
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

The subject of Madhya-/ila, the longest of the three divisions, is a detailed nar-
ration of Lord Caitanya's extensive and eventful travels throughout India as a
renounced mendicant, teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and mystic. Dur-
ing this period of six years, ऽ Caitanya transmits his teachings to his principal dis-
ciples. He debates and converts many of the most renowned philosophers and
theologians of his time, including Sankarites, Buddhists and Muslims, and incor-
porates their many thousands of followers and disciples into his own burgeoning
numbers. A dramatic account of Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s miraculous activities at
the giant Jagannatha Cart Festival in Orissa is also included in this section.

Antya-lila concerns the last eighteen years of Sr Caitanya’s manifest presence,
spent in semiseclusion near the famous Jagannatha temple at jagannatha Puri in
Orissa. During these final years, ri Caitanya drifted deeper and deeper into
trances of spiritual ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and literary history,
Eastern or Western. Sri Caitanya’s perpetual and ever-increasing religious
beatitude, graphically described in the eyewitness accounts of Svariipa Damodara
Gosvami, his constant companion during this period, clearly defy the investigative
and descriptive abilities of modern psychologists and phenomenologists of
religious experience.

The author of this great classic, Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami, born in the year
1507, was a disciple of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, a confidential follower of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Raghunatha dasa, a renowned ascetic saint, heard and
memorized all the activities of Caitanya Mahaprabhu told to him by 5५५२008
Damodara. After the passing away of $ri Caitanya and Svaripa Damodara,
Raghunatha dasa, unable to bear the pain of separation from these objects of his
complete devotion, traveled to Vrndavana, intending to commit suicide by jump-
ing from Govardhana Hill. In Vrndavana, however, he encountered Ripa Gosvami
and Sanatana Gosvami, the most confidential disciples of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
They convinced him to give up his plan of suicide and impelled him to reveal to
them the spiritually inspiring events of Lord Caitanya's later life. Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Cosvami was also residing in Vrndavana at this time, and Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami endowed him with a full comprehension of the transcendental life of ri
Caitanya.

By this time, several biographical works had already been written on the life of
का Caitanya by contemporary and near-contemporary scholars and devotees.
These included Sri Caitanya-carita by Murari Gupta, Caitanya-marigala by Locana
dasa Thakura and Caitanya-bhagavata. This latter text, a work by Vindavana dasa
Thakura, who was then considered the principal authority on $i Caitanya'’s life,
was highly revered. While composing his important work, Vrndavana dasa, fearing
that it would become too voluminous, avoided elaborately describing many of
the events of ऽ Caitanya’s life, particulary the later ones. Anxious to hear of these
later pastimes, the devotees of Vrndavana requested Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami,
whom they respected as a great saint, to compose a book to narrate these

vii


--- Page 3 ---
$ri Caitanya-caritamrta
episodes in detail. Upon this request, and with the permission and blessings of the
Madana-mohana Deity of Vrndavana, he began compiling $ri Caitanya-caritamrta,
which, due to its biographical excellence and thorough exposition of Lord
Caitanya’s profound philosophy and teachings, is regarded as the most significant
of biographical works on 6 Caitanya.

He commenced work on the text while in his late nineties and in failing health,
as he vividly describes in the text itself: “I have now become too old and dis-
turbed in invalidity. While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot remember any-
thing, nor can | see or hear properly. Still | write, and this is a great wonder.” That
he nevertheless completed, under such debilitating conditions, the greatest liter-
ary gem of medieval India is surely one of the wonders of literary history.

This English translation and commentary is the work of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of In-
dian religious and philosophical thought. His commentary is based upon two
Bengali commentaries, one by his teacher Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami,”
the eminent Vedic scholar who predicted, “The time will come when the people
of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,” and the other by
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta's father, Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is himself-a disciplic
descendant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he is the first scholar to execute
systematic English translations of the major works of $ri Caitanya's followers. His
consummate Bengali and Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with the
precepts of Sri Krsna Caitanya are a fitting combination that eminently qualifies
him to present this important classic to the English-speaking world. The ease and
clarity with which he expounds upon difficult philosophical concepts lures even a
reader totally unfamiliar with Indian religious tradition into a genuine understand-
ing and appreciation of this profound and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, presented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, represents a contribution of major im-
portance to the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man.

viii


--- Page 4 ---
CHAPTER 4
Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service
In his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following sum-
mary of the Fourth Chapter. Passing along the path of Chatrabhoga and coming to
Vrddhamantreévara, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu reached the border of Orissa. On
His way He enjoyed transcendental bliss by chanting and begging alms in dif-
ferent villages. In this way He reached the celebrated village of Remuna, where
there is a Deity of Gopinatha. There He narrated the story of Madhavendra Puri, as
He had heard it from His spiritual master, Tsvara Purl. The narration is as follows.

One night while in Govardhana, Madhavendra Puri dreamed that the Gopala
Deity was within the forest. The next morning he invited his neighborhood friends
to accompany him to excavate the Deity from the jungle. He then established the
Deity of Sri Gopalaji on top of Govardhana Hill with great pomp. Gopala was
worshiped, and the Annakdta festival was observed. This festival was known
everywhere, and many people from the neighboring villages came to join. One
night the Copala Deity again appeared to Madhavendra Puriin a dream and asked
him to go to Jagannatha Puri to collect some sandalwood pulp and smear it on the
body of the Deity. Having received this order, Madhavendra Puri immediately
started for Orissa. Traveling through Bengal, he reached Remuna village and there
received a pot of condensed milk (ksira) offered to the Deity of Gopinathaji. This
pot of condensed milk was stolen by Gopinatha and delivered to Madhavendra
Puri. Since then, the Copinatha Deity has been known as Ksira-cora-gopinatha,
the Deity who stole the pot of condensed milk. After reaching Jagannatha Puri,
Madhavendra Puri received permission from the King to take out one mana of
sandalwood and eight ounces of camphor. Aided by two men, he brought these
things to Remuna. Again He saw in a dream that Copala at Govardhana Hill
desired that very sandalwood to be turned into pulp mixed with camphor and
smeared over the body of Gopinathaji. Understanding that that would satisfy the
Gopala Deity at Govardhana, Madhavendra Puri executed the order and returned
to Jagannatha Puri.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu narrated this story for Lord Nityananda Prabhu and
other devotees and praised the pure devotional service of Madhavendra Purl.
When He recited some verses composed by Madhavendra Puri, He went into an
ecstatic mood. But when He saw that many people were assembled, He checked
Himself and ate some sweet rice prasada. Thus He passed that night, and the next
moming He again started for Jagannatha Puri.

1


--- Page 5 ---
2 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 1
RA দাতুং চোরয়ন্‌ ক্ষীরভাণ্ডং
গোপীনাথঃ ক্ষীরচোরাভ্িধোহভুৎ |
জীগে।পালঃ প্রাদুরাসীদ্বশঃ जन्‌
যঙপ্রেম্ণ। ভং মাধবেন্দ্রং নতোহস্মি ॥ ১॥
yasmai 0300 corayan ksira-bhandam ९
gopinathah ksira-corabhidho ‘bhat
$ri-gopalah pradurasid vasah san
yat-premna tarh madhavendrari nato ‘smi
SYNONYMS
yasmai —unto whom; datum —to deliver; corayan—stealing; ksira-bhandam—
the pot of sweet rice; gopinathah—Gopinatha; ksira-cora—stealer of a pot of
sweet rice; abhidhah—celebrated; abhat—became; sri-gopalah —4n Gopaila
Deity; pradur-asit—appeared; vasah—captivated; san—being; yat-premna—
by his love; tam —unto him; madhavendram —Madhavendra Puri, who was in the
Madhva-sampradaya; natah asmi—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
॥ offer my respectful obeisances unto Madhavendra Puri, who was given a
pot of sweet rice stolen by Sri Gopinatha, celebrated thereafter as ksira-cora.
Being pleased by Maiadhavendra Puri’s love, Sri Gopila, the Deity at
Govardhana, appeared to the public vision.
PURPORT
Bhaktivinoda Thakura annotates that this Gopala Deity was originally installed
by Vajra, the grandson of Krsna. Madhavendra Puri rediscovered Gopala and
established Him on top of Govardhana Hill. This Gopala Deity is still situated at
Nathadvara and is under the management of descendants of Vallabhacarya. The
worship of the Deity is very luxurious, and one who goes there can purchase
varieties of prasada by paying a small price.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় গৌরচন্দ্র জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda


--- Page 6 ---
Text 5] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 3
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya gauracandra—all glories to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya nityanan-
da—all glories to Lord Nityananda; jaya advaita-candra—all glories to Advaita
Prabhu; jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda—all glories to the devotees of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityananda Prabhu!
All glories to Advaita Prabhu! And all glories to all the devotees of Lord
Caitanya!
TEXTS 3-4
নীলাভ্রিগমন, জগন্নাথ-দরশন |
সার্বভৌম ভট্টাচার্য-প্রভুর মিলন ॥ ৩ ॥
এ সব লীলা প্রভুর দাস বৃন্দাবন |
বিস্তারি” করিয়াছেন উত্তম বর্ণন ॥ ৪ ॥
niladri-gamana, jagannatha-darasana
sarvabhauma bhattacarya-prabhura milana
e saba lila prabhura dasa vrndavana
vistari’ kariyachena uttama varpana
SYNONYMS
niladri-gamana—going to Jagannatha Puri; jagannatha-darasana—visiting the
temple of Lord Jagannatha; sarvabhauma bhattacarya—with Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; prabhura—of the Lord; milana—meeting; € saba—all these; lila—
pastimes; prabhura—of the Lord; dasa vrndavana—Vrndavana dasa Thakura;
vistari’—elaborating; kariyachena—has done; uttama—very nice; varpana—de-
scription.
TRANSLATION
The Lord went to Jagannatha Puri and visited Lord Jagannatha’s temple. He
also met with Sarvabhauma Bhattiacarya. All these pastimes have been very
elaborately explained by Vrndavana dasa Thakura in his book Caitanya-
bhagavata.
TEXT 5
সহজে বিচিত্র মধুর চৈতন্য-বিহার |
বৃন্দাবনদাস-মুখে অন্বতের ধার ॥ ¢ ॥


--- Page 7 ---
4 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
sahaje vicitra madhura caitanya-vihara
vrndavana-dasa-mukhe amrtera dhara

SYNONYMS
sahaje—naturally; vicitra—wonderful; madhura—sweet; caitanya—of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vihara—the activities; vrndavana-dasa—of Vrndavana
dasa Thakura; mukhe —from the mouth; amrtera—of nectar; dhara—shower.
TRANSLATION
By nature all the activities of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are very wonderful
and sweet, and when they are described by Vrndavana dasa Thakura, they be-
come like a shower of nectar.
TEXT 6
অতএব তাহা বণিলে হয় পুলকরুক্তি |
wg করি” বর্ণি যদি তৈছে নাহি नचि ॥ ৬ ॥
ataeva taha varnile haya punarukti
dambha kari’ vari yadi taiche nahi sakti
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; taha—such activities; varnile—if describing; haya—there is;
punarukti—repetition; dambha kari’—being proud; varni—I describe; yadi—if;
taiche—such; nahi—there is not; sakti—power.
TRANSLATION
Therefore | very humbly submit that since these incidents have already
been nicely described by Vrndavana dasa Thakura, | would be very proud to
repeat the same thing, and this would not be very good. | do not have such
powers.
TEXT 7
চৈতন্যমঙ্গলে যাহ। করিল বর্ণন ।
TECH সেই লীল। করিয়ে सून ॥ ৭ ॥
caitanya-marngale yaha karila varnana
satra-rape sei lila kariye sacana


--- Page 8 ---
Text 9] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 5
SYNONYMS
caitanya-mangale—in the book named Caitanya-mangala; yaha —whatever;
karila varnana—has described; satra-ripe—in the form of short codes; sei lila—
those pastimes; kariye sicana—I shall present.
TRANSLATION
1 am therefore presenting in short codes all those events already described
in the Caitanaya-mangala [now known as Caitanya-bhagavatal by Vrndavana
dasa Thakura.
TEXT 8
তাঁর সূত্রে আছে, (ङ्‌ न। কৈল वर्नन |
यथोकयकि९ করি” সে লীল। কথন ॥ ৮ ॥
tanra satre ache, tenha na kaila varpana
yatha-katharicit kari’ se lila kathana
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; satre—in the codes; ache—there are; tenha—he; na kaila var-
nana—did not describe; yatha-katharicit—something of them; kari’—doing; se —
these; lila—of pastimes; kathana—narration.
TRANSLATION
Some of the incidents in his codes he did not describe elaborately, and so |
shall try to describe them in this book.
TEXT 9
TET SIA পায়ে করি নমস্কার ।
তাঁর পায় অপরাধ ना হউক আমার ॥ > ॥
ataeva tanra paye kari namaskara
tanra paya aparadha na ha-uk amara
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; tarnra paye—at his lotus feet; kari—I| do; namaskara—obei-
sances; tanra pdya—to the lotus feet of Vrndavana dasa Thakura; aparadha—
offense; na—not; ha-uk—let it happen; amara—my.


--- Page 9 ---
6 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lild, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
1 thus offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Vrndavana dasa
Thakura. | hope that I will not offend his lotus feet by this action.
TEXT 10
এইমত মহাপ্রভু एनिन। नोनाण्टन |
চারি ভক্ত সঙ্গে কৃষ্ণকীর্তন-কুমুুহলে ॥ ১০ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu calila nilacale
cari bhakta sange krsna-kirtana-kutahale
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calila—pro-
ceeded; nilacale—toward Jagannatha Puri; cari bhakta—four devotees; sarge —
with; krsna-kirtana—for chanting of the holy name of Krsna; kutihale —in great
eagerness.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu proceeded toward Jagannatha Puri with four of
His devotees, and He chanted the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Krsna
mantra, with great eagerness.
TEXT 11
few! লানি” একদিন এক গ্রাম গিয়া ।
আপনে বহুত অন্ন আনিল মাশিয় ॥ >> ॥
bhiksa lagi’ eka-dina eka grama giya
apane bahuta anna anila magiya
SYNONYMS
bhiksa lagi’—for prasada; eka-dina—in one day; eka grama—to one village;
giya—going; apane—personally; bahuta—a great quantity; anna—of rice and
other eatables; anila—brought; magiya—begging.
TRANSLATION
Each day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally went to a village and col-
lected a great quantity of rice and other grains for the preparation of prasada.


--- Page 10 ---
Text 13] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 7
TEXT 12
পথে বড় বড় দালী विन्न नाडि করে।
তা” সবারে Fo করি” আইলা রেমুণারে ॥ ১২ ॥
pathe bada bada dani vighna nahi kare
ta’ sabare krpa kari’ ila remunare
SYNONYMS
pathe —on the way; bada bagda—big, big; dani—toll or tax collector; vighna—
hindrances; nahi—not; kare —make; ta’ sabare —to all of them; krpa kari’—show-
ing mercy; aila—reached; remunare —the village known as Remuna.
TRANSLATION
There were many rivers on the way, and at each river there was a tax collec-
tor. They did not hinder the Lord, however, and He showed them mercy.
Finally He reached the village of Remuna.
PURPORT
There is a railway station named Baleévara, and five miles to the west is a village
named Remuna. The temple of Ksira-cora-gopinatha still exists in this village, and
within the temple the samadhi tomb of Rasikananda Prabhu, the chief disciple of
Syamananda Gosvami, can still be found.
TEXT 13
CARH TS গোপীনাথ পরম-মোহন |
ভক্তি করি” কৈল প্রভু তার দরশন ॥ ১৩ ॥
remunate gopinatha parama-mohana
bhakti kari’ kaila prabhu tanra darasana
SYNONYMS
remupate —in that village of Remuna; gopinatha—the Deity of Gopinatha;
parama-mohana—very attractive; bhakti kari’—with great devotion; kaila—did;
prabhu—the Lord; tarra—of Him; darasana—uvisit.
TRANSLATION
The Deity of Gopinitha in the temple at Remuna was very attractive. Lord
Caitanya visited the temple and offered His obeisances with great devotion.


--- Page 11 ---
8 इष Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 4
TEXT 14
তার পাছদপদ্ম নিকট প্রণাম করিতে |
তার পুৎ্প-চুড়। পড়িল প্রভুর মাথাতে ॥ ১৪ ॥
tanra pada-padma nikata pranama karite
tanra puspa-cida padila prabhura mathate
SYNONYMS
tanra pada-padma—the lotus feet of Gopinatha; nikata—near; pranama—obei-
sances; karite—while offering; tanra—His; puspa-cida—helmet of flowers;
padila—fell down; prabhura—of the Lord; mathate—on the head.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offered His obeisances at the lotus feet of
the Gopinatha Deity, the helmet of flowers on the head of Gopinatha fell down
and landed on the head of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 15
ছুড়া পাঞ। মহাপ্রভুর আনন্দিত মন |
TG নৃত্যগীত কৈল नग] ভক্তগণ ॥ ১৫ ॥
০003 pana mahaprabhura anandita mana
bahu nrtya-gita kaila 1275 bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
cada pana—getting the helmet; mahaprabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; anandita—pleased; mana—the mind; bahu—various kinds; nrtya-
gita—dancing and chanting; kaila—performed; 12575 -- ५५111; bhakta-gana—the
devotees.
TRANSLATION
When the Deity’s helmet fell upon His head, ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu be-
came very pleased, and thus He chanted and danced in various ways with His
devotees.
TEXT 16
প্রভুর প্রভাব দেখি” প্রেম-রূপ-গুণ |
বিস্মিত হইল! গোপীনাথের দাসগণ ॥ ১৬ ॥


--- Page 12 ---
Text 18] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 9
prabhura prabhava dekhi’ prema-rapa-guna
vismita ha-ila gopinathera dasa-gana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; prabhava—the influence; dekhi’—seeing; prema-
rapa—His beauty; guna—and His qualities; vismita ha-ila—became struck with
wonder; gopinathera—of the Gopinatha Deity; dasa-gana—the servants.
TRANSLATION
All the servants of the Deity were struck with wonder due to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s intense love, His exquisite beauty and His transcendental
qualities.
TEXT 17
नांनोक्रटनं প্রীত্যে কৈল প্রভুর সেবন |
সেই রাত্রি তাই প্রভু করিল। বঞ্চন ॥ ১৭ ॥
nana-rape pritye kaila prabhura sevana
sei ratri tahan prabhu karila vaficana
SYNONYMS
nana-rape—in various ways; pritye—on account of love; kaila—did;
prabhura—of the Lord; sevana—service; sei ratri—that night; tahan—there;
prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karila—did; vaiicana—passing.
TRANSLATION
Because of their love for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they served Him in many
ways, and that night the Lord stayed at the temple of Gopinatha.
TEXT 18
মহাগ্রসাদ-ক্ষীর-লে।ভে AZo শ্রভু SU |
পূর্বে ঈশ্বরপুরী ভারে কহিয়াছেন কথা ॥ ১৮ ॥
mahaprasada-ksira-lobhe rahila prabhu tatha
parve isvara-puri tanre kahiyachena katha
SYNONYMS
maha-prasada—for the remnants of foodstuff; ksira—sweet rice; lobhe—in
eagerness; rahila—remained; prabhu—the Lord; tatha—there; parve—before


--- Page 13 ---
10 ও Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
that; i$vara-puri—Iévara Puri, His spiritual master; tanre—unto Him;
kahiyachena—told; katha—a narration.
TRANSLATION
The Lord remained there because He was very eager to receive the rem-
nants of sweet rice offered to the Gopinatha Deity, having heard a narration
from His spiritual master, ISvara Puri, of what had once happened there.
TEXT 19
্ষীরচোর। গোপীনাথ' প্রসিদ্ধ ভার नाम ।
ভক্তগণে কহে প্রভু সেই ত' আখ্যান ॥ ১৯ ॥
‘ksira-cora gopinatha’ prasiddha tanra nama
bhakta-gane kahe prabhu sei ta’ akhyana
SYNONYMS
ksira-cora gopinatha—the Gopinatha who stole the pot of sweet rice; prasid-
dha—very famous; tarra nama—His name; bhakta-gane—to all the devotees;
kahe —tells; prabhu—the Lord; sei ta’ akhyana—that narration.
TRANSLATION
That Deity was known widely as Ksira-cora-gopinatha, and Caitanya
Mahaprabhu told His devotees the story of how the Deity became so famous.
TEXT 20
পূর্বে মাধবপুব্রীর লাগি” ক্ষীর কৈল त्रि ।
অতএব নাম হৈল ্ষীরচোর। হরি” ॥ ২০ ॥
10016 madhava-purira lagi’ ksira kaila curi
ataeva nama haila ‘ksira-cora hari’
SYNONYMS
parve —formerly; madhava-purira lagi’—for Madhavendra Puri; ksira—sweet
rice; kaila—did; curi—steal; ataeva—therefore; nama—the name; haila—be-
came; ksira-cora hari—the Lord who stole a pot of sweet rice.
TRANSLATION
Formerly the Deity had stolen a pot of sweet rice for Madhavendra Puri;
therefore He became very famous as the Lord who stole the sweet rice.


--- Page 14 ---
Text 23] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 1
TEXT 21
পূর্বে জীমাধব-পুবরী ख टेन Twas |
ভজ্রমিতে, ভ্রমিতে গেলা গিরি গোবর্ধন ॥ ২১ ॥
parve sri-madhava-puri ila vrndavana
bhramite, bhramite gela giri govardhana
SYNONYMS
parve —formerly; sri-madhava-puri —Srila Madhavendra Pun; &ild—came;
vrndavana—to Vrndavana; bhramite bhramite—while traveling; gela—went; giri
govardhana—to the hill known as Covardhana.
TRANSLATION
Once, $ri Miadhavendra Puri traveled to Vrndivana, where he came upon
the hill known as Govardhana.
TEXT 22
প্রেমে মন্ত_নাহি তার রাত্র্িদিন-ভ্ঞান ।
ক্ষণে উঠে, ক্ষণে পড়ে, নাহি স্থানাস্থান ॥ ২২ ॥
preme matta, —nahi tanra ratri-dina-jAana
ksane uthe, ksane pade, nahi sthanasthana
SYNONYMS
preme matta—maddened in the ecstasy of love of Krsna; nahi —there was not;
tanra—of him; ratri-dina-jiana—knowledge of day and night; ksane—some-
times; uthe—stands; ksane pade—sometimes falls; nahi—there was no sense;
sthana-asthana—a proper place or not.
TRANSLATION
Maiadhavendra Puri was almost mad in his ecstasy of love of Godhead, and he
did not know whether it was day or night. Sometimes he stood up, and some-
times he fell to the ground. He could not discriminate whether he was in a
proper place or not.
TEXT 23
শৈল ने्चिकम। করি” গোবিন্দকুণ্ডে আসি” ।
छान FF, বৃচক্ষতলে আছে সন্ধ্যায় AFA ॥ ২৩ ॥


--- Page 15 ---
12 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
Saila parikrama kari’ govinda-kunde asi’
snana kari, vrksa-tale ache sandhyaya vasi’
SYNONYMS
Saila—the hill;  parikrama —circumambulation;  kari’—finishing; govinda-
kunde —to the bank of the Covinda-kunda; dsi’—coming there; snana kari —tak-
ing a bath; vrksa-tale—under the shade of a tree; ache—is; sandhyaya—in the
evening; vasi’—resting.
TRANSLATION
After circumambulating the hill, Madhavendra Puri went to Govinda-kunda
and took his bath. He then sat beneath a tree to take his evening rest.
TEXT 24
গোপাল-বালক এক তুগ্ধ-ভাও ep |
আসি” আগে ধরি” কিছু বলিল হাসিয়া ॥ ২৪ ॥
gopala-balaka eka dugdha-bhanda lana
asi’ age dhari’ kichu balila hasiya
SYNONYMS
gopala-balaka—cowherd boy; eka—one; dugdha-bhanda laia—taking a pot
of milk; asi’—coming; age dhari’—holding it in front; kichu—something; balila—
said; hasiya—smiling.
TRANSLATION
While he was sitting beneath a tree, an unknown cowherd boy came with a
pot of milk, placed it before Madhavendra Puri, and, smiling, addressed Him
as follows.
TEXT 25
পুণ্রী, এই एफ Al কর ভুমি शान ।
মাগি” কেনে নাহি খাও, किव। কর ধ্যান ॥२९॥
puri, ei dugdha lana kara tumi pana
magi’ kene nahi khao, kiba kara dhyana
SYNONYMS
puri—O Madhavendra Puri; ei dugdha lana —taking this milk; kara tumi pana—
drink it; magi’—by begging; kene—why; nahi—not; khao—you eat; kiba—
what; kara—do; dhyana—meditation.


--- Page 16 ---
Text 28] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 13
TRANSLATION
‘Please drink the milk I have brought. Why don’t you beg some food to
eat? What kind of meditation are you undergoing?’’
TEXT 26
বালকের সৌন্দর্খে ATT হুইল गटखोस ।
তাহার মধুব্র-বাকে্যে গেল ভোক-শোষ ॥ ২৬ ॥
balakera saundarye purira ha-ila santosa
tahara madhura-vakye gela bhoka-sosa
SYNONYMS
balakera—of the boy; saundarye—in the beauty; purira—of Madhavendra
Purl; ha-ila—was; santosa—very much satisfaction; tahara—of Him; madhura-
vakye—by the sweet words; gela—forgot; bhoka-$osa—all hunger and thirst.
TRANSLATION
When he saw the beauty of that boy, Madhavendra Puri became very
satisfied. Hearing His sweet words, he forgot all hunger and thirst.
TEXT 27
AR कटक, (क তুমি, F&I তোমার वाज ।
কেমতে জানিলে, আমি করি উপৰবাস ॥ २१ ॥
puri kahe, —ke tumi, (8037) tomara vasa
ke-mate janile, ami kari upavasa
SYNONYMS
puri kahe—Madhavendra Puri inquired from the boy; ke tumi—who are You;
(८३/80) tomara vasa—where do You reside; ke-mate —how; janile—You know;
ami kari upavasa—I| am fasting.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri said: “Who are You? Where do You reside? And how did
You know that I was fasting?’
TEXT 28
বালক কহে,-__গোপ আমি, এই গ্রামে वजि ।
আমার গ্রামেতে (TZ না রহে উপবাসী ॥ ২৮ ॥


--- Page 17 ---
14 ও Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
balaka kahe, —gopa ami, ei grame vasi
amara gramete keha na rahe upavasi
SYNONYMS
balaka kahe —the boy said; gopa ami—| am a cowherd boy; ei grame vasi—I
reside in this village; amara gramete—in My village; keha—anyone; na—not;
rahe —remains; upavasi—without food.
TRANSLATION
The boy replied: “Sir, | am > cowherd boy, and I reside in this village. In My
village, no one fasts.
TEXT 29
কেহ खन्न मागि" খায়, कङ्‌ FHT |
অযাচক-জনে আমি দিয়ে ত? আহার ॥ ২৯ ॥
keha anna magi’ khaya, keha dugdhahara
ayacaka-jane ami diye ta’ ahara
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; anna—food; magi’—begging; khaya—eats; keha—some-
one; dugdha-ahara—drinks milk; ayacaka-jane—a person who does not beg;
ami—1; diye —supply; ta’—certainly; ahara—eatables.
TRANSLATION
“In this village a person can beg food from others and thus eat. Some
people drink only milk, but if a person does not ask anyone for food, 1 supply
him all his eatables.
TEXT 30
জল নিতে স্ত্রীগণ তোমারে দেখি” গেল ।
MAT द्र দিয়৷ আমারে পাঠাইল ॥ ৩০ ॥
jala nite stri-gana tomare dekhi’ gela
stri-saba dugdha diya amare pathaila
SYNONYMS
jala nite—for bringing water; stri-gana—the women; tomare—you; dekhi’
gela—saw you and went; stri-saba—all the women; dugdha—milk; diya—giving;
amare —Me; pathaila—have sent.


--- Page 18 ---
Text 33] ওলা Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 15
TRANSLATION
“The women who come here to take water saw you, and they supplied Me
with this milk and sent Me to you.”
TEXT 31
গোদোহন করিতে চাহি, শীঘ্র আমি सांव ।
আরবার আসি আমি এই shy गदेव ॥ ৩১ ॥
go-dohana karite cahi, Sighra ami yaba
ara-bara asi ami ei bhanda la-iba
SYNONYMS
go-dohana karite cahi—| want to milk the cows; sighra—very soon; ami
yaba—| must go; ara-bara—again; asi—coming back; ami—I; ei—this; bhanda—
pot; la-iba—will take it back.
TRANSLATION
The boy continued: 41 must go very soon to milk the cows, but I shall return
and take back this milk pot from you.”
TEXT 32
এত বলি” গেলা বালক ন৷ দেখিয়ে सान्न ।
মাধব-পুর্রীর চিত্তে হইল চমৎকার ॥ ৩২ ॥
eta bali’ gela balaka na dekhiye ara
madhava-purira citte ha-ila camatkara
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; gela—went; balaka—the boy; na—not; dekhiye —could
be seen; ara—any more; madhava-purira—of Madhavendra Puri; citte —in the
mind; ha-ila—there was; camatkara—wonder.
TRANSLATION
Saying this, the boy left the place. Indeed, He suddenly could be seen no
more, and Madhavendra Puri’s heart was filled with wonder.
TEXT 33
2% शंन করি” She yas) রাখিল |
বাট দেখে, সে বালক পুনঃ A আইল ॥ ৩৩ ॥


--- Page 19 ---
16 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
dugdha pana kari’ bhanda dhuna rakhila
bata dekhe, se balaka punah na aila
SYNONYMS
dugdha—miilk; pana kari’—drinking; bhanda—the pot; dhuia—washing;
rakhila—kept aside; bata dekhe—looks at the path; se balaka—the boy; punah—
again; na aila—did not come back.
TRANSLATION
After drinking the milk, Madhavendra Puri washed the pot and put it aside.
He looked toward the path, but the boy never returned.
TEXT 34
বসি” নাম লয় AY, नि নাহি হয়।
শেষরাজত্ঞে তন্দ্রা হৈল,__বাহুবৃত্তি-লয় ॥ ৩৪ ॥
vasi’ nama laya puri, nidra nahi haya
Sesa-ratre tandra haila, —bahya-vrtti-laya
SYNONYMS
vasi’—sitting there; nama laya—chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra: puri—
Madhavendra Puri; nidra—sleep; nahi haya—there was not; sesa-ratre—at the
end of the night; tandra—dozing; haila—there was; bahya-vrtti—of external ac-
tivities; laya—stop.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri could not sleep. He sat and chanted the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra, and at the end of the night he dozed a little, and his external
activities stopped.
TEXT 35
স্বপ্নে দেখে, সেই বালক সম্মুখে खौ जिय |
এক कूट न গেল হাতেতে शत्ति<9| ॥ ৩৫ ॥
svapne dekhe, sei balaka sammukhe asia
eka kunje lana gela hatete dharina
SYNONYMS
svapne—in a dream; dekhe—he saw; sei balaka—the very same boy; sam-
mukhe —in front; asia —coming; eka kuiije—in one of the bushes; lafid—taking
him; gela—went; hatete dhariia—holding him by the hand.


--- Page 20 ---
Text 38] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 17
TRANSLATION
In a dream Madhavendra Puri saw the very same boy. The boy came before
him and, holding his hand, took him to a bush in the jungle.
TEXT 36
কুঞ্জ দেখাঞা কহে,_ আমি এই कूट FT|
শীত-বৃষ্টি-বাতাগ্িতে মহা-দুঃখ পাই ॥ ৩৬ ॥
kunja dekhana kahe,—ami ei kunje ra-i
Sita-vrsti-vatagnite maha-duhkha pai
SYNONYMS
kunija dekhafia—while showing him the bush; kahe —He says; ami —I; ei —this;
kurije —in the bush; ra-i—reside; sita-vrsti—in chilly cold and in showering rain;
vata—in severe wind; agnite—and in scorching heat; maha-duhkha pai —I am €>
periencing great pain.
TRANSLATION
The boy showed Madhavendra Puri the bush and said: “I reside in this
bush, and because of this | suffer very much from severe cold, rain showers,
winds and scorching heat.
TEXT 37
গ্রামের লোক আনি” আমা কাঢ়” কুঞ্জ হৈতে।
পর্বভ-উপরি লঞা রাখ ভালমতে ॥ ৩৭ ॥
gramera loka ani’ ama kadha’ (008/৭ haite
parvata-upari laid rakha bhala-mate
SYNONYMS
gramera—of the village; loka—the people; ani’—bringing; ama—Me; kadha’—
take out; kufja haite—from this bush; parvata-upari—on the top of the hill;
1204 —taking Me; rakha—keep Me; bhala-mate —very nicely.
TRANSLATION
‘Please bring the people of the village and get them to take Me out of this
bush. Then have them situate Me nicely on top of the hill.
TEXT 38
এক মঠ कत्रि" रां] করহ স্থাপন |
वच्छ শীতল জলে কর Aww मार्जन ॥ ৩৮ ॥


--- Page 21 ---
18 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
eka matha kari’ tahan karaha sthapana
bahu Sitala jale kara sri-anga marjana
SYNONYMS
eka—one; matha—temple; kari’—constructing; tahan—there; karaha—do;
sthapana—installment; bahu—much; sitala—cold; jale—in water; kara—do; sri-
anga—My transcendental body; marjana—washing.
TRANSLATION
‘Please construct a temple on top of that hill,” the boy continued, “and in-
stall Me in that temple. After this, wash Me with large quantities of cold water
so that My body may be cleansed.
TEXT 39
বছদিন তোমার পথ করি নিরীক্ষণ।
কৰে আলি” মাধব আমা করিবে সেবন ॥ ৩৯ ॥
bahu-dina tomara patha kari niriksana
kabe asi’ madhava ama karibe sevana
SYNONYMS
bahu-dina—many days; tomara—of you; patha—the path; kari—l do;
niriksana—observing; kabe—when; asi’—coming; madhava—Madhavendra Puri;
ama—Me; karibe—he will do; sevana—serving.
TRANSLATION
“For many days 1 have been observing you, and 1 have been wondering,
‘When will Madhavendra Puri come here to serve Me?’
TEXT 40
COIR প্রেমবশে করি” ८जव। অঙ্গীকার |
দর্শন দিয়া নিস্তারিব जकन সংসার ॥ ৪০ ॥
tomara prema-vase kari’ seva angikara
darsana diya nistariba sakala sarnsara
SYNONYMS
tomara—your; prema-vase—by being subjugated by the love; kari’—doing;
seva—of service; angikara—acceptance; darsana diya—giving audience;
nistariba—I| shall deliver; sakala—all; sarhsara—the material world.


--- Page 22 ---
Text 43] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 19
TRANSLATION
‘I have accepted your service due to your ecstatic love for Me. Thus 1 shall
appear, and by My audience all fallen souls will be delivered.
TEXT 41
জ্ঞগোপাল” নাম মোর,-_গোবর্ধনধারী |
বজ্ঞের স্থাপিত, আমি रें] অধিকারী ॥ ৪১ ॥
‘Sri-gopala’ nama mora, — govardhana-dhari
vajrera sthapita, ami ihan adhikari
SYNONYMS
$ri-gopala nama—the name Sri Gopala; mora—My; govardhana-dhari—the
lifter of Govardhana Hill; vajrera—by Vajra, the grandson of Krsna; sthapita—in-
stalled; ami—I; ihan—here; adhikari—the authority.
TRANSLATION
“My name is Gopala. | am the lifter of Govardhana Hill. | was installed by
Vajra, and here 1 am the authority.
TEXT 42
শৈল-উপরি হৈতে আমা कूटछ Ftp! |
ম্লেচ্ছ-ভয়ে সেবক মোর গেল नैनां 3॥ ॥ 8२ ॥
Saila-upari haite ama kunje lukana
mleccha-bhaye sevaka mora gela palana
SYNONYMS
saila-upari—the top of the hill; haite—from; ama—Me; kufje—in the bushes;
lukana—concealing; mleccha-bhaye—from fear of the Mohammedans; sevaka—
servant; mora—My; gela—went; palana—running away.
TRANSLATION
“When the Mohammedans attacked, the priest who was serving Me hid Me
in this bush in the jungle. Then he ran away out of fear of the attack.
TEXT 43
সেই হৈতে রহি আমি এই क्‌ ॐ-न्दाटन |
खान হৈল TIBET আমা TIP সাবধানে ॥ ৪৩ ॥


--- Page 23 ---
20 ওঃ Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lil4, Ch. 4
sei haite rahi ami ei kufija-sthane
bhala haila aila ama kadha savadhane
SYNONYMS
sei haite —from that time; rahi—reside; ami—I; ei—this; kufja-sthane —in the
bush; bhala haila—it was very good; aila—you have come; ama—Me; kadha—
take out; savadhane—with care.
TRANSLATION
‘Since the priest went away, | have been staying in this bush. It is very good
that you have come here. Now just remove Me with care.”
TEXT 44
এত বলি” সে-বালক wg {a टेकल |
জাগিয়। মাধবপুব্রী বিচার করিল ॥ 88 ॥
eta bali’ se-balaka antardhana kaila
jagiya madhava-puri vicara karila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; se-balaka—that very boy; antardhana kaila—disap-
peared; jagiya—awakening; madhava-puri—Madhavendra Puri; vicara—con-
sideration; karila—made.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, the boy disappeared. Then Madhavendra Puri woke up
and began to consider his dream.
TEXT 45
Bp দেখিনু मूख লারিনু চিনিতে।
এত বলি” প্রেমাবেশে পড়িল ভুমিতে ॥ ৪৫ ॥
$ri-krsnake dekhinu mudi narinu cinite
eta bali’ premavese padila bhamite
SYNONYMS
$ri-krsnake dekhinu—saw Lord Krsna personally; mudi—I; narinu—was un-
able; cinite—to identify; eta bali’—saying this; prema-avese—in the ecstasy of
love; padila—fell down; bhiamite—on the ground.


--- Page 24 ---
Text 48] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 21
TRANSLATION
Maidhavendra Puri began to lament: “I saw Lord Krsna directly, but | could
not recognize Him!’’ Thus he fell down on the ground in ecstatic love.
TEXT 46
ক্ষণেক রোদন করি, मन टेकन ধীর |
আজ্জা-পালন লাগি” হইলা WE ॥ ৪৬ ॥
ksaneka rodana kari, mana kaila dhira
ajna-palana lagi’ ha-ila susthira
SYNONYMS
ksaneka—for some time; rodana kari—crying; mana—mind; kaila—made;
dhira—pacified; ajia—the order; palana—of executing; lagi’—for the matter; ha-
ila—became; su-sthira—silent.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri cried for some time, but then he fixed his mind on ex-
ecuting the order of Gopila. Thus he became tranquil.
TEXT 47
প্রাতঃস্লান করি” AM গ্রামমধ্যে গেলা |
সব লোক একত্র করনি” কহিতে লাগিল ॥ ৪৭ ॥
pratah-snana kari’ puri grama-madhye gela
saba loka ekatra kari’ kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
pratah-snana—morning bath; kari’—finishing; puri—Madhavendra Puri;
grama-madhye—within the village; gela—entered; saba loka—all the people;
ekatra kari’—assembling; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
After taking his morning bath, Madhavendra Puri entered the village and
assembled all the people. Then he spoke as follows.
TEXT 48
গ্রামের ঈশ্বর ८डायोज्र-(नोव्धनधान्नो |
FTP আছে, চল, SICH বাহির যে করি ॥ ৪৮ ॥


--- Page 25 ---
22 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
gramera i$vara tomara——govardhana-dhari
kunje ache, cala, (3776 bahira ye kari
SYNONYMS
gramera—of the village; iSvara—the proprietor; tomara—your; govardhana-
dhari—the lifter of Govardhana Hill; kufije ache—in the bushes in the jungle;
cala—let us go; tanre—Him; bahira ye kari—take out.
TRANSLATION
‘The proprietor of this village, Govardhana-dhari, is lying in the bushes. Let
us go there and rescue Him from that place.
TEXT 49
অত্যন্ত নিবিড় কুঞ্জ, _ নারি প্রবেশিতে।
কুঠারি কোদালি লহ দ্বার করিতে ॥ ৪৯ ॥
atyanta nivida kufja,——nari pravesite
kuthari kodali laha dvara karite
SYNONYMS
atyanta—very much; nivida—dense; kufja—bushes; nari—we are not able;
pravesite—to enter; kuthari—chopper; kodali—spade; laha—take; dvara
karite —to make a way.
TRANSLATION
“The bushes are very dense, and we will not be able to enter the jungle.
Therefore take choppers and spades to clear the way.”
TEXT 50
শুনি” লেক Sta সঙ্গে চলিল। হরিষে।
To कोष দ্বার করি” করিল প্রবেশে ॥ ৫০ ॥
Suni’ loka (37773 53785 calila harise
kunja kati’ dvara kari’ karila pravese
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; loka—the people; tarnra—him; sange—with; calila—went;
harise —with great pleasure; kufja kati’—cutting the bushes; dvara—a way;
kari’—making; karila pravese —entered.


--- Page 26 ---
Text 53] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 23
TRANSLATION
After hearing this, all the people accompanied Madhavendra Puri with great
pleasure. According to his directions, they cut down bushes, cleared a path
and entered the jungle.
TEXT 51
ঠাকুর দেখিল माो-ङ्दन আচ্ছাদিত |
দেখি' जव লোক হৈল আনন্দে বিস্মিত ॥ es ॥
thakura dekhila mati-trpe acchadita
dekhi’ saba loka haila anande vismita
SYNONYMS
thakura—the Deity; dekhila—they saw; mati—with dirt; trpe—and grass; ac-
chadita—covered; dekhi’—seeing; saba loka—all the people; haila—became;
anande—with pleasure; vismita—amazed.
TRANSLATION
When they saw the Deity covered with dirt and grass, they were all struck
with wonder and pleasure.
TEXT 52
আবরণ দুর করি” করিল বিদিতে |
মহা-ভারী ঠাকুর- কেহ নারে চালাইতে ॥ ৫২ ॥
avarana dara kari’ karila vidite
maha-bhari thakura——keha nare calaite
SYNONYMS
avarana—the covering; dara kari’—clearing away; karila vidite—declared;
maha-bhari—very heavy; thakura—the Deity; keha—anyone; nare—not able;
calaite—to cause to move.
TRANSLATION
After they cleansed the body of the Deity, some of them said: “The Deity is
very heavy. No one person can move Him.”
TEXT 53
মহা-মহা-বলিষ্ট লোক একত্র করিঞ।৷ |
পর্বত-উপরি গেল 2A ঠাকুর Aw ॥ ৫৩ ॥


--- Page 27 ---
24 ওঃ Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lil, Ch. 4
maha-maha-balistha loka ekatra karina
parvata-upari gela puri thakura lana
SYNONYMS
maha-maha-balistha—who are very strong; loka—persons; ekatra karifia—
assembling; parvata-upari—to the top of the hill; gela—went; puri—Madha-
vendra Puri; thakura lana—taking the Deity.
TRANSLATION
Since the Deity was very heavy, some of the stronger men assembled to car-
ry Him to the top of the hill. Madhavendra Puri also went there.
TEXT 54
পাথরের সিংহাসনে ঠাকুর বসাইল |
TT এক পাথর পৃষ্ঠে অবলম্ব দিল ॥ ৫৪ ॥
patharera sithhasane thakura vasaila
bada eka pathara prsthe avalamba dila
SYNONYMS
patharera—of stone; simha-asane —on a throne; thakura—the Deity; vasaila—
installed; bada—big; eka—one; pathara—stone; prsthe—at the back; avalam-
ba—support; dila—gave.
TRANSLATION
A big stone was made into a throne, and the Deity was installed upon it.
Another big stone was placed behind the Deity for support.
TEXT 55
গ্রামের ত্রাহ্মণ जव नव ঘট লঞ৷ |
গোবিন্দ-কুণ্ডের জল আমিল ifs ॥ ৫৫ ॥
gramera brahmana saba nava ghata lana
govinda-kundera jala anila chanina
SYNONYMS
gramera—of the village; brahmana—brahmana priests; saba—all; nava—nine;
ghata—water pots; lafna—bringing; govinda-kundera—of the lake known as
Govinda-kunda; jala—the water; anila—brought; chanifia—filtering.


--- Page 28 ---
Text 57] Sri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 25
TRANSLATION
All the brahmana priests of the village gathered together with nine water
pots, and water from Govinda-kunda lake was brought there and filtered.
TEXT 56
नव শতঘট জল LFA TANS |
नाना AY-CSAY বাজে, স্ত্রীগণ গায় AS ॥ ৫৬ ॥
nava sata-ghata jala kaila upanita
nana vadya-bheri baje, stri-gana gaya gita
SYNONYMS
nava—nine; Sata-ghata—hundreds of water pots; jala—water; kaila—made;
upanita—brought; nana —various; vadya—musical sounds; bheri—bugles;
baje —vibrate; stri-gana—all the women; gaya—chant; gita—various songs.
TRANSLATION
When the Deity was being installed, nine hundred pots of water were
brought from Govinda-kunda. There were musical sounds of bugles and
drums and the singing of women.
TEXT 57
(कङ्‌ গায়, কেহ নাচে, মহোৎসব হৈল।
लवि, ध्र, TS আইল গ্রামে যত ছিল ॥ ৫৭ ॥
keha gaya, keha nace, mahotsava haila
dadhi, dugdha, ghrta aila grame yata chila
SYNONYMS
keha gaya—some sing; keha nace —some dance; mahotsava haila—there was
a festival, dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—milk; ghrta—clarified butter; aila—was
brought; grame —in the village; yata—as much; chila—as there was.
TRANSLATION
During the festival at the installation ceremony, some people sang and some
danced. All the milk, yogurt and clarified butter in the village was brought to
the festival.


--- Page 29 ---
26 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 58
ভোগ-সামগ্রী আইল সম্দেশাদি य |
নানা উপহার, তাহ IES পারি কত ॥ ৫৮ ॥
bhoga-samagri aila sandesadi yata
nana upahara, taha kahite pari kata
SYNONYMS
bhoga-samagri—ingredients for eatables to be offered; aila—brought in; san-
desa-adi—sweetmeats; yata—all kinds of; nana—various; upahara—presenta-
tions; tadha—that; kahite—to say; pari—| am able; kata—how much.
TRANSLATION
Various foods and sweetmeats, as well as other kinds of presentations, were
brought there. | am unable to describe all these.
TEXT 59
তুলসী আদি, Fool, AW SNES অনেক |
আপনে মাধবপুত্রী কৈল অভিষেক ॥ ৫৯ ॥
tulasi adi, puspa, vastra aila aneka
apane madhava-puri kaila abhiseka
SYNONYMS
tulasi—tulasi leaves; adi—and others; puspa—flowers; vastra —garments;
aila—arrived; aneka—in great quantity; apane—personally; madhava-puri—Sri
Madhavendra Puri; kaila—executed; abhiseka—the bathing of the Deity at the
beginning of the installation ceremony.
TRANSLATION
The villagers brought a large quantity of tulasi leaves, flowers, and various
kinds of garments. Then $ri Madhavendra Puri personally began the abhiseka
[bathing ceremony].
PURPORT
In the Hari-bhakti-vilasa (6th Vilasa, verse 30) it is stated that the Deity should
be bathed in water mixed with yogurt and milk, accompanied by the sounds of
conchshells, bells and other instruments and the chanting of the mantra, om


--- Page 30 ---
Text 61] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 27
bhagavate vasudevaya namah, as well as the chanting of the Brahma-samhita
verses beginning cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-laksavrtesu surabhir
abhipalayantam.
TEXT 60
অমঙল। দূর কর” করাইল স্নান |
বহু তৈল fami কৈল জ্রীঅঙ্গ Bae ॥ ৬০ ॥
amangala 0013 kari’ karaila snana
bahu taila diya kaila sri-anga cikkana
SYNONYMS
amarigala—all inauspiciousness; dira kari’—driving away; kardila—caused;
snana—bathing; bahu—a great quantity; taila—oil; diya—applying; kaila—
made; sri-anga—the body; cikkana—glossy.
TRANSLATION
After all inauspicious things were driven away by the chanting of the
mantra, the Deity’s bathing ceremony started. First the Deity was massaged
with a large quantity of oil, so that His body became very glossy.
TEXT 61
পঞ্চগব্য, পঞ্চাম্তে FIA FAT] |
मडान्नान করাইল শত ঘট पिं | ॥ ৬১ ॥
panca-gavya, paincamrte snana karana
maha-snana karaila sata ghata dina
SYNONYMS
parica-gavya—in five kinds of products from the cow; pafca-amrte—in a
preparation made with five palatable foods; snana—bath; karana—finishing;
maha-snana—a vast bath with ghee and water; karaila—performed; sata—one
hundred; ghata—water pots; dina—with.
TRANSLATION
After the first bathing, further bathings were conducted with paiica-gavya
and then with paiicamrta. Then the maha-snana was performed with ghee and
water, which had been brought in one hundred pots.


--- Page 31 ---
28 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
PURPORT
The ingredients of parica-gavya are milk, yogurt, ghee (clarified butter), cow
urine and cow dung. All these items come from the cow; therefore we can just
imagine how important the cow is, since its urine and stool are required for
bathing the Deity. The paficamrta consists of five kinds of nectar—yogurt, milk,
ghee, honey and sugar. The major portion of this preparation also comes from the
cow. To make it more palatable, sugar and honey are added.
TEXT 62
शंनः তৈল [Fal কৈল Sow চিন্কণ |
শ্খ-গন্ধোদকে टेकन्‌ सोन সমাধান ॥ ৬২ ॥
punah taila diya (८2112 sri-anga cikkana
Sankha-gandhodake kaila snana samadhana
SYNONYMS
punah—again; taila diya—with oil; kaila—made; sri-ariga—the body of the
Deity; cikkana—shiny; sarikha-gandha-udake —in water scented with flowers
and sandalwood pulp and kept within a conchshell; kaila—did; snana—bath;
samadhana—execution.
TRANSLATION
After the maha-snana was finished, the Deity was again massaged with
scented oil and His body made glossy. Then the last bathing ceremony was
performed with scented water kept within a conchshell.
PURPORT
In his commentary on this occasion, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
quotes from the Hari-bhakti-vilasa. Barley powder, wheat powder, vermillion
powder, urad dahl powder and another powder preparation called avata (made by
mixing banana powder and ground rice) are applied to the Deity’s body with a
brush made from the hair at the end of a cow's tail. This produces a nice finish.
The oil smeared over the body of the Deity should be scented. To perform the
maha-snana, at least two and a half mounds (about twenty-four gallons) of water
are needed to pour over the body of the Deity.
TEXT 63
প্রীঅঞ্গ মার্জন করি' वच्च পরাইল |
চন্দন, তুলসী, পুষ্প-মাল। অঙ্গে দিল ॥ ৬৩ ॥


--- Page 32 ---
Text 65] $ri MiadhavendraPuri’s Devotional Service 29
s$ri-arga marjana kari’ vastra pardila
candana, tulasi, puspa-mala ange dila
SYNONYMS
$ri-anga—the transcendental body of the Deity; marjana kari’—cleansing;
vastra—garments; paraila—were put on; candana—sandalwood pulp; tulasi—
tulasi leaves; puspa-mala—garlands of flowers; arige—on the body; dila—were
placed.
TRANSLATION
After the body of the Deity was cleansed, He was dressed very nicely with
new garments. Then sandalwood pulp, tulasi garlands, and other fragrant
flower garlands were placed upon the body of the Deity.
TEXT 64
ধুপ, দীপ, করি” नाना ভোগ नोगोशेन ।
দধি-তুঞ্চ-সম্দেশাদি यङ কিছু আইল ॥ ৬৪ ॥
dhapa, dipa, kari’ nana bhoga lagaila
dadhi-dugdha-sandesadi yata kichu aila
SYNONYMS
dhapa—incense; dipa—lamp; kari’—burning; nana—various; bhoga—
foodstuffs; lagaila—were offered; dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—milk; sandesa—
sweetmeats; adi—and others; yata—as much as; kichu—some; dila—received.
TRANSLATION
After the bathing ceremony was finished, incense and lamps were burned
and all kinds of food offered before the Deity. These foods included yogurt,
milk and as many sweetmeats as were received.
TEXT 65
স্ববাসিত জল নবপাত্রে সমর্লিল |
আচমন দিয়। সে Siger নিবেদিল ॥ ৬৫ ॥
suvasita jala nava-patre samarpila
acamana diya se tambala nivedila


--- Page 33 ---
30 ওর Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
suvasita jala—scented water; nava-patre—in new pots; samarpila—were
offered; acamana diya—when offering acamana (water for washing the feet and
mouth); se—he; tambuala—pan and spices; nivedila—offered.
TRANSLATION
The Deity was first offered many varieties of food, then scented drinking
water in new pots, and then water for washing the mouth. Finally pan mixed
with a variety of spices was offered.
TEXT 66
আরাত্রিক করি” কৈল ITS वन |
wage করি” LIA আত্ম-সমর্পণ ॥ ৬৬ ॥
aratrika kari’ kaila bahuta stavana
dandavat kari’ kaila atma-samarpana
SYNONYMS
aratrika—the performance of daratrika; kari’—finishing; kaila—chanted;
bahuta—varieties; stavana—of prayers; dandavat—obeisances; kari’—offering;
kaila—did; atma-samarpana—self-surrender.
TRANSLATION
After the last offering of tambula and pan, bhoga-aratrika was performed.
Finally everyone offered various prayers and then obeisances, falling flat
before the Deity in full surrender.
TEXT 67
গ্রামের ACSF ऊन, नोनि, গোধূম-চুর্ণ ৷
সকল আনিয়। দিল পর্বত হৈল পূর্ত ॥ ৬৭ ॥
gramera yateka tandula, dali godhama-carna
sakala aniya dila parvata haila parna
SYNONYMS
gramera—of the village; yateka—all; tandula—the rice; dali—dahl; godhima-
carna—wheat flour; sakala—all; aniya—bringing; dila—offered; parvata—the
top of the hill; haila—became; parna—filled.


--- Page 34 ---
Text 69] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 31
TRANSLATION
As soon as the people of the village had understood that the Deity was
going to be installed, they had brought their entire stocks of rice, dahl and
wheat flour. They brought such large quantities that the entire surface of the
top of the hill was filled.
TEXT 68
FETA ঘরে ছিল যে goto |
जव আনাইল প্রাতে, চড়িল THA ॥ ৬৮ ॥
kumbhakara ghare chila ye mrd-bhajana
saba anaila prate, cadila randhana
SYNONYMS
kumbhakara—of the potters of the village; ghare—in the houses; chila—there
was; ye—whatever; mrd-bhdjana—clay pots; saba—all; anaila—brought;
prate —in the morning; cadila—started; randhana—cooking.
TRANSLATION
When the villagers brought their stock of rice, dahl and flour, the potters of
the village brought all kinds of cooking pots, and in the morning the cooking
began.
TEXT 69
দ্শবিপ্র অন্প Fw कटन्र এক खनं ।
জনা-পাঁচ त्राटक ব্যঞ্জনাদি নানা সূপ ॥ ৬৯ ॥
dasa-vipra anna randhi’ kare eka stapa
jana-panca randhe vyanjanadi nana sapa
SYNONYMS
dasa-vipra—ten brahmanas; anna—food grains; randhi’—cooking; kare —do;
eka stipa—in one stack; jana-panca—five brahmanas; randhe —cook; vyanjana-
adi—vegetables; nana—various; sapa—Iliquid.
TRANSLATION
Ten brahmanas cooked the food grains, and five brahmanas cooked both
dry and liquid vegetables.


--- Page 35 ---
32 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lil3, Ch. 4
TEXT 70
वच्छ भां क-कल्‌-मूट॒न विविध ব্যঞজন ।
কেহ বড়া-বড়ি-কড়ি করে fate ॥ ৭০ ॥
vanya saka-phala-male vividha ৮১৭/৭/৭/73
keha bada-badi-kadi kare vipra-gana
SYNONYMS
vanya saka—spinach of the forest; phala—fruits; male —with roots; vividha—
varieties; vyarijana—vegetables; keha—someone; bada-badi—bada and bad;
kadi—from the pulp of dahl; kare—made; vipra-gana—all the brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
The vegetable preparations were made from various kinds of spinach, roots
and fruits collected from the forest, and someone had made bada and badi by
mashing dahl. In this way the brahmanas prepared all kinds of food.
TEXT 71
জনা পাাচ-সাত রুটি করে রাশি-রাশি ।
অন্প-ব্যগুন সব AR TCS ভাসি ॥ ৭১ ॥
jana 038/703-53(3 ruti kare rasi-rasi
anna-vyanjana saba rahe ghrte bhasi’
SYNONYMS
jana parica-sata—five to seven men; ruti—chappatis; kare —make; rasi-rasi—in
great quantity; anna-vyanjana—food grains and vegetables; saba—all; rahe—
remained; ghrte—in ghee; bhasi’—overflooding.
TRANSLATION
Five to seven men had prepared a huge quantity of chappatis, which were
sufficiently covered with ghee [clarified butter], as were all the vegetables,
rice and dahl.
TEXT 72
नवयवश् गडि" তাহে পলাশের পাত।
Fw AFF Siw উপর রাশি কৈল ভাত ॥ ৭২ ॥


--- Page 36 ---
Text 74) $ri Miadhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 33
nava-vastra pati’ tahe palasera pata
randhi’ randhi’ tara upara rasi kaila bhata
SYNONYMS
nava-vastra—new cloth; pati’—spreading; tahe—on that; palasera pata—the
leaves of palasa; randhi’ randhi’—cooking and cooking; tara upara—on that;
rasi—stacked; kaila—made; bhata—rice.
TRANSLATION
All the cooked rice was stacked on palasa leaves, which were on new cloths
spread over the ground.
TEXT 73
তার পাশে করুটি-রাশির পর্বত হুইল ।
সূপ-আদি-ব্যগুন-ভাণ্ু চৌদিকে ধরিল ॥ ৭৩ ॥
tara pase ruti-rasira parvata ha-ila
sapa-adi-vyainjana-bhanda caudike dharila
SYNONYMS
tara pase —around the stack of rice; ruti—of chappatis; rasira—of stacks; par-
vata—another small hill; ha-ila—became; sdpa-adi—of all liquid vegetables;
vyaiijana—and of all other vegetables; bhanda—pots; caudike—all around;
dharila—were placed.
TRANSLATION
Around the stack of cooked rice were stacks of chappatis, and all the
vegetables and liquid vegetable preparations were placed in different pots
and put around them.
TEXT 74
তার পাশে नधि, gw, মাঠা, শিখরিনী ।
পায়স, मथनो, সর পাশে ধরি আনি” ॥ ৭৪ ॥
tara pase dadhi, dugdha, matha, sikharini
pdyasa, mathani, sara pase dhari ani’
SYNONYMS
tara pase—by the side of the vegetables; dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—milk;
matha —buttermilk; Sikharini—a sweet preparation made with yogurt; payasa—


--- Page 37 ---
34 इत Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
sweet rice; mathani—cream; sara—solid cream collected over yogurt; pase —by
the side; dhari—keeping; ani’—bringing.
TRANSLATION
Pots of yogurt, milk, buttermilk and sikharini, sweet rice, cream and solid
cream were placed alongside the vegetables.
PURPORT
In this kind of ceremony, which is called annakdata, cooked rice is stacked like a
small mountain for prasada distribution.
TEXT 75
হেনমতে खन्नक़ করিল সাজন।
পুৰী-গোসাঞ্জি গোপ।লেরে কৈল সমর্পণ ॥ १९ ॥
hena-mate anna-kata karila sajana
puri-gosani gopalere kaila samarpana
SYNONYMS
hena-mate—in this way; anna-kdta—of the Annakdta ceremony; karila—did;
sajana—performance; puri-gosani—Madhavendra Purl; gopalere—unto the
Copala Deity; kaila—did; samarpana—offering.
TRANSLATION
In this way the Annakiita ceremony was performed, and Madhavendra Puri
Gosvami personally offered everything to Gopala.
TEXT 76
অনেক ঘট ofa দিল স্থৰাসিত जन ।
বহুদিনের ক্ষুধায় গোপাল খাইল সকল ॥ qu ॥
aneka ghata bhari’ dila suvasita jala
bahu-dinera ksudhaya gopala khaila sakala
SYNONYMS
aneka ghata—many water pots; bhari’—filled; dila—offered; suvasita—
scented; jala—water; bahu-dinera—of many days; ksudhaya—by hunger;
gopala—Gopala; khaila—ate; sakala— everything.


--- Page 38 ---
Text 77] Sri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 35
TRANSLATION
Many water pots were filled with scented water for drinking, and Lord Sri
Gopala, who had been hungry for many days, ate everything offered to Him.
TEXT 77
TE গোপাল जव অন্প-ব্যগুল খাইল |
তার হস্ত-স্পর্শে পুনঃ তেমনি হইল ॥ ৭৭ ॥
yadyapi gopala 5363 anna-vyanjana khaila
tanra hasta-sparse punah temani ha-ila
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; gopala—Lord Copadla; saba—all; anna-vyanjana—dahl,
rice and vegetables; khaila—ate; tanra—His; hasta—of the hands; sparse —by the
touch; punah—again; temani—exactly as before; ha-ila—became.
TRANSLATION
Although ওল Gopaila ate everything offered, still, by the touch of His tran-
scendental hand, everything remained as before.
PURPORT
The atheists cannot understand how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ap-
pearing in the form of the Deity, can eat all the food offered by His devotees. In
Bhagavad-gita Krsna says:
(2211217) puspari phalam toyarin
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aharh bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
“If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, | will ac-
cept it” (Bg. 9.26) The Lord is parna, complete, and therefore He eats everything
offered by His devotees. However, by the touch of His transcendental hand, all
the food remains exactly as before. It is the quality that is changed. Before the
food was offered, it was something else, but after it is offered the food acquires a
transcendental quality. Because the Lord is (0८112, He remains the same even after
eating. Parpasya parnam adaya parnam evavasisyate. The food offered to Krsna is
qualitatively as good as Krsna; just as Krsna is avyaya, indestructible, the food
eaten by Krsna, being identical with Him, remains as before.


--- Page 39 ---
36 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
Apart from this, Krsna can eat the food with any one of His transcendental
senses. He can eat by seeing the food, or by touching it. Nor should one think that
it is necessary for Krsna to eat. He does not become hungry like an ordinary
human being; nonetheless, He presents Himself as being hungry, and as such, He
can eat everything and anything, regardless of quantity. The philosophy underly-
ing Krsna's eating is understandable by our transcendental senses. When our
senses are purified by constantly being engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord, we can understand Krsna’'s activities, names, forms, qualities, pastimes, and
entourage.
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
“No one can understand Krsna by the blunt material senses. But He reveals Him-
self to the devotees, being pleased with them for their transcendental loving ser-
vice unto Him!” (Bh.r.s. 1.2.234) The devotees understand Krsna through revela-
tion. It is not possible for a mundane scholar to understand Krsna and His pastimes
through research work on the nondevotional platform.
TEXT 78
ইহা অনুভব বকৈল মাধব গোসাণিও |
তার यञ গোপালের লুকান কিছু নাই ॥ ৭৮ ॥
iha anubhava kaila madhava gosani
tanra thani gopalera lukana kichu nai
SYNONYMS
iha—this; anubhava kaila—perceived; madhava gosani—Madhavendra Puri
Gosvami; tanra thani— before him; gopalera—of Lord Gopala; lukana—secret;
kichu—anything; nai—there is not.
TRANSLATION
How Gopila ate everything while the food remained the same was transcen-
dentally perceived by Madhavendra Puri Gosvami; nothing remains a secret
to the devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 79
একদিনের উদ্যোগে এঁছে মহোৎসব বকৈল।
গোপাল-প্রভাবে হয়, खट ai জানিল ॥ ৭৯ ॥


--- Page 40 ---
Text 79] $ri Miadhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 37
eka-dinera udyoge aiche mahotsava kaila
gopala-prabhave haya, anye na janila

SYNONYMS

eka-dinera udyoge—by one day's attempt; aiche—such; mahotsava—festival;
kaila—performed; gopala—of Gopala; prabhave—by the potency; haya—is
possible; anye—others; na—not; janila—know.

TRANSLATION

The wonderful festival and installation of Sri Gopalaji was arranged in one
day. Certainly all this was accomplished by the potency of Gopala. No one but
a devotee can understand this.

PURPORT

The Krsna consciousness movement has spread all over the world within a very
short time (within five years), and mundane people are very astonished at this.
However, by the grace of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, we understand that
everything is possible by the grace of Krsna. Why does Krsna have to take five
years? In five days He can spread His name and fame all over the world like
wildfire. Those who have faith and devotion to Krsna can understand that these
things happen so wonderfully by the grace ০151 Caitanya Mahaprabhu. We are
simply the instruments. In the fierce Battle of Kuruksetra, Arjuna was victorious
within eighteen days simply because Krsna’s grace was on his side.

yatra yogesvarah krsno

yatra partho dhanur-dharah
tatra rir vijayo bhatir

dhruva nitir matir mama

“Wherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna,

the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary

power and morality. That is my opinion.” (Bg. 18.78)

If the preachers in our Krsna consciousness movement are sincere devotees of
Krsna, Krsna will always be with them because He is very kind and favorable to all
His devotees. Just as Arjuna and Krsna were victorious in the Battle of Kuruksetra,
this Krsna consciousness movement will surely emerge victorious if we but remain
sincere devotees of the Lord and serve the Lord according to the advice of pre-
decessors (the six Gosvamis and other devotees of the Lord). As Narottama dasa
Thakura has stated: taridera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa, janame janame haya ei
abhilasa. The Krsna consciousness devotees must always desire to remain in the
society of devotees. Bhakta-sane vasa: they cannot go outside the Krsna con-
scious society or the movement. Within the society we must try to serve the pre-


--- Page 41 ---
38 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
decessors by preaching Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s cult and spreading His name and
fame all over the world. If we attempt this seriously within the society, it will be
successfully done. There is no question of estimating how this will happen in the
mundane sense. But without a doubt, it happens by the grace of Krsna.
TEXT 80
আচমন দিয়া দিল বিড়ক-সঞ্চয় |
আরতি করিল লোকে, করে জয় জয় ॥ ৮০ ॥
dcamana diya dila ৮/93/83-53003)3
arati karila loke, kare jaya jaya
SYNONYMS
acamana—washing water; diya—offering; dila—gave; vidaka-saficaya—betel
nuts; arati karila—arati was performed; loke—all the people; kare—chant; jaya
jaya—the words jaya jaya, “all glories”
TRANSLATION
Maidhavendra Puri offered water to Gopala for washing His mouth, and he
gave Him betel nuts to chew. Then, while arati was performed, all the people
chanted, “Jaya jaya!”’ [‘‘All glories to Gopala’].
TEXT 81
শয্যা করাইল, TSA খাট আনাঞ) |
नव বঞ্তর আনি” তার উপরে পাতিয়া ॥ ৮১ ॥
Sayya karaila, natana khata anana
nava vastra ani’ tara upare patiya
SYNONYMS
Sayya—a bedstead; karaila—made; natana—new; khata—bedstead; anana—
bringing; nava vastra—new cloth; ani’—bringing; tara—of the cot; upare—on the
top; patiya—spreading.
TRANSLATION
Arranging for the Lord's rest, $ri Madhavendra Puri brought a new cot, and
over this he spread a new bedspread and thus made the bed ready.


--- Page 42 ---
Text 84] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 39
TEXT 82
তৃণ-টাটি দিয়৷ চারিদিক্‌ আবরিল ।
উপরেতে এক টাটি দিয় আচ্ছ।দিল ॥ ৮২ ॥
trpa-tati diya cari-dik avarila
uparete eka tati diya acchadila
SYNONYMS
trpa-tati—straw mattress; diya —with; cari-dik —all around; avarila—covered;
uparete—on top; eka—one; tati—similar straw mattress; diya—with; ac-
chadila—covered.
TRANSLATION
A temporary temple was constructed by covering the bed all around with a
straw mattress. Thus there was a bed and a straw mattress to cover it.
TEXT 83
च तनो-(भोंगो यर আড্ঞ। দিল সকল ব্রান্মণে |
আ-বাল-বৃদ্ধ গ্রামের লোক FANE ভোজনে ॥ ৮৩ ॥
puri-gosani ajna dila sakala brahmane
a-bala-vrddha gramera loka karaha bhojane
SYNONYMS
puri-gosani—Madhavendra Puri; ajia—order; dila—gave; sakala brahmane —
to all the brahmanas; a-bala-vrddha—beginning from the children up to the old
persons; gramera—of the village; loka—the people; karaha—make; bhojane —
take prasada.
TRANSLATION
After the Lord was laid down to rest on the bed, Madhavendra Puri gathered
all the brahmanas who had prepared the prasida and said to them: ‘Now feed
everyone sumptuously, from the children on up to the aged!”
TEXT 84
সবে Af ক্রমে कटम ভোজন করিল ।
ত্রাহ্মণ-ত্রাহ্মলীগণে আগে খাওয়াইল ॥ ৮৪ ॥


--- Page 43 ---
40 ওলা Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
sabe vasi’ krame krame bhojana karila
brahmana-brahmani-gane age khaoyaila

SYNONYMS

sabe —all; vasi’—sitting; krame krame—by and by; bhojana karila—honored
prasada and ate it; brahmana-brahmani-gane —the brahmanas and their wives;
age—first; khaoyaila—were fed.

TRANSLATION

All the people gathered there sat down to honor the prasada, and by and by

they took food. All the brahmanas and their wives were fed first.
PURPORT

According to the varnasrama system, the brahmanas are always honored first.

Thus at the festival, the brahmanas and their wives were first offered the remnants

of food, and then the others (ksatriyas, vaisyas and sadras). This has always been

the system, and it is still prevalent in India, even though the caste brahmanas are
not qualified. The system is still current due to the varpasrama institutional rules
and regulations.
TEXT 85
অন্য গ্রামের লোক TS দেখিতে আইল ।
গোপাল (कचि সবে প্রসাদ খাইল ॥ ৮৫ ॥
anya gramera loka yata dekhite aila
gopala dekhiya saba prasada khaila
SYNONYMS
anya—other; gramera—of the villages; loka—people; yata—all; dekhite —to
see; dila—came; gopala—the Lord Copala; dekhiya—seeing; saba—all;
prasada—remnants of food; khaila—partook.
TRANSLATION
Not only did the people of Govardhana village take prasada, but also those
who came from other villages. They also saw the Deity of Gopala and were
offered prasada to eat.
TEXT 86
wR পুত্রীর প্রভাব লোকে চমৎকার |
পূর্ব অন্নকুট যেন হৈল সাক্ষাৎকার ॥ ৮৬ ॥


--- Page 44 ---
Text 86] $ri Miadhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 41
dekhiya purira prabhava loke camatkara
parva annakata yena haila saksatkara
SYNONYMS
dekhiya—by seeing; purira—of Madhavendra Puri; prabhava—the influence;
loke —all the people; camatkara—struck with wonder; parva—formerly; anna-
kata—the Annakata ceremony during the time of Krsna; yena—as if; haila—be-
came; saksatkara—directly manifest.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the influence of Madhavendra Puri, all the people gathered there
were struck with wonder. They saw that the Annakiita ceremony, which had
been performed before during the time of Krsna, was now taking place again
by the mercy of $ri Midhavendra Puri.
PURPORT
Formerly, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, all the cowherd men of Vrndavana had
arranged to worship King Indra, but they gave this worship up, following the ad-
vice of Krsna. Instead, they performed a ceremony whereby they worshiped the
cows, brahmanas and Govardhana Hill. At that time Krsna expanded Himself and
declared, “I am Govardhana Hill” In this way He accepted all the paraphernalia
and foodstuff offered to Govardhana Hill. It is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.24.26, 31-33):
pacyantam vividhah pakah
sapantah paya-sadayah
sarhyava-puapasaskulyah
sarva-dohas ca grhyatam
kalatmana bhagavata
Sakra-darpam jighamsata
proktari nisamya nandadyah
sadhv agrhnanta tad vacah
tatha ca vyadadhuh sarvam
yathaha madhusadanah
vacayitva svasty ayanam
tad dravyena giri-dvijan
upahrtya balin sarvan
adrta yavasarih gavam
godhanani puras-krtya
girin cakruh pradaksinam


--- Page 45 ---
42 ওঃ Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
‘Prepare very nice foodstuffs of all descriptions from the grains and ghee col-
lected for the yajia. Prepare rice, dahl, then halavah, pakora, puri and all kinds of
milk preparations like sweet rice, sweetballs, sandesa, rasagulla and laddu.
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, therefore advised the cowherd
men to stop the Indra-yajiia and begin the Covardhana-pija to chastise Indra,
who was very much puffed up at being the supreme controller of the heavenly
planets. The honest and simple cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, ac-
cepted Krsna's proposal and executed in detail everything He advised. They per-
formed Govardhana worship and circumambulation of the hill. According to the
instruction of Lord Krsna, Nanda Maharaja and the cowherd men called in learned
brahmanas and began to worship Govardhana Hill by chanting Vedic hymns and
offering prasada. The inhabitants of Vrndavana assembled together, decorated
their cows and gave them grass. Keeping the cows in front, they began to circum-
ambulate Govardhana Hill.”
TEXT 87
সকল ত্রাহ্মণে HF বৈঝ্ণৰ করিল।
সেই সেই সেবা-মধ্যে जव। নিয়োজিল ॥ ৮৭ ॥
sakala brahmane puri vaisnava karila
sei sei seva-madhye saba niyojila
SYNONYMS
sakala brahmane —all the brahmanas who were present there; puri—Madha-
vendra 6011 Gosvami; vaisnava karila—elevated to the position of Vaisnavas; sei
sei—under different divisions; seva-madhye—in rendering service; saba—all of
them; niyojila—were engaged.
TRANSLATION
All the brahmanas present on that occasion were initiated by Madhavendra
Puri into the Vaisnava cult, and Madhavendra Puri engaged them in different
types of service.
PURPORT
In the scriptures it is stated: sat-karma-nipuno vipro mantra-tantra-visaradah
avaisnavah. Even though a caste brahmana or a qualified brahmana is expert in the
occupational duties of a brahmana, he is not necessarily a Vaisnava. His duties are
mentioned as six brahminical engagements. Pathana means that a brahmana must
be conversant with the Vedic scriptures. He must also be able to teach others to
study Vedic literatures. This is pathana. He must also be expert in worshiping dif-
ferent deities and in performing the Vedic rituals (yajana). On account of this ya-
jana, the brahmana, being the head of society, performs all the Vedic rituals for


--- Page 46 ---
Text 88] ওল Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 43
ksatriyas, vaisyas, and Sadras. This is called yajana, assisting others in performing
ceremonies. The remaining two items are dana and pratigraha. The brahmana ac-
cepts all kinds of contributions (pratigraha) from his followers (mainly, the
ksatriyas, vaisyas and $00135). But he does not keep all the money. He keeps only
as much as required and gives the balance to others in charity (dana).

In order for such a qualified brahmana to worship the Deity, he must be a
Vaisnava. Thus the Vaisnava's position 15 superior to that of the brahmana. This
example given by Madhavendra Puri confirms that even though a brahmana may
be very expert, he cannot become a priest or servitor of the Visnu marti unless he
is initiated in vaispava-mantra. After installing the Deity of Gopala, Madhavendra
Puri initiated all the brahmanas into Vaisnavism. He then allotted the brahmanas
different types of service to the Deity. From four in the morning until ten at night
(from mangala-aratrika to sayana-aratrika), there must be at least five or six
brahmanas to take care of the Deity. Six aratrikas are performed in the temple, and
food is frequently offered to the Deity and the prasada distributed. This is the
method of worshiping the Deity according to the rules and regulations set by pre-
decessors. Our sampraddya belongs to the disciplic succession of Madhavendra
Puri, who belonged to the Madhva-sampradaya. We are in the disciplic succes-
sion of आ Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who was initiated by $i Tévara Puri, a disciple of
Madhavendra 12015. Our sampradaya is therefore called the Madhva-Gaudiya-
sampradaya. As such, we must carefully follow in the footsteps of Sri Madha-
vendra Puri and observe how he installed the Gopala Deity on top of Govardhana
Hill, how he arranged and performed the Annakdta ceremony in only one day,
and so forth. Our installation of Deities in America and in the wealthy countries of
Europe should be carried out in terms of $ri Madhavendra Puri’s activities. All the
servitors of the Deity must be strictly qualified as brahmanas and, specifically,
must engage in the Vaisnava custom of offering as much prasada as possible and
distributing it to the devotees who visit the temple to see the Lord.

TEXT 88
পুলঃ দিন-শেষে প্রভুর कब्र देल Ture |
কিছু ভোগ লাগাইল করাইল জলপান ॥ ৮৮ ॥
punah dina-sese prabhura karaila utthana
kichu bhoga lagaila karaila jala-pana
SYNONYMS

punah—again; dina-sese—at the end of the day; prabhura—of the Lord;
karaila—caused to do; utthana—rising; kichu—some; bhoga—food; lagaila—
offered; karaila—caused to do; jala—water; pana—drinking.


--- Page 47 ---
44 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
After taking rest, the Deity must be awakened at the end of the day, and im-
mediately some food and some water must be offered to Him.
PURPORT
This offering is called vaikali-bhoga, food offered at the end of the day.
TEXT 89
গোপাল প্রকট হৈল,- দেশে শব্দ देन |
আশ-পাশ গ্রামের লোক দেখিতে আইল ॥ ৮৯ ॥
gopala prakata haila, - dese 53603 haila
asa-pasa gramera loka dekhite aila
SYNONYMS
gopala—Lord Copala; prakata haila—has appeared; dese—throughout the
country; sabda haila—the news spread; asa-pasa—neighboring; gramera—of the
villages; loka—the people; dekhite aila—came to see.
TRANSLATION
When it was advertised throughout the country that Lord Gopala had ap-
peared atop Govardhana Hill, all the people from neighboring villages came
to see the Deity.
TEXT 90
একেক দিন একেক গ্রামে লইল মাগিঞা।
CHES করে जटव TANTS ₹9| ॥ >° ॥
ekeka dina ekeka grame la-ila magina
anna-kata kare sabe harasita hana
SYNONYMS
ekeka dina—one day after another; ekeka grame—one village after another;
la-ila—took permission; magifia—begging; anna-kata kare—perform the An-
nakdta ceremony; sabe—all; harasita—pleased; hafa—becoming.
TRANSLATION
One village after another was pleased to beg Madhavendra Puri to allot
them one day to perform the Annakiita ceremony. Thus, day after day, the An-
nakita ceremony was performed for some time.


--- Page 48 ---
Text 93] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 45
TEXT 91
রাত্রিকালে ঠাকুরেরে করাইয়। শয়ন |
পুবী-গোসাঞ্ি কৈল কিছু গব্য ভোজন ॥ >> ॥
ratri-kale thakurere karaiya sayana
puri-gosani kaila kichu gavya bhojana
SYNONYMS
ratri-kale —at night; thakurere—the Deity; karaiya—causing to do; sayana—
lying down for rest; puri-gosaini—Madhavendra Puri; kaila—did; kichu—some;
gavya—milk preparation; bhojana—eating.
TRANSLATION
$ri Madhavendra Puri did not eat anything throughout the day, but at night,
after laying the Deity down to rest, he took a milk preparation.
TEXT 92
প্রাতঃকালে পুনঃ তৈছে করিল সেবন |
खन्न FR] একগ্রামের আইল লোকগণ ॥ ৯২ ॥
pratah-kale punah taiche karila sevana
anna lana eka-gramera aila loka-gana
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; punah—again; taiche—just as before; karila—
rendered; sevana—service; anna lana —with food grains; eka-gramera—of one
village; aila—came; loka-gana—the people.
TRANSLATION
The next morning, the rendering of service to the Deity began again, and
people from one village arrived with all kinds of food grains.
TEXT 93
खन्न, TS, फथि, द्र, গ্রামে যত ছিল!
গোপালের আগে লোক আনিয়া ধরিল ॥ ৯৩ ॥
anna, ghrta, dadhi, 008009, —grame yata chila
gopadlera age loka aniya dharila


--- Page 49 ---
46 इषा Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS

anna—food grain; ghrta—ghee, or clarified butter; dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—
milk; grame—in the village; yata—as much; chila—as there was; gopalera age—
before the Deity Gopala; loka—all people; aniya—bringing; dharila—placed.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of the village brought to the Deity of Gopala as much food

grains, ghee, yogurt and milk as they had in their village.
PURPORT

Anna, ghrta, dadhi and dugdha are food grains, ghee, yogurt and milk. Actually
these are the basis of all food. Vegetables and fruits are subsidiary. Hundreds and
thousands of recipes can be made out of grains, vegetables, ghee, milk and
yogurt. The food offered to Gopala in the Annakdta ceremony contained only
these five ingredients. Only demoniac people are attracted to other types of food,
which we will not even mention in this connection. We should understand that in
order to prepare nutritious food, we require only grains, ghee, yogurt and milk.
We cannot offer anything else to the Deity. The Vaisnava, the perfect human
being, does not accept anything not offered to the Deity. People are often frus-
trated with national food policies, but from the Vedic scriptures we find that if
there are sufficient cows and grains, the entire food problem is solved. The vaisyas
(people engaged in agriculture and commerce) are therefore recommended in
Bhagavad-gita to produce grains and give protection to cows. Cows are the most
important animal because they produce the miracle food, milk, from which we
can prepare ghee and yogurt.

The perfection of human civilization depends on Krsna consciousness, which
recommends Deity worship. Preparations made from vegetables, grains, milk,
ghee and yogurt are offered to the Deity and then distributed. Here we can see
the difference between the East and the West. The people who came to see the
Deity of Gopala brought all kinds of food to offer the Deity. They brought all the
food they had in stock, and they came before the Deity not only to accept
prasada for themselves, but to distribute it to others. The Krsna consciousness
movement vigorously approves this practice of preparing food, offering it to the
Deity, and distributing it to the general population. This activity should be ex-
tended universally to stop sinful eating habits as well as other behavior befitting
only demons. A demoniac civilization will never bring peace within the world.
Since eating is the first necessity in human society, those engaged in solving the
problems of preparing and distributing food should take lessons from Madha-
vendra Puri and execute the Annakiata ceremony. When the people take to eating
only prasada offered to the Deity, all the demons will be turned into Vaisnavas.
When the people are Krsna conscious, naturally the government will be so also. A


--- Page 50 ---
Text 95] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 47
Krsna conscious man is always a very liberal well-wisher of everyone. When such
men head the government, the people will certainly be sinless. They will no
longer be disturbing demons. It is then and then only that a peaceful condition
can prevail in society.
TEXT 94
পূর্বদিন-প্রায় विष्ये করিল রজ্ধন ।
facia] অন্লকুট গোপাল করিল ভোজন ॥ ৯৪ ॥
parva-dina-praya vipra karila randhana
taiche anna-kata gopala karila bhojana
SYNONYMS
parva-dina-pradya—almost like the previous day; vipra—all the brahmanas;
karila—did; randhana—cooking; taiche—similarly; anna-kata—heaps of food;
gopala—the Deity of Lord Gopala; karila—did; bhojana—eating.
TRANSLATION
The next day, almost like before, there was an Annakiita ceremony. All the
brihmanas prepared foodstuffs and Gopala accepted them.
TEXT 95
ত্রজবাসী লোকের কৃষ্ণে সহজ পিরীতি |
গোপালের সহজ-প্রীতি ত্রজবাসি-প্রতি ॥ se ॥
vraja-vasi lokera krsne sahaja piriti
gopalera sahaja-priti vraja-vasi-prati
SYNONYMS
vraja-vasi—the inhabitants of Vrndavana (Vrajabhami); lokera—of the people;
krsne—unto Lord Krsna; sahaja—natural; piriti—love; gopalera—of Lord Gopala;
sahaja—natural; priti—love; vraja-vasi-prati—toward the inhabitants of Vra-
jabhami.
TRANSLATION
The ideal place to execute Krsna consciousness is Vrajabhami, or
Vrndavana, where the people are naturally inclined to love Krsna and Krsna is
naturally inclined to love them.


--- Page 51 ---
48 इष Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lils, Ch. 4
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is said: ye yatha mam prapadyante tams tathaiva bhajamy
aham. There is a responsive cooperation between the Supreme Lord Krsna and His
devotees. The more a devotee sincerely loves Krsna, the more Krsna reciprocates,
so much so that a highly advanced devotee can talk with Krsna face to face. Krsna
confirms this in Bhagavad-gita:
tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatar priti-parvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, | give the
understanding by which they can come to Me.” (Bg. 10.10) The actual mission of
human life is to understand Krsna and return home, back to Godhead. Therefore
one who is sincerely engaged in the service of the Lord with love and faith can
talk with Krsna and receive instructions by which he can speedily return home,
back to Godhead. Today many scholars defend the science of religion, and they
have some conception of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but religion with-
out practical experience of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is no religion at
all. Srimad-Bhagavatam describes this as a form of cheating. Religion means abid-
ing by the orders of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one is not
qualified to talk with Him and take lessons from Him, how can one understand the
principles of religion? Thus talks of religion or religious experience without Krsna
consciousness are a useless waste of time.
TEXT 96

মহাপ্রসাদ খাইল আলসিয়| जव (लाक |

গোপাল দেখিয়৷ সবার খণ্ডে দুঃখ-শেোক ॥ ৯৬ ॥

maha-prasada khaila asiya saba loka

gopala dekhiya sabara khande duhkha-soka

SYNONYMS
maha-prasada—spiritualized foods offered to Krsna; khaila—ate; asiya—com-

ing; saba—all; loka—people; gopala—the Deity of Sri Gopala; dekhiya—seeing;
sabara—of all of them; khande —disappears; duhkha-soka—all lamentation and
unhappiness.


--- Page 52 ---
Text 98] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 49
TRANSLATION
Throngs of people came from different villages to see the Deity of Gopala,
and they took maha-prasada sumptuously. When they saw the superexcellent
form of Lord Gopala, all their lamentation and unhappiness disappeared.
TEXT 97
অআশ-পাশ ব্রজজ্ভুমের যত গ্রাম जव |
এক এক দিন ACT করে মহোৎসব ॥ ৯৭ ॥
asa-pasa vraja-bhumera yata grama 53023
eka eka dina sabe kare mahotsava
SYNONYMS
asa-pasa—neighboring; vraja-bhamera—of Vrajabhami; yata—all; grama—
villages; saba—all; eka eka—one after another; dina—days; sabe —all; kare—
perform; mahotsava—festivals.
TRANSLATION
All the villages in neighboring Vrajabhimi [Vrndavanal became aware of
the appearance of Gopala, and all the people from these villages came to see
Him. Day after day they all performed the Annakiita ceremony.
TEXT 98
গোপাল-প্রকট শুনি” नाना দেশ হৈতে।
নানা छवः नयग) লোক লাগিল আসিতে ॥ ৯৮ ॥
gopala-prakata Suni’ nana desa haite
nana dravya lana loka lagila asite
SYNONYMS
gopala—of the Deity of Copala; prakata—appearance; suni’—hearing; nana—
various; desa—countries; haite—from; nana—various; dravya—things; 1272 --
bringing; loka—people; lagila—began; asite—to come.
TRANSLATION
In this way not only the neighboring villages but all the other provinces
came to know of Gopala’s appearance. Thus people came from all over, bring-
ing a variety of presentations.


--- Page 53 ---
50 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 99
মধুবরার লোক जव বড় বড় ধনী |
ভক্তি করি” নানা खव? (ङक দেয় আনি” ॥ >> ॥
mathurara loka saba bada bada dhani
bhakti kari’ nana dravya bheta deya ani’
SYNONYMS
mathurara—of the city of Mathura; loka—the people; saba—all; bada bada—
very big; dhani—capitalists; bhakti kari’—out of devotion; nana dravya—various
kinds of things; bheta—presents; deya—gave; ani’—bringing.
TRANSLATION
The people of Mathurd, who are very big capitalists, also brought various
presentations and offered them before the Deity in devotional service.
TEXT 100
স্বর্ণ, রৌপ্য, বল্ল, গন্ধ, ভক্ষ্য-উপহার |
অসংখ্য আইসে, নিত্য বাড়িল ভাণ্ডার ॥ ১০০ ॥
svarna, raupya, vastra, gandha, bhaksya-upahara
asankhya aise, nitya badila bhandara
SYNONYMS
svarna—gold; raupya—silver; vastra—garments; gandha—scents; bhaksya-
upahara—presentations for eating; asarikhya—countless; aise—came; nitya—
daily; badila—increased; bhandara—the store.
TRANSLATION
Thus countless presentations of gold, silver, garments, scented articles and
eatables arrived. The store of Gopaila increased daily.
TEXT 101
এক মহাধলী कलिञ्न कन्नादेन মন্দির ।
কেহ পাক-ভাগুার বকৈল, (कङ्‌ ত' প্রাচীর ॥ ১০১ ॥
eka maha-dhani ksatriya karaila mandira
keha paka-bhandara kaila, keha ta’ pracira


--- Page 54 ---
Text 102] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 51
SYNONYMS
eka—one; maha-dhani—very rich man; ksatriya—of the royal order; karaila—
constructed; mandira—a temple; keha—someone; paka-bhandara—clay pots for
cooking; kaila—made; keha—someone; ta’—certainly; pracira—the boundary
walls.
TRANSLATION
One very rich ksatriya of the royal order constructed a temple, someone
made cooking utensils, and someone constructed boundary walls.
TEXT 102
এক এক ত্রজবাসী এক এক HS দিল |
जङ्ख्य ATH গান্ডী গোপালের হৈল ॥ ১০২ ॥
eka eka vraja-vasi eka eka gabhi dila
sahasra sahasra gabhi gopalera haila
SYNONYMS
eka eka—each and every; vraja-vasi—resident of Vindavana; eka eka—one;
gabhi—cow; dila—contributed; sahasra sahasra—thousands and thousands;
gabhi—cows; gopalera—of Gopala; haila—there were.
TRANSLATION
Each and every family residing in the land of Vrajabhimi contributed one
cow. In this way, thousands of cows became the property of Gopala.
PURPORT
This is the way to install the Deity, construct the temple and increase the prop-
erty of the temple. Everyone should be enthusiastic to contribute to the construc-
tion of the temple for the Deity, and everyone should also contribute food for the
distribution of prasada. The devotees should preach the gospel of devotional ser-
vice and thus engage people in practical service to the Deity. Wealthy people can
also be attracted to take part in these activities. In this way everyone will become
spiritually inclined, and the entire society will be converted to Krsna conscious-
ness. The desire to satisfy the material senses will automatically diminish, and the
senses will become so purified that they will be able to engage in bhakti (devo-
tional service to the Lord). Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanarh bhaktir ucyate. By serving
the Lord, one’s senses are gradually purified. The engagement of one’s purified
senses in the service of Lord Hrsikesa is called bhakti. When the dormant propen-
sity for bhakti is awakened, one can understand the Supreme Personality of God-


--- Page 55 ---
52 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
head as He is. Bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah. (Bg. 18.55) This
is the process of giving humanity the chance to awaken Krsna consciousness.
Thus people can perfect their lives in all respects.
TEXT 103
গৌড় হুইতে আইলা দুই বৈরাগী ত্রাহ্মণ।
পুব্রী-গোসাঞ্ডি রাখিল তারে করিয়। যতন ॥ ১০৩ ॥
gauda ha-ite aila dui vairagi brahmana
puri-gosani rakhila tare kariya yatana
SYNONYMS
gauda ha-ite—from Bengal; dila—came; dui—two; vairagi—of the renounced
order; brahmana—persons born in brahmana families; puri-gosani—Madha-
vendra Puri; rakhila—kept; tare —them; kariya—making; yatana—all efforts.
TRANSLATION
Eventually two brahmanas in the renounced order arrived from Bengal, and
Maiadhavendra Puri, who liked them very much, kept them in Vrndiavana and
gave them all kinds of comforts.
TEXT 104
সেই দুই শিষ্য করি” ८जव। সমপিল |
রাজ-সেবা হয়,- পুরীর আনন্দ বাড়িল ॥ ১০৪ ॥
sei dui sisya kari’ seva samarpila
raja-seva haya, ——purira ananda badila
SYNONYMS
sei dui—these two persons; Sisya kari’—initiating; seva—with the service;
samarpila—entrusted; raja-seva—gorgeous performance of service; haya—is;
purira—of Madhavendra Puri; ananda—pleasure; badila—increased.
TRANSLATION
These two were then initiated by Madhavendra Puri, and he entrusted them
with the daily service of the Lord. This service was performed continuously,
and the worship of the Deity became very gorgeous. Thus Madhavendra Puri
was very pleased.


--- Page 56 ---
Text 106] Sri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 53
PURPORT
The Gosvamis started many temples, namely the Govinda temple, Gopinatha,
Madana-mohana, Radha-Damodara, Syamasundara, Radharamana and Gokula-
nanda. The disciples of the Gosvamis were entrusted with the seva-pagja (Deity
worship) of these temples. It was not that the disciples were family members of
the original Gosvamis. Most of the Gosvamis were in the renounced order of life,
and Jiva Gosvami in particular was a brahmacari. At present, sevaitas assume the
title of gosvami on the basis of their being engaged as sevaitas of the Deity. The
sevaitas who have inherited their positions now assume proprietorship of the
temples, and some of them are selling the Deities’ property as if it were their own.
However, the temples did not originally belong to these sevaitas.
TEXT 105
এইমত AAT দুই করিল সেবন |
একদিন श्ुन्ौ-८नो जोड দেখিল স্বপন ॥ ১০৫ ॥
ei-mata vatsara dui karila sevana
eka-dina puri-gosani dekhila svapana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; vatsara—years; dui—two; karila—performed; sevana—
worship; eka-dina—one day; puri-gosani—Madhavendra Puri; dekhila—saw;
svapana—a dream.
TRANSLATION
In this way the Deity worship in the temple was very gorgeously performed
for two years. Then one day Madhavendra Puri had a dream.
TEXT 106
গোপাল কহে, পুব্রী আমার তাপ নাহি सास्र ।
মলয়জ-চন্দন লেপ”, তবে সে FOI ॥ ১০৬ ॥
gopala kahe, puri amara tapa nahi yaya
malayaja-candana lepa’, tabe se judaya
SYNONYMS
gopala—the Deity of Copaila; kahe—said; puri—My dear Madhavendra Puri;
amara—My; tapa—body temperature; nahi —does not; yaya—go away; malaya-


--- Page 57 ---
54 इषं Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
ja-candana—sandalwood produced in the Malaya Hills; lepa’—smear over the
body; tabe—then; se—that; judaya—cools.
TRANSLATION
In his dream, Madhavendra Puri saw Gopala, who said: “My bodily tem-
perature still has not decreased. Please bring sandalwood from the Malaya
province and smear the pulp over My body to cool Me.
PURPORT
The Deity of Gopala had been buried within the jungle for many years, and al-
though He was installed and was offered thousands of pots of water, He still felt
very hot. He therefore asked Madhavendra Puri to bring sandalwood from the
Malaya province. Sandalwood produced in Malaya is very popular. That province
is situated on the western ghata, and the hill Nilagiri is sometimes known as
Malaya Hill. The word malaya-ja is used to indicate the sandalwood produced in
the Malaya Province. Sometimes the word Malaya refers to the modern country
of Malaysia. Formerly this country also produced sandalwood, but now they have
found it profitable to produce rubber trees. Although the Vedic culture was once
prevalent in Malaysia, now all the inhabitants are Mohammedans. The Vedic
culture is now lost in Malaysia, Java and Indonesia.
TEXT 107
মলয়জ আন, चा) নীলাচল CZCS |
TLD হৈতে নহে, তুমি চলহ ত্বরিতে ॥ ১০৭ ॥
malayaja ana, yana nilacala haite
anye haite nahe, tumi calaha tvarite
SYNONYMS
malaya-ja—sandalwood; ana—bring; yana—coming; nilacala haite—from
Jagannatha Puri; anye —others; haite —from; nahe —not; tumi—you; calaha—go;
tvarite —quickly.
TRANSLATION
“Bring sandalwood pulp from Jagannatha Puri. Kindly go quickly. Since no
one else can do it, you must.”
TEXT 108
স্বপ্ন দেখি” श्रुो-(नोजा यिञन् হৈল প্রেমাবেশ |
পুভু-আজ্ঞ। পালিবারে গেলা ALTE ॥ ১০৮ ॥


--- Page 58 ---
Text 110] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 55
svapna dekhi’ puri-gosanira haila premavesa
prabhu-ajna palibare gela parva-desa
SYNONYMS
svapna dekhi’—after seeing the dream; puri-gosafira—of Madhavendra Puri;
haila—there was; prema-avesa—ecstasy on account of love of God; prabhu-
ajiia—the order of the Lord; palibare—to execute; gela—started; pdarva-desa—
for the eastern countries (Bengal).
TRANSLATION
After having this dream, Madhavendra Puri Gosvami became very glad due
to ecstasy of love of Godhead, and in order to execute the command of the
Lord, he started east toward Bengal.
TEXT 109
সেবার निर्वक्ष-- লোক করিল স্থাপন ৷
আজ্ঞ। মাগি” গৌড়-দেশে করিল গমন ॥ ১০৯ ॥
sevara nirbandha—— loka karila sthapana
ajna magi’ gauda-dese karila gamana
SYNONYMS
sevara nirbandha—the arrangements for executing the daily routine of the wor-
ship of the Lord; loka—the people; karila—did; sthapana—establish; ajia
magi’—taking the order; gauda-dese—toward Bengal; karila—did; gamana—
going.
TRANSLATION
Before leaving, Madhavendra Puri made all arrangements for regular Deity
worship, and he engaged different people in various duties. Then, taking up
the order of Gopila, he started for Bengal.
TEXT 110
শাস্তিপুৰ আইলা' অদ্বৈতাচার্যের ঘরে |
ANT প্রেম দেখি” আচার্য আনন্দ অন্তরে ॥ ১১০ ॥
$3/7100/3 aila advaitacaryera ghare
purira prema dekhi’ acarya ananda antare


--- Page 59 ---
56 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
_ $anti-pura—to the place known as Santipura; aila—came; advaita-acaryera—of
Sri Advaita Acarya; ghare—to the home; purira prema—the ecstatic love of
Madhavendra Puri; dekhi’—seeing; dcarya—Advaita Acarya; dnanda—pleased;
antare—within Himself.
TRANSLATION
When Maidhavendra Puri arrived at the house of Advaita Acarya in San-
tipura, the Acarya became very pleased upon seeing the ecstatic love of God-
head manifest in Madhavendra Puri.
TEXT 111
তার $ ख মন্ত্র লৈল যতন Has ।
চলিলা দক্ষিণে পুরী Sioa দীক্ষা দিএ। ॥ ১১১ ॥
tanra thani mantra laila yatana karina
calila daksine puri tanre diksa dina
SYNONYMS
tanra thani—from him; mantra—initiation; laila—accepted; yatana—efforts;
karina—making; calila—started; daksine—toward the south; puri—Madha-
vendra एतत; tanre—to Him (Advaita Acarya); diksa—initiation; difa—giving.
TRANSLATION
Advaita Acarya begged to be initiated by Madhavendra Puri. After initiating
Him, Madhavendra Puri started for South India.
PURPORT
In this connection, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that
Advaita Acarya took initiation from Madhavendra Puri, who was a sannyasi in the
disciplic succession of the Madhva-sampradaya. According to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu:
kiba vipra kiba nyasi sadra kene naya,
yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei ‘guru’ haya
“A person may be a brahmana, sannyasi, a $0073 or whatever, but if he is well con-
versant in the science of Krsna, he can become a guru.” (Cc. Madhya 8.128) This
statement is supported by Sri Madhavendra Puri. According to the paficaratra in-
junction, only a householder brahmana can initiate. Others cannot. When a per-
son is initiated, it is assumed that he has become a brahmana; without being ini-


--- Page 60 ---
Text 113] $ri Miadhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 57
tiated by a proper brahmana, one cannot be converted into a brahmana. In other
words, unless one is a brahmana, he cannot make another a brahmana. A
grhastha-brahmana partaking of the varpasrama-dharma institution can secure
various types of paraphernalia to worship Lord Visnu through his honest labor. Ac-
tually, people beg to be initiated by these householder brahmanas just to become
successful in the varnasrama institution or to become free from material desires. It
is therefore necessary for a spiritual master in the grhastha-asrama to be a strict
Vaisnava. A spiritual master from the sannyasa order has very little opportunity to
perform arcana, Deity worship, but when one accepts a spiritual master from the
transcendental sannyasis, the principle of Deity worship is not at all neglected. To
implement this conclusion, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave us His opinion in the
verse kiba vipra kiba nyasi, etc. This indicates that the Lord understood the weak-
ness of society in its maintaining that only a grhastha-brahmana should be a
spiritual master. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu indicated that it does not matter
whether the spiritual master is a grhastha (householder), a sannyasi or even a
sadra. A spiritual master simply must be conversant in the essence of the sastra;
he must understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Only then can one be-
come a spiritual master. Diksa actually means initiating a disciple with transcen-
dental knowledge by which he becomes freed from all material contamination.
TEXT 112
রেমুণাতে टेकल গোপীনাথ দরশন |
তার রূপ দেখিএঞা হৈল विच्छवन-मन ॥ ১১২ ॥
remunate kaila gopinatha darasana
tanra rapa dekhina haila vihvala-mana
SYNONYMS
remunate—in the village of Remuna; kaila—did; gopinatha—the Deity of
Copinatha; darasana—seeing; tanra—His; rapa—beauty; dekhifna—seeing;
haila—became; vihvala—bewildered; mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
Going into South India, $ri Madhavendra Puri visited Remuna, where
Gopinatha is situated. Upon seeing the beauty of the Deity, Madhavendra Puri
was overwhelmed.
TEXT 113
“নৃত্যগীত করি” জগমোহনে वजिल। ।
“ক্যা ক্যা ভোগ লাগে ?' ত্রাহ্মণে পুছিলা৷ ॥ ১১৩ ॥


--- Page 61 ---
58 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
nrtya-gita kari’ jaga-mohane vasila
‘kya kya bhoga lage?’ brahmane puchila
SYNONYMS
nrtya-gita kari’—after performing dancing and chanting; jaga-mohane —in the
corridor of the temple; vasila—he sat down; kya kya—what; bhoga—foods;
lage—they offer; brahmane —from the brahmana priest; puchila—inquired.
TRANSLATION
In the corridor of the temple, from which people generally viewed the
Deity, Madhavendra Puri chanted and danced. Then he sat down there and
asked a brahmana what kinds of foods they offered to the Deity.
TEXT 114
সেবার (गोव দেখি” আনন্দিত मटन |
উত্তম ভোগ লাগে--এথা বুঝি অনুমানে ॥ ১১৪ ॥
sevdra sausthava dekhi’ anandita mane
uttama bhoga lage—— etha bujhi anumane
SYNONYMS
sevara—of the worship; sausthava—excellence; dekhi’—seeing; anandita—
pleased; mane —in the mind; uttama bhoga—first-class foods; lage—they offer;
etha—thus; bujhi—I understand; anumane —by deduction.
TRANSLATION
From the excellence of the arrangements, Madhavendra Puri understood by
deduction that only the best food was offered.
TEXT 115
যৈছে ইহা তোগ লাগে, সকলই शर छिव |
তৈছে ভিয়ানে ভোগ গোপালে লাগাইব ॥ ১১৫ ॥
yaiche 103 bhoga lage, sakala-i puchiba
taiche bhiyane bhoga gopale lagaiba


--- Page 62 ---
Text 117] $ri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 59
SYNONYMS
yaiche—just like; iha—here; bhoga—foods; lige—they offer; sakala-i—all;
puchiba—I shall inquire; taiche—similarly; bhiyane—in the kitchen; bhoga—
foods; gopale—to $i Gopala; lagaiba—I shall arrange.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri thought: “I shall inquire from the priest what foods are
offered to Gopinatha so that by making arrangements in our kitchen, we can
offer similar foods to $ri Gopala.”
TEXT 116
এই লাগি' পুছিলেন Armee স্থানে |
ত্রাহ্মণ কহিল সব ভোগ-বিবরণে ॥ ১১৬ ॥
ei lagi’ puchilena brahmanera sthane
brahmana kahila saba bhoga-vivarane
SYNONYMS
ei lagi’—for this matter; puchilena—he inquired; brahmanera sthane —from the
brahmana; brahmana—the priest; kahila—informed; saba—everything; bhoga—
foods; vivarane—in description.
TRANSLATION
When the brahmana priest was questioned in this matter, he explained in
detail what kinds of foods were offered to the Deity of Gopinatha.
TEXT 117
সন্ধ্যায় ভোগ লাগে ক্ষীর- “অম্ৃতকেলি'-নাম।
দ্বাদশ মৃৎপাত্রে ভরি” অম্বৃত-সমান ॥ ১১৭ ॥
sandhydya bhoga lage ksira——‘amrta-keli’-nama
dvadasa mrt-patre bhari’ amrta-samana
SYNONYMS
sandhydya—in the evening; bhoga—foods; lage—they offer; ksira—sweet
rice; amrta-keli-nama—named amrta-keli; dvadasa—twelve; mrt-patre —earthen
pots; bhari’—filling; amrta-samana—ijust like nectar.


--- Page 63 ---
60 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
The brahmana priest said: ‘In the evening the Deity is offered sweet rice in
twelve earthen pots. Because the taste is as good as nectar [amrta], it is named
amrta-keli.
TEXT 118
“গোপীনাথের ক্ষীর” বলি' প্রসিদ্ধ নাম যার ।
পৃথিবীতে এঁছে ভোগ कोद] নাহি আর ॥ ১১৮ ॥
‘gopinathera ksira’ bali’ prasiddha nama yara
prthivite aiche bhoga kahan nahi ara
SYNONYMS
gopinathera ksira—the sweet rice offered to Gopinatha; bali’—as; prasiddha—
celebrated; nama—the name; yara—of which; prthivite—throughout the whole
world; aiche —such; bhoga—food; kahan—anywhere; nahi—not; ara—else.
TRANSLATION
“This sweet rice is celebrated throughout the world as gopinatha-ksira. It is
not offered anywhere else in the world.”
TEXT 119
হেনকালে সেই ভোগ ঠাকুরে লাগিল |
শুনি श्रूजौ-८भोज। ॐ কিছু মনে বিচারিল ॥ ১১৯ ॥
hena-kale sei bhoga thakure lagila
Suni’ puri-gosani kichu mane vicarila
SYNONYMS
hena-kale —at this time; sei bhoga—that wonderful food; thakure—in front of
the Deity; lagila—was placed; suni’—hearing; puri-gosani—Madhavendra Puri;
kichu—something; mane —within the mind; vicarila—considered.
TRANSLATION
While Madhavendra Puri was talking with the brahmana priest, the sweet
rice was placed before the Deity as an offering. Hearing this, Madhavendra
Puri thought as follows.


--- Page 64 ---
Text 122] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 61
TEXT 120
অযাচিত ক্ষীর প্রসাদ खन्न যদি পাই ।
স্বাদ জানি” তৈছে ক্ষীর গোপালে লাগাই ॥ ১২০ ॥
ayacita ksira prasada alpa yadi pai
svada jani’ taiche ksira gopale lagai
SYNONYMS
ayacita—without asking; ksira—sweet rice; prasada—remnants of food; alpa—
a little; yadi—if; pai—I get; svada—the taste; jani’—knowing; taiche—similar;
ksira—sweet rice; gopale—to my Gopala; lagai—| can offer.
TRANSLATION
“If, without my asking, a little sweet rice is given to me, | can then taste it
and make a similar preparation to offer my Lord Gopala.”
TEXT 121
এই ইচ্ছায় লঙ্জা ग 1491 বিষ্ণুন্মরণ देकन |
হেনকালে ভোগ সরি” আরতি वाकिन ॥ ১২১ ॥
ei icchaya lajja pana visnu-smarana kaila
hena-kale bhoga sari’ arati bajila
SYNONYMS
ei icchaya—by this desire; lajja—shame; pana—getting; visnu-smarana—
remembrance of Lord Visnu; kaila—did; hena-kale—at that time; bhoga—the
food; sari’—being finished; arati—the arati ceremony; bajila—was sounded.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri became greatly ashamed when he desired to taste the
sweet rice, and he immediately began to think of Lord Visnu. While he was
thus thinking of Lord Visnu, the offering was completed, and the arati
ceremony began.
TEXT 122
আরতি দেখিয়া খুব্রী কৈল নমস্কার |
বাহিরে আইল) কারে কিছু न। কহিল আর ॥ ১২২॥


--- Page 65 ---
62 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
arati dekhiya puri kaila namaskara
bahire aila, kare kichu na kahila ara
SYNONYMS
arati dekhiya—after seeing the arati; puri—Madhavendra Puri; kaila—offered;
namaskara—obeisances; bahire dili—he went out; kdre—to anyone; kichu—
anything; na—not; kahila—say; ara—more.
TRANSLATION
After the arati was finished, Madhavendra Puri offered his obeisances to the
Deity and then left the temple. He did not say anything more to anyone.
TEXT 123
অযাচিত-বৃত্তি 2A বিরক্ত, উদাস ।
অযাচিত পাইলে খান, নহে উপবাস ॥ ১২৩ ॥
ayacita-vrtti puri—virakta, (0353
aydacita paile kha’'na, nahe upavasa
SYNONYMS
ayacita-vrtti—accustomed to avoid begging; puri—Madhavendra Puri; virak-
ta—unattached; udasa—indifferent; ayacita—without begging; paile—if getting;
kha’'na—he eats; nahe —if not; upavasa—fasting.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri avoided begging. He was completely unattached and in-
different to material things. He would not beg. If someone offered him some
food, he would eat; otherwise he would fast.
PURPORT
This is the paramahamsa stage, the highest stage for a sannyasi. A sannyasi can
beg from door to door just to collect food, but a paramaharsa who has taken
aydcita-vrtti, or ajagara-vrtti, does not ask anyone for food. If someone offers him
food voluntarily, he eats. Ayacita-vrtti means being accustomed to refrain from
begging, and ajagara-vrtti indicates one who is compared to a python, the big
snake that makes no effort to acquire food, but rather allows food to come auto-
matically within its mouth. In other words, a paramahamsa simply engages ex-
clusively in the service of the Lord, without caring even for eating or sleeping. It
was stated about the six Cosvamis: nidrahara-viharakadi-vijitau. In the
paramahamsa stage one conquers the desire for sleep, food and sense gratifica-


--- Page 66 ---
Text 125] $ri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 63
tion. One remains a humble, meek mendicant engaged in the service of the Lord
day and night. Madhavendra Puri had attained this paramahamsa stage.
TEXT 124
প্রেমাম্বতে তৃপ্ত, THIF নাহি বাধে |
ক্বীর-ইচ্ছ| হৈল, তাহে মানে অপরাধে ॥ ১২৪ ॥
premamrte trpta, ksudha-trsna nahi badhe
ksira-iccha haila, tahe mane aparadhe
SYNONYMS
prema-amrte trpta—being satisfied only in the loving service of the Lord;
ksudha-trspa—hunger and thirst; nahi—not; badhe —impede; ksira—for sweet
rice; iccha—the desire; haila—became; tahe —for that reason; mane —he con-
siders; aparadhe —offense.
TRANSLATION
A paramaharisa like Madhavendra Puri is always satisfied in the loving ser
vice of the Lord. Material hunger and thirst cannot impede his activities.
When he desired to taste a little sweet rice offered to the Deity, he considered
that he had committed an offense by desiring to eat what was being offered to
the Deity.
PURPORT
It is advisable that food being offered to the Deity be covered when taken from
the kitchen to the Deity room. In that way, others may not see it. Those who are
not accustomed to following the advanced regulative devotional principles may
desire to eat the food, and that is an offense. Therefore no one should be given a
chance to even see it. However, when it is brought before the Deity, it must be
uncovered. Seeing the food uncovered before the Deity, Madhavendra Puri
desired to taste a little of it so that he could prepare a similar sweet rice for his
Copala. Madhavendra Puri was so strict, however, that he considered this to be an
offense. Consequently he left the temple without saying anything to anyone. The
paramaharnsais therefore called vijita-sad-guna. He must conquer the six material
qualities—kama, krodha, lobha, moha, matsara, and ksudha-trsna (lust, anger,
greed, illusion, enviousness, hunger and thirst.)
TEXT 125
গ্রামের শুপ্তহাটে বসি” করেন কীর্তন |
सयव] পূজারী TATE ঠাকুরে শয়ন ॥ ১২৫ ॥


--- Page 67 ---
64 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
gramera sanya-hate vasi’ karena kirtana
etha pajari karaila thakure sayana
SYNONYMS
gramera—of the village; sanya-hate —in the vacant marketplace; vasi’—sitting
down; karena—performs; kirtana—chanting; etha—in the temple; pdjari—the
priest; kardila—made; thakure—the Deities; sayana—lying down.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri left the temple and sat down in the village marketplace,
which was vacant. Sitting there, he began to chant. In the meantime, the
temple priest laid the Deity down to rest.
PURPORT
Although Madhavendra Puri was not interested in eating and sleeping, his in-
terest in chanting the maha-mantra was as acute as if he were an aspiring tran-
scendentalist rather than a paramaharisa. This means that even in the
paramaharnsa stage, one cannot give up chanting. Haridasa Thakura and the
Gosvamis were all engaged in chanting a fixed number of rounds; therefore
chanting on beads is very important for everyone, even though one may become
a paramaharisa. This chanting can be executed anywhere, either inside or outside
the temple. Madhavendra Puri even sat down in a vacant marketplace to perform
his chanting. As stated by Srinivasa Acarya in his prayers to the Gosvamis: nama-
gana-natibhih. A paramaharisa devotee is always engaged in chanting and ren-
dering loving service to the Lord. Chanting the Lord's holy names and engaging in
His service are identical. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.23), there are nine
kinds of devotional service: hearing (sravanam), chanting (kirtanam), remember-
ing (visnoh smaranam), serving (pada-sevanam), worship of the Deity (arcanam),
praying (vandanam), carrying out orders (dasyam), serving Him as a friend
(sakhyam), and sacrificing everything for the Lord (atma-nivedanam). Although
each process appears distinct, when one is situated on the absolute platform he
can see that they are identical. For instance, hearing is as good as chanting, and
remembering is as good as chanting or hearing. Similarly, engaging in Deity wor-
ship 15 as good as chanting, hearing or remembering. The devotee is expected to
accept all nine processes of devotional service, but even if only one process is
properly executed, he can still attain the highest position (paramaharisa) and go
back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 126
নিজ কৃত্য कत्रि" পূজারী করিল শয়ন |
স্বপনে ঠাকুর আসি” বলিলা বচন ॥ ১২৬ ॥


--- Page 68 ---
Text 128] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 65
nija krtya kari’ pajari karila sayana
svapane thakura asi’ balila vacana
SYNONYMS
nija krtya—his own duty; kari’—finishing; pajari—the brahmana priest in the
temple; karila—took; sayana—rest; svapane—in a dream; thakura—the Deity;
asi’—coming there; balila—said; vacana—the words.
TRANSLATION
Finishing his daily duties, the priest went to take rest. In a dream he saw the
Gopinatha Deity come to talk to him, and He spoke as follows.
TEXT 127
উঠহ, পূজারী, কর দ্বার বিমোচন |
ক্ষীর এক রাখেয়াছি সন্ন্যালি-কারণ ॥ ১২৭ ॥
uthaha, pajari, kara dvara vimocana
ksira eka rakhiyachi sannyasi-karana
SYNONYMS
uthaha—please get up; pajari—O priest; kara—just do; dvara—the door;
vimocana—opening; ksira—sweet rice; eka—one pot; rakhiyachi—I have kept;
sannyasi—of the mendicant, Madhavendra Puri; karana—for the reason.
TRANSLATION
“Please get up and open the door of the temple. ॥ have kept one pot of
sweet rice for the sannyasi Madhavendra Puri.
TEXT 128
ধড়ার অঞ্চলে ঢাক। এক ক্ষীর 2 |
তোমরা না জানিল৷ তাহা আমার মায়ায় ॥ ১২৮ ॥
dhadara aricale dhaka eka ksira haya
tomara na janila taha amara mayaya
SYNONYMS
dhadara—of the cloth curtain; aficale—by the skirt; dhaka—covered; eka—
one; ksira—pot of sweet rice; haya—there is; tomarda—you; na—not; janila—
knew; taha—that; amara—of Me; mayaya—by the trick.


--- Page 69 ---
66 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
“This pot of sweet rice is just behind My cloth curtain. You did not see it
because of My tricks.
TEXT 129
মাধব-পুত্রী সন্ন্যাসী আছে হাটেতে वजि। ।
তাহাকে ङ এই ক্ষীর শীঘ্র দেহ लर) ॥ ১২৯ ॥
madhava-puri sannyasi ache hatete vasina
tahake ta’ ei ksira sighra deha lana
SYNONYMS
madhava-puri—of the name Madhavendra Puri; sannyasi—a mendicant;
ache —there is; hatete—in the marketplace; vasina—sitting; tahake—to him;
ta’—certainly; ei—this; ksira—pot of sweet rice; sighra—very quickly; deha—
give; lana—taking.
TRANSLATION
“A sannyasi named Madhavendra Puri is sitting in the vacant marketplace.
Please take this pot of sweet rice from behind Me and deliver it to him.”
TEXT 130
স্বপ্ন দেখি” পুজারী উঠি' করিল। বিচার 1
Fi করি” কপাট খুলি, মুক্ত কৈল দ্বার ॥ ১৩০ ॥
svapna dekhi’ pajari uthi’ karila vicara
snana kari’ kapata khuli, mukta kaila dvara
SYNONYMS
svapna dekhi’—after seeing the dream; pajari—the priest; uthi’—getting up;
karila—made; vicara—considerations; snana kari’—taking his bath before enter-
ing the Deity room; kapata—the door; khuli—opening; mukta—opened; kaila—
made; dvara—the doors.
TRANSLATION
Awaking from the dream, the priest immediately rose from bed and thought
it wise to take a bath before entering the Deity’s room. He then opened the
temple door.


--- Page 70 ---
Text 133] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 67
TEXT 131
ধড়ার আঁচলতলে পাইল সেই ক্ষীর ।
স্থান লেপি” ক্ষীর লঞ। হুইল বাহির ॥ ১৩১ ॥
dhadara ancala-tale paila sei ksira
sthana 19011 ksira 127 ha-ila bahira
SYNONYMS
dhadara—of the mantle; ancala-tale—at the skirt; paila—he got; sei—that;
ksira—pot of sweet rice; sthana lepi’—mopping that place; ksira—the pot of
sweet rice; laia—taking; ha-ila—he went; bahira—out of the temple.
TRANSLATION
According to the Deity’s directions, the priest found the pot of sweet rice
behind the cloth curtain. He removed the pot and mopped up the place where
it had been kept. He then went out of the temple.
TEXT 132
দ্বার দিয় গ্রামে গেলা সেই ক্ষীর লঞ।৷ ।
হাটে হাটে বুলে মাধবপুত্রীকে ए] ङिथग। ॥ ১৩২ ॥
dvara diya grame gela sei ksira lana
hate hate bule madhava-purike cahina
SYNONYMS
dvara diya—closing the door; grame—to the village; gela—went; sei—that;
ksira—pot of sweet rice; lana—taking; hate hate—in every stall; bule— walks;
madhava-purike —to Madhavendra Puri; cahina—calling.
TRANSLATION
Closing the door of the temple, he went to the village with the pot of sweet
rice. He called out in every stall in search of Madhavendra Puri.
TEXT 133
ক্ষীর লহ এই, যার নাম “মাধবপুর” |
তোমা লাগি” গোপীনাথ ক্ষীর কৈল চুরি ॥ ১৩৩ ॥


--- Page 71 ---
68 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
ksira laha ei, yara nama ‘madhava-puri’
toma lagi’ gopinatha ksira kaila curi
SYNONYMS

ksira laha—take the pot of sweet rice; ei—this; yara—whose; nama— name;
madhava-puri—Madhavendra Puri; toma lagi’—for you only; gopinatha—the
Deity of Lord Gopinatha; ksira—the pot of sweet rice; kaila—did; curi—steal.

TRANSLATION

Holding the pot of sweet rice, the priest called: ‘Will he whose name is
Maidhavendra Puri please come and take this pot! Gopindtha has stolen this
pot for you!”

PURPORT

The difference between the Absolute Truth and relative truth is explained here.
Lord Gopinatha has openly declared herein that He is a thief. He had stolen the
pot of sweet rice, and this was not kept a secret because His act of stealing is a
source of great transcendental bliss. In the material world, theft is criminal, but in
the spiritual world the Lord's stealing is a source of transcendental bliss. Mundane
rascals, who cannot understand the absolute nature of the Personality of God-
head, sometimes call Lord $ri Krsna immoral, but they do not know that His
seemingly immoral activities, which are not kept secret, afford pleasure to the
devotees. Not understanding the transcendental behavior of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, these rascals slur His character and immediately fall into the
category of miscreants (rascals, lowest among men, demons and those whose
knowledge is taken away by the illusory energy). Krsna explains in Bhagavad-gita:

na marh duskrtino madhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jhana
asurarm bhavam asritah
“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose know!-
edge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do
not surrender unto Me!” (Bg. 7.15)

Mundane rascals cannot understand that whatever Krsna does, being absolute
in nature, is all good. This quality of the Lord is explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(Tenth Canto). One may consider certain acts of a supremely powerful person to
be immoral by mundane calculations, but this is not actually the case. For exam-
ple, the sun absorbs water from the surface of the earth, but it does not absorb


--- Page 72 ---
Text 134] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 69
water only from the sea. It also absorbs water from filthy sewers and ditches con-
taining urine and other impure substances. The sun is not polluted by absorbing
such water. Rather, the sun makes the filthy place pure. If a devotee approaches
the Supreme Personality of Godhead for an immoral or improper purpose, he
nonetheless becomes purified; the Lord does not become infected. In Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is stated that if one approaches the Supreme Lord even out of lust,
anger or fear (kamarh krodharh bhayam), he is purified. (Bhag. 10.29.15) The
gopis, being young girls, approached Krsna because He was a beautiful young boy.
From the external point of view, they approached the Lord out of lust, and the
Lord danced with them at midnight. From the mundane point of view, these ac-
tivities may appear immoral because a married or unmarried young girl cannot
leave home to mix with a young boy and dance with him. Although this is im-
moral from the mundane viewpoint, the activities of the gopis are accepted as the
highest form of worship because it was Lord Krsna whom they approached with
lusty desires in the dead of night.

But these things cannot be understood by nondevotees. One must understand
Krsna in tattva (truth). One should use his common sense and consider that if
simply by chanting Krsna’s holy name one is purified, how then can the person
Krsna be immoral? Unfortunately, mundane fools are accepted as educational
leaders and are offered exalted posts for teaching irreligious principles to the
general populace. This is explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.31): andha
yathandhair upaniyamanah. Blind men are trying to lead other blind men. Due to
the immature understanding of such rascals, common men should not discuss
Krsna's pastimes with the gopis. A nondevotee should not even discuss His steal-
ing sweet rice for His devotees. It is warned that one should not even think about
these things. Although Krsna is the purest of the pure, mundane people, thinking
of Krsna's pastimes that appear immoral, themselves become polluted. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore never publicly discussed Krsna’s dealings with
the gopis. He used to discuss these dealings only with three confidential friends.
He never discussed rasa-lila publicly, as the professional reciters do, although they
do not understand Krsna or the nature of the audience. However, ऽत Caitanya
Mahaprabhu encouraged the public chanting of the holy name on a huge scale for
as many hours as possible.

TEXT 134
ক্ষীর लग স্থখে তুমি করহ SWC |
COA ভাগ্যবান্‌ নাহি ত্রিভুবনে ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
ksira lana sukhe tumi karaha bhaksane
toma-sama bhagyavan nahi tribhuvane


--- Page 73 ---
70 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS

ksira lana—taking the pot of sweet rice; sukhe—in happiness; tumi—you;
karaha—do; bhaksane —eating; toma-sama—like you; bhagyavan—fortunate;
nahi—there is no one; tri-bhuvane —within the three worlds.

TRANSLATION

The priest continued: “Would the sannyasi whose name is Madhavendra
Puri please come and take this pot of sweet rice and enjoy the prasada with
great happiness! You are the most fortunate person within these three
worlds!”

PURPORT

Here is an example of a personal benediction by Krsna's immoral activity. By
Gopinatha's stealing for His devotee, the devotee becomes the most fortunate
person within the three worlds. Thus even the Lord's criminal activities make His
devotee the most fortunate person. How can a mundane rascal understand the
pastimes of Krsna and judge whether He is moral or immoral? Since Krsna is the
Absolute Truth, there are no mundane distinctions such as moral and immoral.
Whatever He does is good. This is the real meaning of “God is good.” He is good
in all circumstances because He is transcendental, outside the jurisdiction of this
material world. Therefore, Krsna can be understood only by those who are already
living in the spiritual world. This is corroborated in Bhagavad-gita:

mari ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhayaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to
the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26)

One who is engaged in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord is already situ-
ated in the spiritual world (brahma-bhayaya kalpate). In all circumstances, his ac-
tivities and dealings with Krsna are transcendental and thus not understandable
by mundane moralists. It is therefore better not to discuss such activities among
mundane people. It is better to give them the Hare Krsna maha-mantra so that
they will be gradually purified and then come to understand the transcendental
activities of Krsna.

TEXT 135
এত खनिः चर त्रो -८गो)गा > পরিচয় দিল ।
ক্ষীর किञ्च) পুজারী SICA দণ্ডবৎ হৈল ॥ ১৩৫ ॥


--- Page 74 ---
Text 136] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 71
eta uni’ puri-gosani paricaya dila
ksira diya pajari tanre dandavat haila
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; puri-gosani—Madhavendra Puri; paricaya—introduc-
tion; dila—gave; ksira diya—delivering the pot of sweet rice; pajari— the priest;
tanre —to him; dandavat haila—offered obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this invitation, Madhavendra Puri came out and identified himself.
The priest then delivered the pot of sweet rice and offered his obeisances,
falling flat before him.
PURPORT
A brahmana is not supposed to offer his obeisances by falling flat before any-
one because a brahmana is considered to be in the highest caste. However, when
a brahmana sees a devotee, he offers his dandavats. This brahmana priest did not
ask Madhavendra Puri whether he was a brahmana, but when he saw that
Madhavendra Puri was such a bona fide devotee that Krsna would even steal for
him, he immediately understood the position of the saint. As stated by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu: kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sadra kene naya / yei krsna-tattva-
vetta, sei ‘guru’ haya. (Cc. Madhya 8.128) Had the brahmana priest been an or-
dinary brahmana, Copinatha would not have talked with him in a dream. Since
the Deity spoke to both Madhavendra Puri and the brahmana priest in dreams,
practically speaking they were on the same platform. However, because Madha-
vendra Puri was a senior sannydsi Vaisnava, a paramaharnsa, the priest im-
mediately fell flat before him and offered obeisances.
TEXT 136
ক্ষীরের বৃত্তান্ত তারে কহিল পুজারী |
শুনি প্রেমাবিষ্ট হৈল दयावन्तो ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
ksirera vrttanta tanre kahila pajari
Suni’ premavista haila $ri-madhava-puri
SYNONYMS
ksirera vrttanta—all the incidents that took place on account of the pot of
sweet rice; tarnre—to Madhavendra Puri; kahila—explained; pajari—the priest;
suni’—hearing; prema-avista—saturated with love of Godhead; haila—became;
$ri-madhava-puri—Srila Madhavendra Puri.


--- Page 75 ---
72 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
When the story about the pot of sweet rice was explained to him in detail,
Sri Madhavendra Puri at once became absorbed in ecstatic love of Krsna.
TEXT 137
প্রেম দেখি” raw কহে হইয়া বিস্মিত |
কৃষ্ণ যে ইহার বশ,-_হয় WATS ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
prema dekhi’ sevaka kahe ha-iya vismita
krspa ye inhara vasa,— haya yathocita
SYNONYMS
prema dekhi’—seeing the ecstatic position of Madhavendra Puri; sevaka— the
priest; kahe—said; ha-iya—being; vismita—struck with wonder; krspa— Lord
Krsna; ye—that; inhara—by him; vasa—obliged; haya—it is; yathocita—befit-
ting.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the ecstatic loving symptoms manifest in Madhavendra Puri,
the priest was struck with wonder. He could understand why Krsna had be-
come so much obliged to him, and he saw that Krsna’s action was befitting.
PURPORT
, A devotee can bring Krsna perfectly under his control. This is explained in
Srimad-Bhagavatam: ajita-jito ‘py asi tais tri-lokyam. (Bhag. 10.14.3) Krsna is never
conquered by anyone, but a devotee can conquer Him through devotional ser-
vice. As stated in Brahma-sarnhita (5.33): vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-
bhaktau. One cannot understand Krsna simply by reading Vedic literature. Al-
though all Vedic literature is meant for understanding Krsna, one cannot under-
stand Krsna without being a lover of Krsna. Therefore along with the reading of
Vedic literature (svadhyaya), one must engage in devotional worship of the Deity
(arcana-vidhi). Together these will enhance the devotee’s transcendental under-
standing of devotional service. Sravapadi suddha-citte karaye udaya
(Cc. Madhya 22.107). Love of Godhead is dormant within everyone's heart, and
if one simply follows the standard process of devotional service, it is awakened.
But foolish mundane people who simply read about Krsna mistakenly think that
He is immoral or criminal.
TEXT 138
এত বলি” নমস্করি” করিল গমন ।
আবেশে করিলা HT সে ক্ষীর ভক্ষণ ॥ ১৩৮ ॥


--- Page 76 ---
Text 140] Sri Miadhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 73
eta bali’ namaskari’ karila gamana
avese karila puri se ksira bhaksana
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; namaskari’—offering obeisances; karila gamana—
returned; avese—in ecstasy; karila—did; puri—Puri Cosani; se—that; ksira—
sweet rice; bhaksana—eating.
TRANSLATION
The priest offered his obeisances to Madhavendra Puri and returned to the
temple. Then, in ecstasy, Madhavendra Puri ate the sweet rice offered to him
by Krsna.
TEXT 139
পাত্র প্রচ্ষালন করি” খণ্ড Ae टेकन्‌ |
বহির্বাসে বাস্ধি' সেই ঠিকারি রাখিল ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
patra praksalana kari’ khanda khanda kaila
bahir-vase bandhi’ sei thikari rakhila
SYNONYMS
patra—the pot; praksalana kari’—washing; khanda khanda—breaking into
pieces; kaila—did; bahir-vase—in his outer wrapper; bandhi’—binding; sei—
those; thikari—pieces of pot; rakhila—kept.
TRANSLATION
After this, Madhavendra Puri washed the pot and broke it into pieces. He
then bound all the pieces in his outer cloth and kept them nicely.
TEXT 140
প্রতিদিন একখানি করেন ভক্ষণ ।
খাইলে প্রেমাবেশ হয়, STS কথন ॥ ১৪০ ॥
prati-dina eka-khani karena bhaksana
khaile premavesa haya, —adbhuta kathana
SYNONYMS
prati-dina—every day; eka-khani—one piece; karena—does; bhaksana—eat-
ing; khaile—by eating; prema-avesa—ecstasy; haya—there is; adbhuta—won-
derful; kathana—narrations.


--- Page 77 ---
74 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Each day, Madhavendra Puri would eat one piece of that earthen pot, and
after eating it he would immediately be overwhelmed with ecstasy. These are
wonderful stories.
TEXT 141
ঠাকুর মোরে ক্ষীর দিল--লোক जव শুনি” ।
দিলে লোক-ভিড় হবে মোর প্রতিষ্ঠা জানি” ॥ ১৪১ ॥
‘thakura more ksira dila—— loka saba suni’
dine loka-bhida habe mora pratistha jani’
SYNONYMS
thakura—the Lord; more—to me; ksira—sweet rice; dila—has given; loka—
the people; saba—all; suni’—after hearing; dine—at daytime; loka—of people;
bhida—crowd; habe —there will be; mora—my; pratistha—fame; jani’—know-
ing.
TRANSLATION
Having broken the pot and bound the pieces in his cloth Madhavendra Puri
began to think: “The Lord has given me a pot of sweet rice, and when the
people hear of this tomorrow morning, there will be great crowds.”
TEXT 142
সেই ভয়ে রাত্রি-শেষে एनिन। শ্রীপুর ।
সেইখানে গোপীনাথে क<७व< করি” ॥ ১৪২ ॥
sei bhaye ratri-sese calila $ri-puri
sei-khane gopinathe dandavat kari’
SYNONYMS
sei bhaye—fearing that; ratri-sese—at the end of the night; calila—left; sri-
puri—Sri Madhavendra Puri; sei-khdne—on that spot; gopinithe—to Lord
Gopinatha; dandavat—obeisances; kari’—doing.
TRANSLATION
Thinking this, Sri Madhavendra Puri offered his obeisances to Gopinatha on
the spot and left Remuna before morning.


--- Page 78 ---
Text 145] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 75
TEXT 143
চলি” চলি” আইল। পুরী জ্রীলীলাচল |
জগল্লাথ দেখি' হৈল। প্রেমেতে বিহরল ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
cali’ cali’ 3//3 pur? sri-nilacala
jagannatha dekhi’ haila premete vihvala
SYNONYMS
cali’ cali’—walking and walking; aila—he reached; puri—Jagannatha Puri; sri-
nilacala—known as Nilacala; jagannatha dekhi’—seeing Lord Jagannatha; haila—
became; premete —in love; vihvala—overwhelmed.
TRANSLATION
Walking and walking, Madhavendra Puri finally reached Jagannatha Puri,
which is also known as Nilacala. There he saw Lord Jagannatha and was over-
whelmed with loving ecstasy.
TEXT 144
প্রেমাবেশে উঠে, পড়ে, হাসে, নাচে, গায়।
জগল্লাথ-দরশনে মহাস্ুখ পায় ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
premavese 0106, pade, hase, nace, gaya
jagannatha-darasane maha-sukha paya
SYNONYMS
prema-avese —in loving ecstasy; uthe—sometimes stands; pade —sometimes
falls; hase —laughs; nace —dances; gaya—sings; jagannatha darasane —by seeing
Lord Jagannatha in the temple; maha-sukha—transcendental happiness; paya—
he felt.
TRANSLATION
When Madhavendra Puri was overwhelmed in the ecstasy of love of God-
head, he sometimes stood up and sometimes fell to the ground. Sometimes he
laughed, danced and sang. In this way he enjoyed transcendental bliss by
seeing the Jagannatha Deity.
TEXT 145
মাধবপুরী প্রীপাদ wer, — (नाटक হৈল খ্যাতি |
जव লোক আসি” তারে করে Iw ভক্তি ॥ ১৪৫ ॥


--- Page 79 ---
76 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
‘madhava-puri sripada aila’,—loke haila khyati
saba loka asi’ tarnre kare bahu bhakti
SYNONYMS
madhava-puri—Sri Madhavendra Puri; $ripida—sannyasi; aila—has come;
loke —among the people; haila—there was; khyati—reputation; saba loka—all
people; asi’—coming; tanre—unto him; kare —do; bahu—much; bhakti—devo-
tion.
TRANSLATION
When Madhavendra Puri came to Jagannatha Puri, people were aware of his
transcendental reputation. Therefore crowds of people came and offered him
all sorts of respect in devotion.
TEXT 146
প্রতিষ্ঠার স্বভাব এই জগতে বিদিত।
যে না ATR, তার হয় বিধাতা-নির্মিত ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
pratisthara svabhava ei jagate vidita
ye na vaiche, tara haya vidhata-nirmita
SYNONYMS
pratisthara—of reputation; svabhava—the nature; ei—this; jagate—in the
world; vidita—known; ye—the person who; na vafiche—does not desire it;
tara—of him; haya—it is; vidhata-nirmita—created by providence.
TRANSLATION
Even though one may not like it, reputation, as ordained by providence,
comes to him. Indeed, one’s transcendental reputation is known throughout
the entire world.
TEXT 147
প্রতিষ্ঠার ভয়ে AM গেল৷ नैनां] |
কৃষ্ণ-প্রেমে প্রতিষ্ঠা চলে সঙ্গে जङांकेश ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
pratisthara bhaye puri gela palana
krsna-preme pratistha cale sange gadana


--- Page 80 ---
Text 148] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 77
SYNONYMS

pratisthara bhaye —in fear of reputation; puri—Madhavendra Puri; gela—went
away; palana—fleeing; krspa-preme—in love of Krsna; pratistha—reputation;
cale—goes; sarge —simultaneously; gadana—gliding down.

TRANSLATION

Being afraid of his reputation [pratisthal, Madhavendra Puri fled from
Remuna. But the reputation brought by love of Godhead is so sublime that it
goes along with the devotee, as if following him.

PURPORT

Almost all the conditioned souls within the material world are envious. Jealous
people generally turn against one who automatically attains some reputation. This
is natural for jealous people. Consequently, when a devotee is fit to receive
worldly reputation, he is envied by many people. This is quite natural. When a
person, out of humility, does not desire fame, people generally think him quite
humble and consequently give him all kinds of fame. Actually a Vaisnava does not
hanker after fame or a great reputation. Madhavendra Puri, the king of Vaisnavas,
bore his reputation, but he wanted to keep himself outside of the vision of the
general populace. He wanted to cover his real identity as a great devotee of the
Lord, but when people saw him overwhelmed in ecstasy in love of Godhead, they
naturally gave credit to him. Actually a first-class reputation is due Madhavendra
Puri because he was a most confidential devotee of the Lord. Sometimes a saha-
jiya presents himself as being void of desires for reputation (pratistha) in order to
become famous as a humble man. Such people cannot actually attain the plat-
form of celebrated Vaisnavas.

TEXT 148
যতপি উদ্বেগ হৈল পলাইতে मन्‌ |
ঠাকুরের GHATS হইল বন্ধন ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
yadyapi udvega haila palaite mana
thakurera candana-sadhana ha-ila bandhana
SYNONYMS

yadyapi —although; udvega—anxiety; haila—there was; palaite—to go away;
mana—the mind; thakurera—of the Lord; candana—of the sandalwood;
sadhana—the collecting; ha-ila—there was; bandhana—bondage.


--- Page 81 ---
78 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri wanted to leave Jaganniatha Puri because the people
were honoring him as a great devotee; however, this threatened to hinder his
collecting sandalwood for the Gopala Deity.
TEXT 149
জগলন্লাথের সেবক TS, যতেক মহাস্ত |
সবাকে কহিল পুরী গোপাল-বৃত্তান্ত ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
jagannathera sevaka yata, yateka mahanta
sabake kahila puri gopala-vrttanta
SYNONYMS
jagannathera sevaka—the servants of Lord Jagannatha; yata—all; yateka
mahanta—all respectable devotees; sabdke—unto everyone; kahila—told;
puri—Madhavendra Puri; gopala-vrttanta—the narration of Gopala.
TRANSLATION
Sri Madhavendra Puri told all the servants of Lord Jagannatha and all the
great devotees there the story of the appearance of Sri Gopala.
TEXT 150
গোপাল চন্দন মাগে,-_ শুনি” रुशमे |
আনন্দে চন্দন লাগি” করিল যতন ॥ ১৫০ ॥
gopala candana mage, — suni’ bhakta-gana
anande candana lagi’ karila yatana
SYNONYMS
gopala—Lord Gopala at Vrindavana; candana—sandalwood; mage—wants;
Suni’—hearing; bhakta-gana—all the devotees; anande—in great pleasure; can-
dana lagi’—for sandalwood; karila—made; yatana—endeavor.
TRANSLATION
When all the devotees at Jagannatha Puri heard that the Gopala Deity
wanted sandalwood, in great pleasure they all endeavored to collect it.


--- Page 82 ---
Text 152] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 79
TEXT 151
রাজপাত্র-সনে যার যার পরিচয় ।
তারে মাগি” কর্পূব্র-চম্দন कतिल। সঞ্চয় ॥ ১৫১ ॥
raja-patra-sane vara yara paricaya
tare magi’ karpara-candana karila saficaya
SYNONYMS
raja-patra—government officers; sane—with; yara yara—whoever; paricaya—
had acquaintance; tare magi’—begging them; karpdra-candana—camphor and
sandalwood; karila—made; saficaya—collection.
TRANSLATION
Those who were acquainted with government officers met with them and
begged for camphor and sandalwood, which they collected.
PURPORT
It appears that malayaja-candana (sandalwood) and camphor were used for the
Jagannatha Deity. The camphor was used in His aratrika, and the sandalwood was
used to smear His body. Both these items were under government control;
therefore the devotees had to meet with the government officials. Informing
them of all the details, they attained permission to take the sandalwood and
camphor outside Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 152
এক বিপ্র, এক সেবক, A বহিতে |
পুরী-গোসাঞ্ঞির সঙ্গে দিল সম্ধবল-সহিতে ॥ ১৫২ ॥
eka vipra, eka sevaka, candana vahite
puri-gosanira sange dila sambala-sahite
SYNONYMS
eka vipra—one brahmana; eka sevaka—one servant; candana—the sandal-
wood; vahite—to carry; puri-gosaiira—Madhavendra Puri; sarige—with; dila—
gave; sambala-sahite —with the necessary expenditure.
TRANSLATION
One brahmana and one servant were given to Madhavendra Puri just to car-
ry the sandalwood. He was also given the necessary traveling expenses.


--- Page 83 ---
80 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 153
PFN ছাড়াইতে রাজপাত্র দ্বারে ।
রাজলেখা FR দিল পুবী-গোসাঞ্ঞর করে ॥১৫৩॥
ghati-dani chadaite raja-patra dvare
raja-lekha kari’ dila puri-gosanira kare
SYNONYMS
ghati-dani—from the toll collectors; chadaite—to get release; raja-patra—
papers showing governmental sanction; dvare —at the gates; raja-lekha—govern-
mental permission; kari’—showing; dila—delivered; puri-gosanira—of Puri
Gosani, Madhavendra Puri; kare —into the hand.
TRANSLATION
To get past the toll collectors along the way, Madhavendra Puri was sup-
plied with the necessary release papers from government officers. The papers
were placed in his hand.
TEXT 154
চলিল মাধবপুর চন্দন नअ ।
কতদিনে রেমুণাতে উত্তরিল fim ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
calila madhava-puri candana lana
kata-dine remunate uttarila giya
SYNONYMS
calila—proceeded; madhava-puri—Madhavendra Puri; candana lana—taking
the sandalwood; kata-dine —after some days; remunate —at the same temple of
Remuna; uttarila—reached; giya—going.
TRANSLATION
In this way Madhavendra Puri started for Vrndavana with the burden of san-
dalwood, and after some days he again reached the village of Remuna and the
Gopiniatha temple there.
TEXT 155
গোপীলাথ-চরণে কৈল বহু নমনজ্কার |
প্রেমাবেশে নৃত্য-গীত कत्रिन। অপার ॥ ১৫৫ ॥


--- Page 84 ---
Text 157] $ri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 81
gopinatha-carane kaila bahu namaskara
premavese nrtya-gita karila apara
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-carane —at the lotus feet of Lord Gopinatha; kaila—made; bahu—
many; namaskdra—obeisances; prema-avese—in the ecstasy of love; nrtya-
gita—dancing and chanting; karila—performed; apara—unlimitedly.
TRANSLATION
When Madhavendra Puri reached the temple of Gopinatha, he offered his
respectful obeisances many times at the lotus feet of the Lord. In the ecstasy
of love, he began to dance and sing without cessation.
TEXT 156
AM দেখি' সেবক जव সম্মান করিল।
ক্ষীরপ্রসাদ দিয় Sica ভিক্ষা कन्ना देन ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
puri dekhi’ sevaka 5303 sammana karila
ksira-prasada diya tanre bhiksa karaila
SYNONYMS
puri dekhi’—by seeing Madhavendra Puri; sevaka—the priest or servant; saba
sammana—all respects; karila—offered; ksira-prasida—sweet rice prasada;
diya—offering; tarire—him; bhiksa karaila—made to eat.
TRANSLATION
When the priest of Gopinatha saw Madhavendra Puri again, he offered all
respects to him and, giving him the sweet rice prasada, made him eat.
TEXT 157
সেই রাত্রে দেবালয়ে করিল শয়ন |
শেষরাত্রি হৈলে FAY দেখিল স্বপন ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
sei ratre devalaye karila $ayana
Sesa-ratri haile puri dekhila svapana
SYNONYMS
sei ratre—on that night; deva-alaye—in the temple; karila—did; Sayana—
sleeping; Sesa-ratri—at the end of the night; haile—when it was; puri—Madha-
vendra Puri; dekhila—saw; svapana—a dream.


--- Page 85 ---
82 ওর Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri took rest that night in the temple, but toward the end of
the night he had another dream.
TEXT 158
গোপাল खाजिश्न। कटङ, হে माव ।
কর্পূর-চন্দন আমি পাইলাম সব ॥ ०९४ ॥
gopala asiya kahe, —suna he madhava
karpara-candana ami pailama saba
SYNONYMS
gopala—the Deity of Copala; asiya—coming; kahe—says; suna—hear; he —
O; madhava—Madhavendra Puri; karpuara-candana—the camphor and sandal-
wood; ami—I; pailama—have received; saba—all.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri dreamed that Gopala came before him and said: “O
Madhavendra Puri, | have already received all the sandalwood and camphor.
TEXT 159
कर्ञ्न-जङ्िड aR এসব চন্দন |
গোপীনাথের অঙ্গে নিত্য করহ (गनेन ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
karpdra-sahita ghasi’ e-saba candana
gopinathera ange nitya karaha lepana
SYNONYMS
karpara-sahita—with the camphor; ghasi’—grinding; e-saba—all this; can-
dana—sandalwood; gopinathera—of 1 Gopinatha; arige—on the body; nitya—
daily; karaha—do; lepana—smearing.
TRANSLATION
“Now just grind all the sandalwood together with the camphor and then
smear the pulp on the body of Gopinatha daily until it is finished.
TEXT 160
গোপীনাথ আমার সে একই অঙ্গ =F |
ইহাকে চন্দন দিলে হবে মোর তাপ-ক্ষয় ॥ ১৬০ ॥


--- Page 86 ---
Text 162] इ Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 83
gopinatha amara se eka-i anga haya
inhake candana dile habe mora tapa-ksaya
SYNONYMS
gopinatha—Lord Gopinatha; amara—My; se—that; eka-i—one; ariga—body;
haya—is; inhake—unto Him; candana dile—in offering this candana; habe —
there will be; mora—My; tapa-ksaya—reduction of temperature.
TRANSLATION
‘There is no difference between My body and Gopinatha’s body. They are
one and the same. Therefore if you smear the sandalwood pulp on the body of
Gopinatha, you will naturally also smear it on My body. Thus the temperature
of My body will be reduced.
PURPORT
Copala was situated in Vrndavana, which was far from Remuna. In those days,
one had to pass through provinces governed by the Mohammedans, who some-
times hindered travelers. Considering the trouble of His devotee, Lord ০০313, the
greatest well-wisher of His devotees, ordered Madhavendra Puri to smear the san-
dalwood pulp on the body of Gopinatha, which was nondifferent from the body
of Gopala. In this way the Lord relieved Madhavendra Puri from trouble and in-
convenience.
TEXT 161
দ্বিধা न। ভাবিহ, না করিহ কিছু मटन ।
বিশ্বাস করি” চন্দন দেহ আমার বচনে ॥ ১৬১ ॥
dvidha na bhaviha, na kariha kichu mane
visvasa kari’ candana deha amara vacane
SYNONYMS
dvidha na bhaviha—do not hesitate; na kariha—do not do; kichu—anything;
mane —in the mind; visvasa kari’—believing Me; candana—sandalwood; deha—
offer; amara vacane—under My order.
TRANSLATION
“You should not hesitate to act according to My order. Believing in Me, just
do what is needed.”
TEXT 162
এত বলি” গোপাল গেল, (नेमां জান্গিল। ৷
গোপীনাথের সেবকগঞণে छोकिश्च। खोनिन। ॥ ১৬২ ॥


--- Page 87 ---
84 ওর Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
eta bali’ gopala gela, gosani jagila
gopinathera sevaka-gane dakiya anila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; gopala—the Deity of Gopala; gela—disappeared; gosani
jagila—Madhavendra Puri awoke; gopinathera—of Lord Gopinatha; sevaka-
gane—to the servitors; dakiya—calling; anila—brought them.
TRANSLATION
After giving these instructions, Gopila disappeared, and Madhavendra Puri
awoke. He immediately called for all the servants of Gopinatha, and they came
before him.
TEXT 163
প্রভুর আজ্ঞ। হৈল,- এই FAH |
গোপীনাথের অঙ্গে নিত্য করহ লেপন ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
prabhura ajia haila,—ei karpira-candana
gopinathera ange nitya karaha lepana
SYNONYMS
prabhura ३/7 haila—there was an order of the Lord; ei—this; karpdra—
camphor; candana—and sandalwood; gopinathera arige—on the body of
Copinatha; nitya—daily; karaha—do; lepana—smearing.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri said: “Smear the body of Gopinatha with this camphor
and sandalwood | have brought for Gopala in Vrndavana. Do this regularly
every day.
TEXT 164
ইহাকে চন্দন দিলে, গোপাল হইবে Ase |
স্বতন্ত্র ঈশ্বর गत्र আজ্ঞ। সে প্রবল ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
inhake candana 0115, gopala ha-ibe $itala
svatantra iSvara——tarra 2/7 se prabala
SYNONYMS
inhake —unto Gopinatha; candana dile—when sandalwood will be given;
gopala—Lord Gopala in Vrndavana; ha-ibe—will become; Sitala—cool; svatantra


--- Page 88 ---
Text 166] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 85
isvara—the most independent Supreme Personality of Godhead; tarra—His;
ajna—order; se—that; prabala—powerful.
TRANSLATION
“If the sandalwood pulp is smeared over the body of 0০001113113, then
Gopala will be cooled. After all, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is com-
pletely independent; His order is all-powerful.”
TEXT 165
গ্রীষ্মকালে গোপীনাথ পরিবে চন্দন |
শুনি” আনন্দিত হৈল সেবকের মল ॥ ১৬৫ ॥
grisma-kale gopinatha paribe candana
Suni’ anandita haila sevakera mana
SYNONYMS
grisma-kale —in the summer; gopinatha—Lord Gopinatha; paribe—will put on;
candana—sandalwood pulp; suni’—hearing; anandita—pleased; haila—became;
sevakera—of the servants; mana—the minds.
TRANSLATION
The servants of Gopinatha became very pleased to hear that in the summer
all the sandalwood pulp would be used to anoint the body of Gopinatha.
TEXT 166
পুব্রী Fee, — दे তুই ঘষিবে চন্দন।
আর TAZ দেহ, দিব যে বেতন ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
puri kahe, —ei dui ghasibe candana
ara jana-dui deha, diba ye vetana
SYNONYMS
puri kahe—Madhavendra Puri said; ei dui—these two assistants; ghasibe —will
grind; candana—the sandalwood; ara—another; jana-dui—two men; deha—ap-
ply; diba—I shall pay; ye—that; vetana—salary.


--- Page 89 ---
86 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lil4, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri said: “These two assistants will regularly grind the san-
dalwood, and you should also get two other people to help. I shall pay their
salary.”
TEXT 167
এই মত চন্দন দেয় প্রত্যহ ঘঝিয়া।
পরায় সেবক সব আনন্দ TF ॥ ১৬৭ ॥
ei mata candana deya pratyaha ghasiya
pardya sevaka saba ananda kariya
SYNONYMS
ei mata—in this way; candana—sandalwood; deya—gives; pratyaha—daily;
ghasiya—grinding; paradya—caused to put on; sevaka—servants; saba—all of it;
ananda—pleasure; kariya—feeling.
TRANSLATION
In this way Gopinathaji was supplied ground sandalwood pulp daily. The
servants of Gopinatha were very pleased with this.
TEXT 168
প্রত্যহ চন্দন পরায়, যাবৎ হৈল खड |
তথায় রহিল YT তাবঙ পর্যন্ত ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
pratyaha candana paraya, yavat haila anta
tathaya rahila puri tavat paryanta
SYNONYMS
pratyaha—daily; candana—sandalwood pulp; pardya—smears over the body;
yavat—until; haila—there was; anta—an end; tathaya—there; rahila—remained;
puri—Madhavendra Pur; tavat—that time; paryanta—until.
TRANSLATION
In this way the sandalwood pulp was smeared over the body of Gopinatha
until the whole stock was finished. Madhavendra Puri stayed there until that
time.


--- Page 90 ---
Text 169) $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 87
TEXT 169
গ্রীষ্মকাল-অস্তে পুনঃ নীলাচলে গেলা |
নীলাচলে চাত্ুর্মাহ্ত' আনন্দে রহিল৷ ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
grisma-kala-ante punah nilacale gela
nilacale caturmasya anande rahila
SYNONYMS

grisma-kala—of the summer season; ante—at the end; punah—again;
nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; gela—went; nilacale—in Jagannatha Puri; catur-
masya—the four months for vows; anande —in great pleasure; rahila—remained.

TRANSLATION

At the end of summer, Madhavendra Puri returned to Jagannatha Puri,
where he remained with great pleasure during the whole period of Catur-
masya.

PURPORT

The Caturmasya period begins in the month of Asadha (June-July) from the day
of Ekadasi called Sayana-ekadasi in the fortnight of the waxing moon. The period
ends in the month of Kartika (October-November) on the Ekadasi day known as
Utthana-ekadasi in the fortnight of the waxing moon. This four-month period is
known as Caturmasya. Some Vaisnavas also observe it from the full-moon day of
Asadha until the full-moon day of Kartika. That is also a period of four months.
This period, calculated by the lunar months, is called Caturmasya, but others also
observe Caturmasya according to the solar month from $ravana to Kartika. The
whole period, either lunar or solar, takes place during the rainy season. Catur-
masya should be observed by all sections of the population. It does not matter
whether one is a grhastha or a sannyasi. The observance is obligatory for all
asramas. The real purpose behind the vow taken during these four months is to
minimize the quantity of sense gratification. This is not very difficult. In the month
of Sravana, one should not eat spinach. In the month of Bhadra, one should not
eat yogurt, and in the month of Advina, one should not drink milk. One should not
eat fish or other nonvegetarian food during the month of Kartika. A nonvegetarian
diet means fish and meat. Similarly, masura dahl and urad dahl are also considered
nonvegetarian. These two dahls contain a great amount of protein, and food rich
in protein is considered nonvegetarian. On the whole, during the four-month
period of Caturmasya, one should practice giving up all food intended for sense
enjoyment.


--- Page 91 ---
88 ওলা Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
TEXT 170
Bey मोधय-चजोन्र खभ्रूड-षएत्रि ।
ভক্তগণে WAI] প্রভু করে আস্বাদিত ॥ ১৭০ ॥
$ri-mukhe madhava-purira amrta-carita
bhakta-gane sunana prabhu kare asvadita
SYNONYMS
$ri-mukhe —from the mouth of जनं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; madhava-purira—of
Madhavendra Puri; amrta-carita—nectarean characteristics; bhakta-gane—the
devotees; sunania—making hear; prabhu—the Lord; kare—does; asvadita—
relished.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally praised the nectarean charac-
teristics of Madhavendra Puri, and while He related all this to the devotees, He
personally relished it.
TEXT 171
প্রভু कटक, _ নিত্যানন্দ», করহ বিচার ।
M-TH ভাগ্যবান্‌ জগতে নাহি আর ॥ ১৭১ ॥
prabhu kahe, — nityananda, karaha vicara
puri-sama bhagyavan jagate nahi ara
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —the Lord said; nityananda—Nityananda Prabhu; karaha vicara—
just consider; puri-sama—like Madhavendra Puri; bhagyavan—fortunate;
jagate—in the world; nahi — there is not; ara—anyone else.
TRANSLATION
Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Nityananda Prabhu to judge whether
there was anyone within the world as fortunate as Madhavendra Puri.
TEXT 172
তু্ধদান-ছলে কৃষ্ণ যারে দেখা দিল |
তিনবারে স্বপ্নে আসি” যারে আজ্ঞা কৈল ॥ ১৭২ ॥


--- Page 92 ---
Text 174] $ri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 89
dugdha-dana-chale krsna yanre dekha dila
tina-bare svapne asi’ yanre ajna kaila
SYNONYMS
dugdha-dana-chale—on the plea of delivering milk; krspa—Lord Krsna;
yanre—unto whom; dekha dila—made His appearance; tina-bare—three times;
svapne—in dreams; dsi’—coming; yarre—unto whom; ajia—order; kaila—gave.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: ‘“Madhavendra Puri was so fortunate that
Krsna personally appeared before him on the plea of delivering milk. Three
times the Lord gave orders to Madhavendra Puri in dreams.
TEXT 173
যার প্রেমে বশ হঞ। প্রকট 226 |
সেবা তঙ্গীকার করি” জগত তারিল)| ॥ ১৭৩ ॥
yanra preme vasa hana prakata ha-ila
seva angikara kari’ jagata tarila
SYNONYMS
yanra—of whom; preme—by love of Godhead; vasa—obliged; haria—being;
prakata—manifest; ha-ila—became; seva—service; angikara—acceptance;
kari’—doing; jagata—the whole world; tarila—delivered.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Being obliged because of the loving affairs of Madhavendra Puri, Lord
Krsna Himself appeared as the Gopala Deity, and, accepting his service, He
liberated the whole world.
TEXT 174
যার লাগি' গোপীনাথ ক্ষীর কৈল ए ।
অতএব নাম হৈল “ক্ষীরচোরা' করি” ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
yanra lagi’ gopinatha ksira kaila curi
ataeva nama haila ’ksira-cora’ kari’


--- Page 93 ---
90 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
SYNONYMS
yanra—whom; lagi’—on account of; gopinatha—Lord Gopinatha; ksira—
sweet rice; kaila—did; curi—steal; ataeva—therefore; nama—the name; haila—
became; ksira-cora—the thief of sweet rice; kari’—making.
TRANSLATION
“On account of Madhavendra Puri, Lord Gopinitha stole the pot of sweet
rice. Thus He became famous as Ksira-cora [the thief who stole the sweet
ricel.
TEXT 175
কপূরে-চন্দন যার অঙ্গে চড়াইল |
আনন্দে পুৰী-গোসাঞ্ির প্রেম BARE ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
karpara-candana yarra arige cadaila
anande puri-gosanira prema uthalila
SYNONYMS
karpara-candana—camphor and sandalwood; yanra arige—on whose body;
cadaila—put; anande—in great pleasure; puri-gosanira—of Madhavendra Puri;
prema—love of Godhead; uthalila—welled up.
TRANSLATION
‘“Madhavendra Puri smeared the sandalwood pulp over the body of
Gopinatha, and in this way he was overpowered with love of Godhead.
TEXT 176
গ্লেচ্ছদেশে কপপূরি-চন্দন আনিতে क्षल |
পুরী তুঃখ न।टव ইহ wife গোপাল ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
mleccha-dese karpuara-candana anite janjala
puri duhkha pabe iha janiya gopala
SYNONYMS
mleccha-dese —through the countries where Mohammedans ruled; karpara-
candana—camphor and sandalwood; anite—to bring; jaijala—inconvenience;
puri—Madhavendra Puri; duhkha—unhappiness; pabe—will get; iha—this;
janiya—knowing; gopala—GCopala.


--- Page 94 ---
Text 178] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 91
TRANSLATION
“In the provinces of India governed by the Mohammedans, there was much
inconvenience in traveling with sandalwood and camphor. Because of this,
Madhavendra Puri might have gotten into trouble. This became known to the
Gopala Deity.
TEXT 177
মহা-দয়াময় প্রভু--ভকতবৎসল |
চন্দন পরি” ভক্তশ্রম করিল সফল ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
maha-daya-maya prabhu——bhakata-vatsala
candana pari’ bhakta-srama karila saphala
SYNONYMS
maha—very; daya-maya—merciful; prabhu—the Lord; bhakata-vatsala—very
attached to His devotees; candana pari’—putting on the sandalwood; bhakta-
Srama—the trouble of the devotee; karila—made; saphala—successful.
TRANSLATION
“The Lord is very merciful and attached to His devotees, so when
Gopinatha was covered with sandalwood pulp, Madhavendra Puri’s labor be-
came successful.”
TEXT 178
ARNT প্রেম-পরাকান্ঠা করহ বিচার |
অলোকিক প্রেম চিত্তে লাগে চমৎকার ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
purira prema-parakastha karaha vicara
alaukika prema citte lage camatkara
SYNONYMS
purira—of Madhavendra Puri; prema-para-kastha—the standard of intense
love of Godhead; karaha—just make; vicara—judgment; alaukika—uncommon;
prema—love of Godhead; citte—in the mind; lage —strikes; camatkara—wonder.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu placed the standard of Madhavendra Puri’s intense
love before Nityananda Prabhu for judgment. ‘All his loving activities are un-


--- Page 95 ---
92 ङा Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
common,” Caitanya Mahaprabhu said. ‘Indeed, one is struck with wonder to
hear of his activities.”
PURPORT
When the living entity feels spiritual separation from Krsna (krsna-viraha), he
has achieved the prime success of life. When one becomes disinterested in mate-
rial things, he is simply experiencing the other side of attraction for material things.
However, feeling separation from Krsna and engaging in the service of the Lord to
fulfill His mission constitute the best example of love of Krsna. $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu wanted to point out this intense love of Krsna exhibited by Madha-
vendra Puri. All Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s devotees later followed in the footsteps
of Madhavendra Puri, serving the Lord without personal considerations.
TEXT 179
পরম বিরক্ত, মৌনী, সর্বত্র উদাসীন |
গ্রাম্যবার্তা-ভয়ে দ্বিতীয়-সঙ্গ-হীন 1 ১৭৯ ॥
parama virakta, mauni, sarvatra udasina
gramya-varta-bhaye dvitiya-sariga-hina
SYNONYMS
parama virakta—totally renounced or unattached; mauni—silent; sarvatra—
everywhere; udasina—uninterested; gramya-varta—of mundane topics; bhaye —
in fear; dvitiya—second; sariga—associate; hina—without.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahiprabhu continued: “Sri Madhavendra Puri used to remain
alone. He was completely renounced and always very silent. He was unin-
terested in everything material, and for fear of talking about mundane things,
he always lived without a companion.
TEXT 180
হেন-জলন গোপালের আজ্ঞাম্বত পাঞা |
72 cae আসি” বুলে চন্দন মাগিঞ। ॥ ১৮০ ॥
hena-jana gopalera 3/ল3/771(9 pana
sahasra krosa asi’ bule candana magina


--- Page 96 ---
Text 182] Sri Miadhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 93
SYNONYMS
hena-jana—such a personality; gopalera—of the Gopala Deity; ajia-amrta—
the nectarean order; pana—getting; sahasra—a thousand; krosa—a distance of
two miles; asi’—coming; bule—walks; candana—sandalwood; magina—beg-
ging.
TRANSLATION
“After receiving the transcendental orders of Gopala, this great personality
traveled thousands of miles just to collect sandalwood by begging.
TEXT 181
ভোকে ACE, তবু অন্ন মাগিঞা ना খায়।
হেন-জন চনম্দন-ভার বহি” न 31 যায় ॥ ১৮১ ॥
bhoke rahe, tabu anna magina na khaya
hena-jana candana-bhara vahi’ lana yaya
SYNONYMS
bhoke—hungry; rahe —remains; tabu—still; anna—food; magina—begging;
na—does not; khaya—eat; hena-jana—such a person; candana-bhara—the load
of sandalwood; vahi’—carrying; lana —taking; yaya—goes.
TRANSLATION
“Although Madhavendra Puri was hungry, he would not beg food to eat.
This renounced person carried a load of sandalwood for the sake of Sri
Gopala.
TEXT 182
“মণেক চন্দন, তোলা-বিশেক कश ।
গোপালে পরাইবঝ'-_এই আনন্দ প্রচুর ॥ ১৮২ ॥
‘maneka candana, tola-viseka karpdra
gopale paraiba’—ei ananda pracura
SYNONYMS
maneka candana—one mound of sandalwood; tola—a measurement of
weight; viseka—twenty; karpidra—camphor; gopale—on Gopala; paraiba—I|
shall smear; ei—this; ananda—pleasure; pracura—sufficient.


--- Page 97 ---
94 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
‘Without considering his personal comforts, Madhavendra Puri carried one
mound [about eighty-two pounds] of sandalwood and twenty tolas [about
eight ounces] of camphor to smear over the body of Gopala. This transcen-
dental pleasure was sufficient for him.
TEXT 183
উৎকলের দানী রাখে চন্দন यिथ ।
তাহ এড়াইল রাজপত্র দেখাঞ। ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
utkalera dani rakhe candana dekhina
tahan edaila raja-patra dekhana
SYNONYMS
utkalera—of Orissa; dani—toll officer; rakhe —takes; candana—sandalwood;
dekhina—seeing; tahan—there; edaila—escaped; raja-patra—governmental
release; dekhana—by showing.
TRANSLATION
‘Since there were restrictions against taking the sandalwood out of the
Orissa province, the toll official confiscated the stock, but Madhavendra Puri
showed him the release papers given by the government and consequently
escaped difficulties.
TEXT 184
গ্লেচ্ছদেশ দুর পথ, জগাতি অপার |
কেমতে চন্দন নিব- নাহি এ বিচার ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
mleccha-desa dara patha, jagati apara
ke-mate candana niba——nahi € vicara
SYNONYMS
mleccha-desa—the countries governed by Mohammedans; 0013 patha—long
journey; jagati—watchmen; apara—unlimited; ke-mate—how; candana—the
sandalwood; niba—I shall take; nahi—there was not; e —this; vicara—considera-
tion.
TRANSLATION
‘““Madhavendra Puri was not at all anxious during the long journey to
Vrndavana through the provinces governed by the Mohammedans and filled
with unlimited numbers of watchmen.


--- Page 98 ---
Text 186] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 95
TEXT 185
সঙ্গে এক বট নাহি ঘাট্টাছান দিতে ।
তথাপি উৎসাহ বড় চন্দল লঞা যাইতে ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
sange eka vata nahi ghati-dana dite
tathapi utsaha (2412 candana lana yaite
SYNONYMS
sarnge—with him; eka—one; vata—farthing; nahi—there was not; ghati-
dana—as a toll tax; dite—to give; tathapi—still; utsaha—enthusiasm; bada—
much; candana—sandalwood; /ana—taking; yaite—to go.
TRANSLATION
‘Although Madhavendra Puri did not have a farthing with him, he was not
afraid to pass by the toll officers. His only enjoyment was in carrying the load
of sandalwood to Vrndavana for Gopala.
TEXT 186
প্রগাড়-প্রেমের এই স্বভাব-আচার |
নিজ-দুঃখ-বিস্ম।দির al করে বিচার ॥ ১৮৬ ॥
pragadha-premera ei svabhava-acara
nija-duhkha-vighnadira na kare vicara
SYNONYMS
pragagdha—intense; premera—of love of Godhead; ei—this; svabhava—
natural; dcara—behavior; nija—personal; duhkha—inconvenience; vighna—im-
pediments; adira—and so on; na—not; kare—does; vicara—consideration.
TRANSLATION
“This is the natural result of intense love of Godhead. The devotee does not
consider personal inconveniences or impediments. In all circumstances he
wants to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
It is natural for those who have developed intense love for Krsna not to care for
personal inconvenience and impediments. Such devotees are simply determined
to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His representa-
tive, the spiritual master. In all circumstances, even amidst the greatest dangers,


--- Page 99 ---
96 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
they undeviatingly carry on with the greatest determination. This definitely
proves the intense love of the servitor. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, tat te
‘nukampar susamiksyamanah: those who seriously desire to get free from the
clutches of material existence, who have developed intense love for Krsna, are
worthy candidates for going back home, back to Godhead. An intense lover of
Krsna does not care for any number of material discomforts, scarcity, impediments
or unhappiness. It is said that when one sees apparent unhappiness or distress in a
perfect Vaisnava, it is not at all unhappiness for him; rather, it is transcendental
bliss. In the Siksastaka, ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu has also instructed: aslisya va
pada-ratam. The intense lover of Krsna is never deviated from his service, despite
all difficulties and impediments brought before him.
TEXT 187
এই তার গাঢ় প্রেমা লোকে দেখাইতে |
গোপাল তারে আজ্ঞা দিল চন্দন আনিতে ॥ ১৮৭ ॥
ei tara 83909 prema loke dekhaite
gopala tanre 2/7 dila candana anite
SYNONYMS
ei—this; tara—of Madhavendra Puri; gadha—intense; prema—love of God-
head; loke —unto the people; dekhaite—to show; gopala—Lord Copala; tanre—
to him; gjAa—order; dila—gave; candana—sandalwood; anite—to bring.
TRANSLATION
“Sri Gopala wanted to show how intensely Midhavendra Puri loved Krsna;
therefore He asked him to go to Nilacala to fetch sandalwood and camphor.
TEXT 188
বহু পরিশ্রমে চন্দন রেমুণা আনিল ।
আনন্দ বাড়িল মনে, দুঃখ না গণিল ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
bahu parisrame candana remuna anila
ananda badila mane, duhkha na ganila
SYNONYMS
bahu—much; parisSrame—with labor; candana—sandalwood; remuna—to
Remuna (the village of Copinatha); anila—brought; ananda—pleasure; badila—
increased; mane—in the mind; duhkha—difficulties; na—not; ganila—counted.


--- Page 100 ---
Text 190] इ Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 97
TRANSLATION
‘With great trouble and after much labor, Madhavendra Puri brought the
load of sandalwood to Remuna. However, he was still very pleased; he dis-
counted all the difficulties.
TEXT 189
পরীক্ষা করিতে গোপাল टेकल আজ্ঞা लोन |
পরীক্ষ| AT শেষে হৈল দয়াবান্‌ ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
pariksa karite gopala kaila aja dana
pariksa kariya sese haila dayavan
SYNONYMS
pariksa—test; karite—to make; gopala—Lord Gopala; kaila—did; ajna—the
order; dana—giving; pariksa—the test; kariya—making; sese—at the end;
haila—became; daya-van—merciful.
TRANSLATION
‘To test the intense love of Madhavendra Puri, Gopila, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, ordered him to bring sandalwood from Nilacala, and
when Madhavendra Puri passed this examination, the Lord became very mer-
ciful to him.
TEXT 190
এই ভক্তি, ভক্তপ্রিয়-ক্বষ্ণ-ব্যবহার |
বুঝিতেও আমা-সবার নাহি অধিকার ॥ ১৯০ ॥
ei bhakti, bhakta-priya-krsna-vyavahara
bujhiteo ama-sabara nahi adhikara
SYNONYMS
ei bhakti—this type of devotion; bhakta—of the devotee; priya—and the most
lovable object; krsna—Lord Krsna; vyavahara—the behavior; bujhiteo —to under-
stand; ama-sabara—of all of us; nahi—there is not; adhikara—the capacity.
TRANSLATION
‘Such behavior exhibited in loving service between the devotee and the
devotee’s lovable object, Sri Krsna, is transcendental. It is not possible for a
common man to understand. Common men do not even have the capacity.”


--- Page 101 ---
98 $i Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
TEXT 191
এত বলি” পড়ে প্রভু তার FS (AIT |
যেই শ্লোক-চল্ছ্বে জগৎ কর্যাছে আলোক ॥ >>> ॥
eta bali’ pade prabhu tanra krta $/০0/3
yei sloka-candre jagat karyache aloka
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; pade—reads; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tarra—by Madhavendra Puri; krta—composed; $loka—verse; yei—that; $loka-
candre —by the moonlike verse; jagat—all over the world; karyache —produced;
aloka—light.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu read the famous verse of
Madhavendra Puri. That verse is just like the moon. It has spread illumination
all over the world.
TEXT 192
firs यसिटङ যৈছে মলয়জ-সার |
গন্ধ বাড়ে, তৈছে এই শ্লোকের বিচার ॥ ১৯২ ॥
ghasite ghasite yaiche malayaja-sara
gandha bade, taiche ei $lokera vicara
SYNONYMS
ghasite ghasite —rubbing and rubbing; yaiche —just as; malaya-ja-sara—sandal-
wood; gandha—the flavor; bade—increases; taiche —similarly; ei—this;
$lokera—of the verse; vicara—the consideration.
TRANSLATION
By continuous rubbing, the aroma of Malaya sandalwood increases.
Similarly, by considering this verse, its importance increases.
TEXT 193
র্নগণ-মধ্যে যৈছে (कोच्छर्मनि |
রসকাব্য-মধ্যে তৈছে এই শ্লোক গণি ॥ ১৯৩ ॥


--- Page 102 ---
Text 195] $ri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 99
ratna-gana-madhye yaiche kaustubha-mani
rasa-kavya-madhye taiche ei sloka gani

SYNONYMS
ratna-gana—the valuable jewels; madhye—among; yaiche—just ৪5;
kaustubha-mani—the jewel known as Kaustubha-mani; rasa-kavya—mellow po-
etry; madhye—among; taiche —similarly; ei—this; sloka—verse; gani—I count.
TRANSLATION
As the kaustubha-mani is considered the most precious of valuable stones,
this verse is similarly considered the best of mellow poems.
TEXT 194
এই শ্লোক কহিয়াছেন aul-Sigaid)
তার কৃপায় স্ফুরিয়াছে মাধবেন্ছে-বাণী ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
ei sloka kahiyachena radha-thakurani
tanra krpaya sphuriyache madhavendra-vani
SYNONYMS
ei—this; Sloka—verse; kahiyachena—has spoken; radha-thakurani —Srimati
Radharani; tanra—Her; krpaya—by the mercy; sphuriyache—has manifested;
madhavendra—of Madhavendra Puri; vani—the words.
TRANSLATION
Actually this verse was spoken by Srimati Radharani Herself, and by Her
mercy only was it manifest in the words of Madhavendra Puri.
TEXT 195
কিবা গৌরচন্দ্র ইহ। করে আস্বাদন |
ইহ আস্বাদিতে আর নাহি চৌঠজন ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
kiba gauracandra iha kare asvadana
iha asvadite ara nahi cautha-jana
SYNONYMS
kiba—how excellent; gaura-candra—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; iha—this;
kare—does; asvadana—tasting; ihda—this verse; asvadite—to taste; ara—
another; nahi—there is not; cautha-jana—a fourth man.


--- Page 103 ---
100 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lil3, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Only Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has tasted the poetry of this verse. No fourth
man is capable of understanding it.
PURPORT
This indicates that only $rimati Radharani, Madhavendra Puri and Caitanya
Mahaprabhu are capable of understanding the purport of this verse.
TEXT 196
শেষকালে এই cuits পঠিতে পঠিতে।
সিদ্ধিপ্রাপ্তি হৈল পুরীর শ্লোকের সহিতে ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
Sesa-kale ei sloka pathite pathite
siddhi-prapti haila purira slokera sahite
SYNONYMS
Sesa-kale—at the end; ei $loka—this verse; pathite pathite—by reciting
repeatedly; siddhi-prapti—attainment of perfection; haila—there was; purira—of
Madhavendra Puri; slokera—this verse; sahite—with.
TRANSLATION
Madhavendra Puri recited this verse again and again at the end of his mate-
rial existence. Thus uttering this verse, he attained the ultimate goal of life.
TEXT 197 `
অয়ি দীনদয়ার্্র নাথ হে মথুরানাথ বদাবলোক্যসে।
হৃদয়ৎত্বদলোককাতরংদয়িত ভ্রাম্যতি কিৎকরোম্যহম্‌॥১৯৭
ayi dina-dayardra natha he
mathura-natha kadavalokyase
hrdayam tvad-aloka-kataram
dayita bhramyati kim karomy aham
SYNONYMS
ayi—O My Lord; dina—on the poor; daya-ardra—compassionate; natha—O
master; he—QO; mathura-natha—the master of Mathurd; kadi—when;
avalokyase—I shall see You; hrdayam—My heart; tvat—of You; aloka—without
seeing; kataram—very much aggrieved; dayita—O most beloved;
bhramyati—becomes overwhelmed; kim—what; karomi—shall do; aham—I.


--- Page 104 ---
Text 198] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 101
TRANSLATION

“O My Lord! O most merciful master! O master of Mathura! When shall |
see You again? Because of My not seeing You, My agitated heart has become
unsteady. O most beloved one, what shall 1 do now?”

PURPORT

The uncontaminated devotees who strictly depend on the Vedanta philosophy
are divided into four sampradayas, or transcendental parties. Out of the four
sampradiyas, the $ri Madhvacarya-sampradaya was accepted by Madhavendra
Puri. Thus he took sannyasa according to parampara, the disciplic succession.
Beginning from Madhvacarya down to the spiritual master of Madhavendra Puri,
the acarya named Laksmipati, there was no realization of devotional service in
conjugal love. $ri Madhavendra Puri introduced the conception of conjugal love
for the first time in the Madhvacarya-sampradaya, and this conclusion of the
Madhviacarya-sampradaya was revealed by $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when He
toured southern India and met the Tattvavadis, who supposedly belonged to the
Madhvacarya-sampradaya.

When 57 Krsna left Vindavana and accepted the kingdom of Mathura, Srimati
Radharani, out of ecstatic feelings of separation, expressed how Krsna can be
loved in separation. Thus devotional service in separation is central to this verse.
Worship in separation is considered by the Caudiya-Madhva-sampradaya to be
the topmost level of devotional service. According to this conception, the devo-
tee thinks of himself as very poor and neglected by the Lord. Thus he addresses
the Lord as dina-dayardra natha, as did Madhavendra Puri. Such an ecstatic feeling
is the highest form of devotional service. Because Krsna had gone to Mathura,
Srimati Radharani was very much affected, and She expressed Herself thus: “My
dear Lord, because of Your separation My mind has become overly agitated. Now
tell Me, what can | do? | am very poor, and You are very merciful, so kindly have
compassion upon Me and let Me know when | shall see You! $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was always expressing the ecstatic emotions of Srimati Radharani
that She exhibited when She saw Uddhava at Vrindavana. Similar feelings, ex-
perienced by Madhavendra Puri, are expressed in this verse. Therefore, Vaisnavas
in the Gaudiya-Madhva-sampradaya say that the ecstatic feelings experienced by
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu during His appearance came from $ri Madhavendra Puri
through Tévara Puri. All the devotees in the line of the Gaudiya-Madhva-
sampradaya accept these principles of devotional service.

TEXT 198
এই (नीक পড়িতে প্রভু ङ्टेन) মুচ্ছিতে |
প্রেমেতে বিবশ হঞা পড়িল ভূমিতে ॥ ১৯৮ ॥


--- Page 105 ---
102 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
ei sloka padite prabhu ha-ila marcchite
premete vivasa hana padila bhamite
SYNONYMS
ei $loka—this verse; padite—reciting; prabhu—Lord आ Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
ha-ila—became; marcchite—unconscious; premete—in ecstatic love; vivasa—
uncontrolled; haina—becoming; padila—fell down; bhamite—on the ground.
TRANSLATION
When ওল Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited this verse, He immediately fell to
the ground unconscious. He was overwhelmed and had no control over Him-
self.
TEXT 199
खटचछ-वाट्ख CFIA করি” নিল নিত্যানন্দ |
ক্রন্দন (awl তবে উঠে গৌরচন্দ্র ॥ ১৯৯ ॥
aste-vyaste kole kari’ nila nityananda
krandana kariya tabe uthe gauracandra
SYNONYMS
aste-vyaste —in great dexterity; kole—on the lap; kari’—making; nila—took;
nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; krandana—crying; kariya—doing; tabe—
at that time; uthe—got up; gaura-candra—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
When Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell to the ground in ecstatic love,
Lord Nityananda took Him on His lap. Crying, Caitanya Mahaprabhu then got
up again.
TEXT 200
প্রেমোল্মাদ হৈল, উঠি' ইতি-উতি ধায় ।
TFA করয়ে, হাসে, কাম্দে, নাচে, গায় ॥ ২০০ ॥
premonmada haila, uthi’ iti-uti dhaya
hunkara karaye, hase, kande, nace, gaya
SYNONYMS
prema-unmada—the madness of love; haila—there was; uthi’—getting up; iti-
uti dhaya—runs here and there; hunkara—resounding; karaye —does; hase—
laughs; kande —cries; nace —dances; gaya—and sings.


--- Page 106 ---
Text 202] $ri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 103
TRANSLATION
Exhibiting ecstatic emotions, the Lord began to run here and there, making
resounding noises. Sometimes He laughed, and sometimes cried, and some-
times danced and sang.
TEXT 201
“অয়ি দীন, “অয় দীন” বলে বারবার ।
কণ্ঠে नो নিঃসরে বাণী, নেত্রে SEER ॥ ২০১ ॥
‘ayi dina’, ‘ayi dina’ bale bara-bara
kanthe na nihsare vani, netre asru-dhara
SYNONYMS
ayi dina—O my Lord, master of the poor; ayi dina—O my Lord, master of the
poor; bale—says; bara-bara—repeatedly; kanthe—in the throat; na—not;
nihsare—comes out; vani—the voice; netre—in the eyes; asru-dhara—torrents
of tears.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu could not recite the whole verse. He simply said, “‘Ayi
dina, ayi dina,” repeatedly. Thus He could not speak, and profuse tears were
in His eyes.
TEXT 202
कन्णे, স্বেদ, श्रुलकोद्यः, BY, oA |
নির্বেদ, বিষাদ, काण, গর্ব; 24, Cr ॥ ২০২ ॥
kampa, sveda, pulakasru, stambha, vaivarnya
nirveda, visada, jadya, garva, harsa, dainya
SYNONYMS
kampa—trembling; sveda—perspiration; pulaka-asru—jubilation and tears;
stambha—shock; vaivarnya—loss of color; nirveda—disappointment; visada—
moroseness; jadya—loss of memory; garva—pride; harsa—joy; dainya—humility.
TRANSLATION
Trembling, perspiration, jubilant tears, shock, fading of the bodily luster,
disappointment, moroseness, loss of memory, pride, joy and humility were all
visible in $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s body.


--- Page 107 ---
104 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
PURPORT
In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, jadya is explained as loss of memory brought
about by severe shock due to separation from the beloved. In that state of mind,
one loses all concern for loss and gain, hearing and seeing, as well as all other con-
siderations. This marks the preliminary appearance of illusion.
TEXT 203
এই (शाटक উঘাড়িলা প্রেমের কপাট 1
গোপীনাথ-সেবক দেখে প্রভুর প্রেমনাট ॥ ২০৩ ॥
ei sloke ughadila premera kapata
gopinatha-sevaka dekhe prabhura prema-nata
SYNONYMS
ei sloke—this verse; ughadila—uncovered; premera—of conjugal love;
kapata—the door; gopinatha-sevaka—the servants of the Gopinatha Deity;
dekhe —see; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-nata—the dance
in ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
This verse uncovered the door of ecstatic love, and when it was exhibited,
all the servants of Gopinatha saw Caitanya Mahaprabhu dance in ecstasy.
TEXT 204
লোকের সংঘট্ট দেখি” প্রভুর বাহু হৈল ।
ঠাকুরের ভোগ সরি” আরতি বাজিল ॥ ২০৪ ॥
lokera sanghatta dekhi’ prabhura bahya haila
thakurera bhoga sari’ arati bgjila
SYNONYMS
lokera—of people; sanghatta—a crowd; dekhi’—seeing; prabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bahya—external consciousness; haila—appeared;
thakurera—of the Deity; bhoga—offering; sari’—finishing; arati—performance of
arati; bajila—resounded.
TRANSLATION
When many people crowded around Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He regained
His external senses. In the meantime, the offering to the Deity had been
finished, and there was a resounding arati performance.


--- Page 108 ---
Text 207] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 105
TEXT 205
ঠাকুরে শয়ন कना 49) YAY হৈল বাহির ।
প্রভুর আগে আমি” দিল প্রসাদ বার ক্ষীর ॥ ২০৫॥
thakure sayana karana pajari haila bahira
prabhura age ani’ dila prasada bara ksira
SYNONYMS
thakure —the Deity; sayana—lying down; karana—causing to do; pajari—the
priest; haila—was; bahira—out of the temple; prabhura—of Lord Sn Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; age —in front; ani’—bringing; dila—offered; prasada—the rem-
nants of food; bara—twelve; ksira—pots of sweet rice.
TRANSLATION
When the Deities were laid down to rest, the priest came out of the temple
and offered all twelve pots of sweet rice to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 206
ক্ষীর দেখি' মহাপ্রভুর আনন্দ বাড়িল |
ভক্তগণে খাওয়াইতে পঞ্চ ক্ষীর লৈল ॥ ২০৬ ॥
ksira dekhi’ mahaprabhura ananda badila
bhakta-gane khaoyaite (227८ ksira laila
SYNONYMS
ksira—the sweet rice; dekhi’—seeing; mahaprabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ananda—the pleasure; badila—increased; bhakta-gane —the devo-
tees; khaoyaite—to feed them; paica—five pots; ksira—sweet rice; laila—ac-
cepted.
TRANSLATION
When all the pots of sweet rice, remnants left by Gopinatha, were placed
before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He became very pleased. In order to feed
the devotees, He accepted five of them.
TEXT 207
সাত ক্ষীর পুজারীকে areal দিল ।
পঞ্চক্ষীর পঞ্চজনে BH খাইল ॥ ২০৭ ॥


--- Page 109 ---
106 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 4
sata ksira pajarike bahudiya dila
parica-ksira pafica-jane vantiya khaila
SYNONYMS
sata ksira—seven pots of sweet rice; pajarike—toward the pajari; bahudiya—
pushing forward; dila—gave; parica-ksira—five pots of sweet rice; parica-jane—
to five men; vantiya—distributing; khaila—ate.
TRANSLATION
The seven remaining pots were pushed forward and delivered to the priest.
Then the five pots of sweet rice the Lord had accepted were distributed
among the five devotees, and they ate the prasada.
TEXT 208
গোপীনাথ-রূপে যদি कत्रिश्नोटन cote |
ভক্তি দেখাইতে কৈল প্রসাদ ভক্ষণ ॥ ২০৮ ॥
gopinatha-ripe yadi kariyachena bhojana
bhakti dekhaite kaila prasada bhaksana
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-ripe—in His arca incarnation as 0901738079৭; yadi—although;
kariyachena—has done; bhojana—eating; bhakti—devotional service;
dekhaite —to exhibit; kaila—did; prasada bhaksana—eating.
TRANSLATION
Being identical with the Gopinatha Deity, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had
already tasted and eaten the pots of sweet rice. Yet just to manifest devotional
service, He again ate the pots of sweet rice as a devotee.
TEXT 209
নাম-সংকীর্তনে সেই রাত্রি গোঙাইলা |
মঙ্গল-অ।রতি দেখি' প্রভাতে চলিল। ॥ ২০৯ ॥
nama-sankirtane sei ratri gonaila
mangala-arati dekhi’ prabhate calila


--- Page 110 ---
Text 211] Sri Madhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 107
SYNONYMS
nama-sankirtane—in congregational chanting; sei—that; ratri—night;
gonaila—passed; marigala-arati—the early arati; dekhi’—after seeing; prabhate —
in the morning; calila—departed.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed that night at the temple engaged in con-
gregational chanting. In the morning, after seeing the mangala-arati perfor-
mance, He departed.
TEXT 210
গোপাল-গোপীনাথ-পুব্লীগো লাঞ্ঞর গুণ |
ভক্ত-সঙ্গে EC প্রভু टेकन्‌। আস্বাদন ॥ ২১০ ॥
gopala-gopinatha-puri-gosarira guna
bhakta-sarige sri-mukhe prabhu kaila asvadana
SYNONYMS
gopala—of the Gopala Deity; gopinatha—of the Copinatha Deity; puri-
gosanira—of Madhavendra Puri; guna—the qualities; bhakta-sarige—with the
devotees; sri-mukhe —in His own mouth; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kaila—did; asvadana—tasting.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally tasted with His own
mouth the transcendental qualities of Gopalaji, Gopiniatha and Sri Madha-
vendraPuri.
TEXT 211
এই & আখ্যানে sem cig মহিমা |
প্রভুর STACI, আর ভক্তপ্রেম-সীম৷ ॥ ২১১ ॥
ei ta’ akhyane kahila dorihara mahima
prabhura bhakta-vatsalya, ara bhakta-prema-sima
SYNONYMS
ei ta’—thus; dkhyane—in the narration; kahila—described; dorihara—of the
two; mahima—the glories; prabhura—of Lord তা Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-


--- Page 111 ---
108 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 4
vatsalya—attachment for His devotees; ara—and; bhakta-prema-sima—the high-
est limit of ecstatic love by the devotee.
TRANSLATION
Thus 1 have described both the transcendental glories of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s affection for His devotees and the highest limit of ecstatic love
of God.
TEXT 212
SGT হঞ৷ ইহ শুনে যেই जन |
জীকৃষ্ণচরণে সেই পায় প্রেমধন ॥ ২১২ ॥
sraddha-yukta hana 103 sune yei jana
sri-krspa-carane sei paya prema-dhana
SYNONYMS
Sraddha-yukta—possessed of faith; hana—being; iha—this; sune—hears;
yei—that; jana—person; sri-krsna-carane—at the lotus feet of Lord Sri Krsna;
sei—that person; paya—gets; prema-dhana—the treasure of love of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
One who hears this narration with faith and devotion attains the treasure of
love of Godhead at the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.
TEXT 213
জীরূপ-রখঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্ৃত কহে কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ২১৩ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe 10050390353
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—S$rila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; ydra—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritaimrta; kahe —describes; krspa-dasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami.


--- Page 112 ---
Text 213] Sri Midhavendra Puri’s Devotional Service 109
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and $ri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
112, Fourth Chapter, describing Sri Madhavendra Puri’s devotional service.


--- Page 113 ---
CHAPTER 5
The Activities of Saksi-gopala
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following summary of the Fifth Chapter in his
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya: After passing through Yajapura, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
reached the town of Kataka (Cuttak) and there went to see the temple of Saksi-
8০313. While there, He heard the story of Saksi-gopala from the mouth of Sri
Nityananda Prabhu.

Once there were two brahmanas, one elderly and the other young, who were
inhabitants of a place known as Vidyanagara. After touring many places of
pilgrimage, the two brahmanas finally reached Vrndavana. The elderly brahmana
was very satisfied with the service of the young brahmana, and he wanted to
offer him his youngest daughter in marriage. The young brahmana received the
promise of his elder before the Gopala Deity of Vindavana. Thus the Gopala Deity
acted as a witness. When both brahmanas returned to Vidyanagara, the younger
brahmana raised the question of this marriage, but the elderly brahmana, due to
obligations to his friends and wife, answered that he could not remember his
promise. Because of this, the younger brahmana returned to Vrndavana and nar-
rated the whole story to Copalaji. Thus Gopalaji, being obliged by the young
man’s devotional service, accompanied him to southern India. Gopalaji followed
the younger brahmana, who could hear the tinkling sound of Copalaji's ankle
bells. When all the respectable gentlemen of Vidyanagara were assembled,
Copalaji testified to the promise of the elderly brahmana. Thus the marriage was
performed. Later, the King of that country constructed a fine temple for Gopala.

Afterwards, King Purusottama of Orissa was insulted by the King of Kataka,
who refused to give him his daughter in marriage and called him a sweeper of
Lord Jagannatha. With the help of Lord Jagannatha, King Purusottama fought the
King of Kataka and defeated him. Thus he took charge of both the King's daughter
and the state of Kataka as well. At that time, Gopalaji, being very much obligated
by the devotional service of King Purusottama, was brought to the town of
Kataka.

After hearing this narration, क Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited the temple of
Gopala in great ecstasy of love of God. From Kataka He went to Bhuvane$vara and
saw the temple of Lord Siva. In this way, He gradually arrived at Kamalapura, and
on the banks of the Bhargi River He came to the temple of Lord Siva, where He en-
trusted His sannydsa staff to Nityananda Prabhu. However, Nityananda Prabhu
broke the staff into three pieces and threw it into the Bhargi River at a place
known as Atharanala. Being angry at not getting His staff back, $ri Caitanya

111


--- Page 114 ---
112 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
Mahaprabhu left the company of Nityananda Prabhu and went alone to see the
Jagannatha temple.
TEXT 1
পদ্ত্যাং চলন্‌ যঃ প্রতিমা-স্বক্ূপো
ত্রহ্মণ্যদেবে হি শতাহগম্যম্‌ ।
দেশং बटो বিপ্রকৃতেহস্ত,তেহং
তং সাক্ষিগোপালমহং acs ॥ ১ ॥
padbhyam calan yah pratima-svarapo
brahmanya-devo hi sataha-gamyam
desarn yayau vipra-krte ‘dbhuteharn
tarn saksi-gopalam aham nato ‘smi
SYNONYMS
padbhyam —by the two legs; calan—walking; yah—one who; pratima—of the
Deity; svaradpah—in the form; brahmanya-devah —the Supreme Lord of brahmini-
cal culture; hi—certainly; sata-dha—in one hundred days; gamyam—to be
passed over; desam —the country; yayau—went; vipra-krte—for the benefit of a
brahmana; adbhuta—most wonderful; iham—activity; tam—unto that; saksi-
gopalam—the Copala known as the witness Gopala; aham—I; natah asmi—offer
respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
1 offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of God
[brahmanya-deval, who appeared as Saksi-gopala to benefit a brahmana. For
one hundred days He traveled through the country, walking on His own legs.
Thus His activities are wonderful.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় Bee জয় নিত্যানন্দ।
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda


--- Page 115 ---
Text 4] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 113
SYNONYMS
jaya—all glories; jaya—all glories; € caitanya—to Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; jaya—all glories; sri nityananda—to Lord Sn Nityananda Prabhu;
jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-
bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda
Prabhu! All glories to Sri Advaita Prabhu! And all glories to the devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
TEXT 3
চলিতে চলিতে আইল য।জপুর-গ্রাম |
বরাহ-ঠাকুর দেখি' করিল প্রণাম ॥ ৩ ॥
calite calite aila yajapura-grama
varaha-thakura dekhi’ karila pranama
SYNONYMS
calite calite—walking on and on; aila—reached; yajapura-grama—the village
of Yajapura-grama; varaha-thakura—the temple of Varahadeva; dekhi’—seeing;
karila—offered; pranama—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Walking and walking, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His party finally arrived
at Yajapura on the River Vaitarani. There He saw the temple of Varahadeva
and offered His obeisances unto Him.
TEXT 4
নৃত্যগীত কৈল প্রেমে বহুত खवन्‌ |
যাজপুরে সে রাত্রি করিল যাপন ॥ ৪ ॥
nrtya-gita kaila preme bahuta stavana
ydjapure se ratri karila yapana
SYNONYMS
nrtya-gita—dancing and chanting; kaila—executed; preme—in love of God-
head; bahuta—various; stavana—prayers; ydjapure—in the village of Yajapura; se
ratri—that night; karila—did; yapana—passing.


--- Page 116 ---
114 ওলা Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
In the temple of Varahadeva, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu engaged in chanting
and dancing and offered prayers. He passed that night in the temple.
TEXT 5
কটকে আইলা সাক্ষিগোপাল দেখিতে |
গোপাল-সৌন্দর্য দেখি' হৈল। আনন্দিতে ॥ ¢ ॥
katake aila saksi-gopala dekhite
gopala-saundarya dekhi’ haila anandite
SYNONYMS
katake —in the town of Kataka (Cuttak); aila—arrived; saksi-gopala—the wit-
ness Gopala; dekhite—to see; gopala—of the Deity of Gopala; saundarya—the
beauty; dekhi’—seeing; haila—became; anandite—very pleased.
TRANSLATION
Afterwards, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the town of Kataka to see the
temple of the witness Gopala. When He saw the Deity of Gopala, He was very
much pleased with His beauty.
TEXT 6
প্রেমাবেশে নৃত্যগীত কৈল কতক্ষণ |
অআবিষ্ট gel কৈল গোপাল স্তবন ॥ © ॥
premavese nrtya-gita kaila kata-ksana
avista hana kaila gopala stavana
SYNONYMS
prema-avese —in the ecstasy of love of God; nrtya-gita—dancing and chant-
ing; kaila—performed; kata-ksana—for some time; avista hana—being over-
whelmed; kaila—offered; gopala stavana—prayers to Gopala.
TRANSLATION
While there, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu engaged in chanting and dancing for
some time, and being overwhelmed, He offered many prayers to Gopala.


--- Page 117 ---
Text 9] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 115
TEXT 7
সেই রাত্রি তাই। রহি'” ভক্তগণ-সঙ্গে |
গোপালের পুূর্বকথ। শুনে व्‌ রঙ্গে ॥ ৭ ॥
sei 1301 tahan rahi’ bhakta-gana-sarige
gopalera parva-katha sune bahu range
SYNONYMS
sei ratri—that night; tahan —there; rahi’—remaining; bhakta-gana-sarige—with
the other devotees; gopalera—of Lord Gopala; puarva-katha—previous narration;
Sune —hears; bahu—much; range —in pleasure.
TRANSLATION
That night Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed in the temple of Gopila, and
along with all the devotees, He heard the narration of the witness Gopala with
great pleasure.
TEXT 8
निगो नन्क-८नो) जा यऽ যবে তীর্থ व्यनिन्‌। |
সাক্ষিগোপাল দেখিবারে কটক रूल ॥ ৮ ॥
nityananda-gosani ১৭৮6 (7003 bhramila
saksi-gopala dekhibare kataka aila
SYNONYMS
nityananda-gosani—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; yabe —when; tirtha bhramila—
traveled to the places of pilgrimage; saksi-gopala—the witness Gopala;
dekhibare—to see; kataka—to the town of Kataka; aila—came.
TRANSLATION
Previously, when Nityananda Prabhu had toured all over India to see dif-
ferent places of pilgrimage, He also had come to see Saksi-gopala at Kataka.
TEXT 9
সাক্ষিগোপালের कथे। শুনি, লে কমুখে ।
সেই कथा কহেন, প্রভু শুনে মহাস্থখে ॥ > ॥


--- Page 118 ---
116 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
saksi-gopalera katha suni, loka-mukhe
sei katha kahena, prabhu sune maha-sukhe
SYNONYMS
saksi-gopalera—of the witness Gopala; katha—the narration; suni—hearing;
loka-mukhe—from the people; sei katha—that narration; kahena—Nityananda
Prabhu narrates; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sune—hears; maha-
sukhe—in great pleasure.
TRANSLATION
At that time, Nityananda Prabhu had heard the story of Saksi-gopala from
the townspeople. He now recited this again, and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
heard the narration with great pleasure.
PURPORT
The Saksi-gopala temple is situated between the Khurda Road Junction railway
station and the Jagannatha Puri station. The Deity is not presently situated in
Kataka, but when Nityananda Prabhu traveled there, the Deity was present.
Kataka is a town in Orissa situated on the Mahanadi River. When Saksi-gopala
was brought from Vidyanagara in southern India, He stayed for some time at
Kataka. Thereafter, He was situated for some time in the Jagannatha temple. It
seems that in the temple of Jagannatha, there was some disagreement between
Jagannatha and Saksi-gopala, a disagreement called prema-kalaha, a quarrel of
love. In order to settle this love quarrel, the King of Orissa constructed a village
about six miles from Jagannatha Puri. The village was called Satyavadi, and Gopala
was stationed there. Thereafter, a new temple was constructed. Now there is a
Saksi-gopala station, and people go there to see the witness Gopala.
TEXT 10
পূর্বে বিভানগরের দুই © ত্রাহ্মণ |
তীর্থ করিবারে Tz করিল গমন ॥ ১০ ॥
parve vidya-nagarera dui ta’ brahmana
tirtha karibare dunhe karila gamana
SYNONYMS
parve —previously; vidya-nagarera—of the town known as Vidyanagara; dui—
two; ta’—certainly; brahmana—brahmanas; tirtha karibare—to tour places of
pilgrimage; dunhe—both of them; karila—began; gamana—journey.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 12] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 117
TRANSLATION
Formerly at Vidyanagara in South India there were two brahmanas who
made a long tour to see different places of pilgrimage.
TEXT 11
tal, বারাণসী, প্রয়াগ-- সকল করিয়া ।
মধুরাতে আইলা BCE আনন্দিত al ॥ ১১ ॥
gaya, varanasi, prayaga——sakala kariya
mathurate dila dunhe anandita hana
SYNONYMS
gaya—the pilgrimage site of the name Gaya; varapasi—Benares, or Kasi;
prayaga—Allahabad; sakala—all; kariya—touring; mathurate—Mathura; aila—
they reached; dunhe—both; anandita—pleased; hana —becoming.
TRANSLATION
First of all they visited Gaya, then Kasi, then Prayaga. Finally, with great
pleasure, they came to Mathura.
TEXT 12
বনযা ত্রায় वन দেখি” দেখে (भौ वर्धन |
দ্বাদশ-বন দেখি” শেষে গেলা বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১২ ॥
vana-yatraya vana dekhi’ dekhe govardhana
dvadasa-vana dekhi’ sese gela vrndavana
SYNONYMS
vana-yatradya—in touring the different forests; vana dekhi’—while seeing the
forests; dekhe —they see; govardhana—Govardhana Hill; dvadasa-vana dekhi’—
visiting the twelve forests in Vindavana; sese—at last; gela—reached;
vrndavana—Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
After reaching Mathura, they started visiting the different forests of
Vrndavana and came to Govardhana Hill. They visited all twelve forests
[vanas] and at last came to the town of Vrndavana.


--- Page 120 ---
118 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
PURPORT
The five forests situated on the eastern side of the River Yamuna are Bhadra,
Bilva, Loha, Bhandira and Mahavana. The seven forests situated on the western
side of the Yamuna are Madhu, Tala, Kumuda, Bahula, Kamya, Khadira and
Vrndavana. After visiting all these forests, these pilgrims went to a place known as
Pafcakro$i Vrndavana. Out of the twelve forests, the Vrndavana forest extends
from the town of Vrndavana up to Nanda-grama and Varsana, a distance of thirty-
two miles, within which the Paficakrosi Vrndavana town is situated.
TEXT 13
বৃল্দাবনে গোবিন্দ-স্থানে মহাদেবালয় ।
সে মন্দিরে গোপালের মহাসেবা হয় ॥ >< ॥
vrndavane govinda-sthane maha-devalaya
se mandire gopalera maha-seva haya
SYNONYMS
vrndavane—within Paiicakro$i Vindavana; govinda-sthane—at the place
where the present Govinda temple is situated; maha-deva-alaya—a great temple;
se mandire—in that temple; gopalera—of the Deity of Gopala; maha-seva—
gorgeous worship; haya—there is.
TRANSLATION
In the village of 23170318051 Vrndavana, at the site where the Govinda
temple is now situated, there was a great temple where gorgeous worship of
Gopala was performed.
TEXT 14
কে্শীতীর্থ্য কালীয়-ভ্রুদাদিকে বকৈল স্নান |
জীগোপাল দেখি” তাই করিলা বিশ্রাম ॥ ১৪ ॥
kesi-tirtha, kaliya-hradadike kaila snana
$ri-gopala dekhi’ tahan karila visrama
SYNONYMS
kesi-tirtha—the bathing place on the bank of the Yamuna known as Keéi-ghata;
kaliya-hrada—the bathing place on the bank of the Yamuna known as Kaliya-
ghata; adike—in such different bathing places; kaila—did; snana—bathing; sri-


--- Page 121 ---
Text 16] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 119
gopala dekhi’—by visiting the temple of Gopala; tahan—there; karila—took;
visrama—rest.
TRANSLATION
After taking baths at different bathing places along the River Yamuna, such
as Kesi-ghata and Kaliya-ghata, the pilgrims visited the temple of Gopala.
Afterwards, they took rest in that temple.
TEXT 15
(भो गान-८गोन्नर्व দু'হার মন निन হরি”।
স্থখ পাঞ। রহে SE দিন দুই-চারি ॥ sen
gopala-saundarya dunhara mana nila hari’
sukha pana rahe tahan dina dui-cari
SYNONYMS
gopala-saundarya—the beauty of the Gopala Deity; dunhara—of both of
them; mana—the minds; nila—took away; hari’—carrying; sukha pana —feeling
this transcendental happiness; rahe —remained; taharn—in that temple; dina—
days; dui-cari—two or four.
TRANSLATION
The beauty of the Gopala Deity stole away their minds, and feeling great
happiness, they remained there for two or four days.
TEXT 16
তুইবিপ্র-মধ্যে এক विव्य বৃদ্ধপ্রায়।
আর বিপ্র-_যুবা, ভর করেন সহায় ॥ ১৬ ॥
dui-vipra-madhye eka vipra— vrddha-praya
ara vipra——yuva, tanra karena sahaya
SYNONYMS
dui-vipra-madhye —between the two brahmanas; eka vipra—one brahmana;
vrddha-praya—elderly man; ara vipra—the second brahmana; yuva—young man;
tanra—of the older brahmana; karena—does; sahaya—assistance.
TRANSLATION
One of the two brahmanas was an old man, and the other was young. The
young man was assisting the old one.


--- Page 122 ---
120 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 17
ছোটবিপ্র করে সদা তাঁহার সেবন |
তাঁহার সেবায় বিশপ্রের তুষ্ট হৈল মন ॥ ১৭ ॥
chota-vipra kare sada tanhara sevana
tanhara sevaya viprera tusta haila mana
SYNONYMS
chota-vipra—the younger brahmana; kare—does; sada—always; tanhara—his
(the old brahmana’s); sevana—service; tanhara—his; sevaya—by the service;
viprera—of the old brahmana; tusta—pacified; haila—became; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, the young brahmana always rendered service to the older one, and
the old man, being very satisfied with his service, was pleased with him.
TEXT 18
fae चटन,- नि মোর ag সেব। टकला ।
সহায় 290] মোরে তীর্থ कनन) शन ॥ ১৮. ॥
vipra bale, —tumi mora bahu seva kaila
sahdya hana more tirtha karaila
SYNONYMS
vipra bale —the elderly brahmana says; tumi —you; mora—my; bahu—various;
seva—service; kaila—have rendered; sahaya—assistant; hana —being; more —to
me; tirtha—pilgrimage; karaila—helped to do.
TRANSLATION
The older man told the younger: ‘You have rendered various types of ser-
vice to me. You have assisted me in traveling to all these places of pilgrimage.
TEXT 19
পুত্রেও পিতার এঁছে न। করে সেবন |
তোমার প্রসাদে আমি না পাইলাম শ্রম ॥ ১৯ ॥
putreo pitara aiche na kare sevana
tomara prasade ami na pailama srama


--- Page 123 ---
Text 21] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 121
SYNONYMS
putreo—even my own son; pitara—of the father; aiche—in this way; na—not;
kare —renders; sevana—service; tomara—your; praside—by the mercy; ami—I;
na—not; pailama—have gotten; srama —fatigue.
TRANSLATION
‘Even my own son does not render such service. By your mercy, 1 did not
become fatigued while on this tour.
TEXT 20
কৃতস্মতা হয় তোমায় না কৈলে সম্মান |
অতএব তোমায় আমি দিব কন্যাদান ॥ ২০ ॥
krta-ghnata haya tomaya na kaile sammana
ataeva tomaya ami diba kanya-dana
SYNONYMS
krta-ghnata—ungratefulness; haya—it is; tomaya—to you; na—not; kaile—if
doing; sammana—respect; ataeva—therefore; tomdya—to you; ami—I|; diba—
shall give; kanya-dana—my daughter as charity.
TRANSLATION
“If 1 do not show you any respect, | will be ungrateful. Therefore, | promise
to give you my daughter in charity.”
TEXT 21
ছোটবিগ্র Tg, “खन, বিপ্র-মহাশয় ।
অসম্ভব কহ কেনে, যেই নাহি হয় ॥ ২১ ॥
chota-vipra kahe, — “Suna, vipra-mahasaya
asambhava kaha kene, yei nahi haya
SYNONYMS
chota-vipra—the younger brahmana; kahe—replies; suna—hear; vipra-
mahasaya—my dear brahmana; asambhava—unlikely; kaha—you say; kene—
why; yei—which; nahi—not; haya—happens.


--- Page 124 ---
122 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
The younger brahmana replied: “My dear sir, please hear me. You are say-
ing something very unusual. Such a thing never happens.
TEXT 22
মহাকুলীন তুমি- বিত্য।-ধনাদি-প্রবীণ 1
আমি অকুলীন, আর ধন-বিদ্যা-হীন ॥ ২২ ॥
maha-kulina tumi——-vidya-dhanadi-pravina
ami akulina, ara dhana-vidya-hina
SYNONYMS
maha-kulina—highly aristocratic; tumi—you; vidya—education; dhana-adi—
riches; pravipa—enriched; ami—I; akulina—not aristocratic; dra—and; dhana-
vidya-hina—without any wealth and education.
TRANSLATION
“You are a most aristocratic family man, well educated and very rich. | am
not at all aristocratic, and | am without a decent education and have no
wealth.
PURPORT
Due to pious activities, one can be enriched by four opulences: one may obtain
birth in an aristocratic family, become highly educated, become very beautiful, or
get a sufficient quantity of riches. These are symptoms of pious activities per-
formed in one’s past life. In India it is still current for an aristocratic family never to
consider a marriage with a common family. Though the caste may be the same, to
maintain the aristocracy such marriages are rejected. No poor man will dare marry
the daughter of a rich man. Because of this, when the elderly brahmana offered
the young brahmana his daughter, the young brahmana did not believe that it
would be possible to marry her. Therefore he asked the elderly brahmana why he
was proposing something unprecedented (asambhava). It was unheard of for an
aristocratic person to offer his daughter to a person who was both uneducated
and poor.
TEXT 23
কল্যাদান-পাত্র আমি না| হই তোমার |
FAIS; করি তোমার সেবা-ব্যবহার ॥ ২৩ ॥


--- Page 125 ---
Text 24] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 123
kanya-dana-patra ami na ha-i tomara
krsna-pritye kari tomara seva-vyavahara
SYNONYMS
kanya-dana-patra—a bridegroom suitable for one’s daughter; ami —I; na—not;
ha-i—am; tomara—of you; krsna-pritye—only for satisfaction of Krsna; kari—I
do; tomara—of you; seva—of service; vyavahara—activities.
TRANSLATION
“Sir, | am not a suitable bridegroom for your daughter. | render service to
you only for the satisfaction of Krsna.
PURPORT
Both brahmanas were pure Vaisnavas. The younger man took special care of
the older one simply to please Krsna. In Srimad-Bhagavatam Krsna says, mad-
bhakta-pajabhyadhika: “It is better to render service to My devotee!”
(Bhag. 11.21.19) Thus, according to the Caudiya-Vaisnava philosophy of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, it is better to be a servant of the servant of God. One
should not try to serve Krsna directly. A pure Vaisnava serves a servant of Krsna
and identifies himself as a servant of a servant of Krsna. This is pleasing to Lord
Krsna. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura confirms this philosophy: chadiya vaispava-
seva nistara payeche keba. Unless one serves a liberated Vaisnava, he cannot at-
tain liberation by directly serving Krsna. He must serve the servant of Krsna.
TEXT 24
ত্রাহ্মণ-সেবায় কৃষ্ণের প্রীতি বড় হয়।
তাহার সন্তোষে ভক্তি-সম্পদ্‌ বাড়য় ॥” ২৪ ॥
brahmana-sevaya krsnera priti bada haya
tanhara santose bhakti-sampad badaya”
SYNONYMS
brahmana-sevaya—by rendering service to a brahmana; krsnera—of Lord
Krsna; priti—the satisfaction; bada—very great; haya—is; tanhara santose—by
pleasing the Lord; bhakti—of devotional service; sampad—the opulence;
badaya—increases.
TRANSLATION
‘Lord Krsna is very pleased by service rendered to brahmanas, and when
the Lord is pleased, the opulence of one’s devotional service increases.”


--- Page 126 ---
124 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
PURPORT
In this regard, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that the
younger brahmana rendered service to the older one with the purpose of pleasing
Krsna. It was not a matter of ordinary worldly dealings. Krsna is pleased when a
Vaisnava is rendered service. Because the younger brahmana served the older
one, Lord ০০313 agreed to become a witness of the marriage negotiation in order
to maintain the prestige of both devotees. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would cer-
tainly not have liked to hear about marital dealings unless such dealings were ex-
changed between two Vaisnavas. Marriage arrangements and ceremonies belong
to ordinary material karma-kanda sections of the scriptures. The Vaisnavas,
however, are not interested in any kind of karma-kanda dealings. $rila Narottama
dasa Thakura says: karma-kanda jiana-kanda kevala visera bhanda. For a
Vaisnava, the karma-kanda and jiana-kanda sections of the Vedas are unneces-
sary. Indeed, a real Vaisnava takes these sections as a poison pot (visera bhanda).
Sometimes we take part in a marriage ceremony for our disciples, but this does
not mean that we are interested in karma-kanda activities. Sometimes, not know-
ing the Vaisnava philosophy, an outsider criticizes such activity, maintaining that a
sannyasi should not take part in a marriage ceremony between a young boy and
girl. However, this is not a karma-kanda activity because our purpose is to spread
the Krsna consciousness movement. We are giving all facility to the general
populace to take to Krsna consciousness, and in order to fix the devotees in con-
centration on the service of the Lord, marriage is sometimes allowed. We have ex-
perienced that such married couples actually render very important service to the
mission. Therefore, one should not misunderstand when a sannyasi takes part in a
marriage ceremony. जां Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu took great
pleasure in hearing about the marriage ceremony between the young brahmana
and the daughter of the elderly brahmana.
TEXT 25

বড়বিপ্র FTTH “তুমি न) কর সংশয় |

তোমাকে कच्छ দিব আমি, করিল নিশ্চয় ॥” ২৫ ॥

bada-vipra kahe,— “tumi na kara sarhsaya

tomake kanya diba ami, karila niscaya”

SYNONYMS
bada-vipra—the older brahmana; kahe —replies; tumi—you; na—not; kara—

do; sarsaya—doubt; tomake —to you; kanya—the daughter; diba—shall give;
ami—I|; karila—made; niscaya—certainty.


--- Page 127 ---
Text 27] The Activities of Saksi-gopila 125
TRANSLATION
The older brahmana replied: “My dear boy, do not doubt me. | will give you
my daughter in charity. 1 have already decided this.”
TEXT 26
ছোটবিপ্র বলে,__“তোমার AoE गव ।
বহু জ্ঞা তি-গোষ্ঠী তোম।র वच्छ বান্ধব ॥ ২৬ ॥
chota-vipra bale, — “tomara stri-putra 5303
bahu jAati-gosthi tomara bahuta bandhava
SYNONYMS
chota-vipra—the young brahmana; bale —says; tomara—your; stri-putra—wife
and sons; saba—all; bahu—many; jAati—of family relations; gosthi—group;
tomara—your; bahuta—many; bandhava —friends.
TRANSLATION
The young brahmana said: ‘You have a wife and sons, and you have a large
circle of relatives and friends.
TEXT 27
তা”-সবার সম্মতি विनो নহে কণল্যাদান ।
রুক্মিণীর পিতা SIT তাহাতে প্রমাণ ॥ ২৭ ॥
ta’-sabara sammati 173 nahe kanya-dana
rukminira pita bhismaka tahate pramana
SYNONYMS
ta-sabara—of all of them; sammati—consent; vina—without; nahe —not;
kanya-dana—giving the daughter in charity; rukminira—of Queen Rukmint;
pita—father; bhismaka—of the name Bhismaka; tahate—of that; pramana—evi-
dence.
TRANSLATION
“Without the consent of all your friends and relatives, it is not possible to
give me your daughter in charity. Just consider the story of Queen Rukmini
and her father, Bhismaka.


--- Page 128 ---
126 ওল Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 28
ভীষ্মকের ইচ্ছা, FLW कच्छ] সমর্পিতে |
পুত্রের বিরোধে कच्चा নারিল অপিতে 1” ২৮ ॥
bhismakera 10003, —krsne kanya samarpite
putrera virodhe kanya narila arpite”
SYNONYMS
bhismakera—of King Bhismaka; iccha—the desire; krspe —unto Krsna; kanya —
daughter; samarpite—to give; putrera—of his son; virodhe—by the objection;
kanya—daughter; narila—was unable; arpite—to offer.
TRANSLATION
‘King Bhismaka wanted to give his daughter, Rukmini, in charity to Krsna,
but Rukmi, his eldest son, objected. Therefore he could not carry out his deci-
sion.”
PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.52.21):
rajasid bhismako nama
vidarbhadhipatir mahan
tasya paficabhavan putrah
kanyaika ca varanana
King Bhismaka of Vidarbha wanted to offer Krsna his daughter, Rukmini, but
Rukmi, the eldest of his five sons, objected. Therefore he withdrew his decision
and decided to offer Rukmini to the King of Cedi, Sisupala, who was a cousin of
Krsna's. However, Rukmini conceived of a trick; she sent a letter to Krsna asking
Him to kidnap her. Thus in order to please Rukmini, who was His great devotee,
Krsna kidnapped her. There ensued a great fight between Krsna and the opposing
party, headed by Rukmini’s brother Rukmi. Rukmi was defeated and, because of
his harsh words against Krsna, was about to be killed, but he was saved at the re-
quest of Rukmini. However, Krsna shaved off all of RukmT's hair with His sword. Sr
Balarama did not like this, and so to please Rukmini, Balarama rebuked Krsna.
TEXT 29
বড়বিপ্র কহে, -_“কল্য| মোর নিজ-ধন ।
নিজ-ধন দিতে নিষেধিবে কোন্‌ জন ॥ ২৯ ॥


--- Page 129 ---
Text 31] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 127
bada-vipra kahe, — “kanya mora nija-dhana
nija-dhana dite nisedhibe kon jana
SYNONYMS
bada-vipra kahe—the elderly brahmana says; kanya—the daughter; mora—
my; nija-dhana—own property; nija-dhana—one’s own property; dite—to give;
nisedhibe —will object; kon—what; jana—person.
TRANSLATION
The elderly brahmana said: “My daughter is my own property. If | choose to
give my property to someone, who has the power to stop me?
TEXT 30
তোমাকে FP দিব, সবাকে করি' তিরস্কার ।
সংশয় না কর তুমি, করহ MFT ॥” ৩০ ॥
tomake kanya diba, sabake kari’ tiraskara
sarhsaya na kara tumi, karaha svikara”
SYNONYMS
tomake—to you; kanya—the daughter; diba—I shall offer; sabake —all others;
kari’—doing; tiraskara—neglecting; sarhsaya—doubt; na—not; kara—do; tumi—
you; karaha—just do; svikara—acceptance.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear boy, | will give my daughter to you in charity, and 1 will neglect
the position of all others. Don’t doubt me in this regard; just accept my pro-
posal.”
TEXT 31
ছোটবিপ্র कटङ,- “समि F991 fics मन ।
গোপালের আগে কহ এ সত্যবচন I” ৩১ ॥
chota-vipra kahe, ১৪01 kanya dite mana
gopalera age kaha e satya-vacana”
SYNONYMS
chota-vipra kahe —the younger brahmana replies; yadi—if; kanya—daughter;
dite—to give in charity; mana—the mind; gopalera—of the Gopala Deity; age —
in front; kaha—say; e—these; satya-vacana—words in truth.


--- Page 130 ---
128 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION

The younger brahmana replied: “If you have decided to give your young

daughter to me, then say so before the Gopala Deity.”
TEXT 32
গোপালের আগে विव्य কহিতে লাগিল ।
“তুমি জান, निख-कच्) ইহারে আমি দিল w ৩২.॥
gopalera age vipra kahite lagila
‘tumi jana, nija-kanya ihare ami dila’
SYNONYMS

gopalera age—in front of the Gopala Deity; vipra—the elderly brahmana;
kahite —to speak; lagila—began; tumi jana—my Lord, please know; nija-kanya—
my own daughter; ihare—to this boy; ami —I; dila—have given in charity.

TRANSLATION

Coming before Gopala, the elderly brahmana said: “My dear Lord, please

witness that | have given my daughter to this boy.”
PURPORT

In India it is still the custom for a daughter to be offered to someone simply by
word. This is called vag-datta. This means that the father, brother or guardian of a
girl has given his word that she will be married to a certain man. Consequently,
that daughter cannot be married to anyone else. She is reserved by virtue of the
honest words of the father or guardian. There are many instances in which the
parents of a female child have given someone a verbal promise that their daughter
will be married to his son. Both parties agree to wait until the boy and girl are
grown up, and then the marriage takes place. Following this custom, which is very
old in India, the elderly brahmana promised to give his daughter to the younger
brahmana in charity, and he promised this before the Gopala Deity. In India the
custom is to honor any promise made before the Deity. Such a promise cannot be
canceled. In Indian villages, whenever there is a quarrel between two parties, they
go to a temple to settle the quarrel. Whatever is spoken in front of the Deity is
taken to be true, for no one would dare lie before the Deity. This same principle
was followed in the Battle of Kuruksetra. Therefore in the very beginning of
Bhagavad-gita it is stated: dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre.

By not becoming God conscious, human society is deteriorating to the lowest
standard of animal life. This Krsna consciousness movement is very essential to


--- Page 131 ---
Text 34] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 129
reviving God consciousness among the general populace. If people actually be-
come God conscious, all quarrels can be settled outside of court, as happened in
the case of the two brahmanas whose disagreement was settled by the witness
Copala.
TEXT 33
ছোটবিপ্র बटन, “ॐ त्र, তুমি মোর সাক্ষী ।
তোমা সাক্ষী বোলাইমু: যদি অন্যথা দেখি ॥” ৩৩ ॥
chota-vipra bale, — ““thakura, tumi mora sakst
toma saksi bolaimu, yadi anyatha dekhi”
SYNONYMS
chota-vipra bale—the younger brahmana replied; thakura—my dear Lord
Copala; tumi—You; mora—my; saksi—witness; toma—unto You; saksi—wit-
ness; bolaimu—I shall call as; yadi—if; anyathd —otherwise; dekhi—I see.
TRANSLATION
Then the younger brahmana addressed the Deity, saying, “My dear Lord,
You are my witness. | shall call for You to testify if it is necessary later 011.”
TEXT 34
এত वनि' দুইজনে চলিল৷ দেশেরে |
ওরুবুদ্ধেয ছোট-বিপ্র বহু সেব৷ করে ॥ ৩৪ ॥
eta bali’ dui-jane calila desere
guru-buddhye chota-vipra bahu seva kare
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—speaking this; dui-jane—both the brahmanas; calila—went;
desere—toward their own country; guru-buddhye—accepting the elderly
brahmana as guru; chota-vipra—the young brahmana; bahu—various; seva—ser-
vices; kare—renders.
TRANSLATION
After these talks, the two brahmanas started for home. As usual, the young
brihmana accompanied the elderly brahmana as if the older brahmana were a
guru [spiritual master] and rendered him service in various ways.


--- Page 132 ---
130 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 35
দেশে আসি” দুইজনে গেলা নিজ-ঘরে |
কত দিনে বড়-বি্র চিন্তিত অন্তরে ॥ ৩৫ ॥
dese asi’ dui-jane gela nija-ghare
kata dine bada-vipra cintita antare
SYNONYMS
dese asi’—after returning to their own country; dui-jane—both of them;
gela—went; nija-ghare —to their respective homes; kata dine —after some time;
bada-vipra—the elderly brahmana; cintita—very anxious; antare —within.
TRANSLATION
After returning to Vidyanagara, each brahmana went to his respective
home. After some time, the elderly brahmana became very anxious.
TEXT 36
Sed বিপ্রে বাক্য Fg, —(Fars সত্য হয়।
श्म, चू, জ্ঞাতি, বন্ধু জা নিবে নিশ্চয় ॥ ৩৬ ॥
tirthe vipre vakya dilur, —kemate satya haya
stri, putra, jAati, bandhu janibe niscaya
SYNONYMS
tirthe—on pilgrimage; vipre—to a brahmana; vakya—word of honor; diluri—|
have given; kemate—how; satya—true; haya—it is; stri—wife; putra—sons;
jAati—relatives; bandhu—friends; janibe—will know; niscaya—certainly.
TRANSLATION
He began to think: “| have given my word to a brahmana in a holy place,
and what 1 promised will certainly come to pass. | must now disclose this to
my wife, sons, other relatives and friends.’
TEXT 37
একদিন নিজ-লেোক একত্র করিল ।
তা-লবার আগে সব বৃত্তান্ত কহিল ॥ ৩৭ ॥
eka-dina nija-loka ekatra karila
ta-sabara age saba vrttanta kahila


--- Page 133 ---
Text 39] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 131
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; nija-loka—all his relatives; ekatra—in one place; karila—
assembled; ta-sabara—of all of them; age—in front; saba—all; vrttanta—narra-
tion; kahila—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Thus one day the elderly brahmana called for a m=eting of all his relatives
and friends, and before them all he narrated what had taken place in front of
Gopala.
TEXT 38
শুনি” जव গোষ্ঠী তার করে হাহাকার ।
“এঁছে বাত্‌ মুখে তুমি ना আনিবে আর ॥ ৩৮ ॥
Suni’ saba gosthi tara kare haha-kara
‘aiche vat mukhe tumi na anibe ara
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; saba—all; gosthi—family members and friends; tara—of the
elderly brahmana; kare—do; ha-ha-kara—exclamation of disappointment;
aiche—such; vat—proposal; mukhe—in the mouth; tumi—you; na—not;
anibe—should bring; ara—again.
TRANSLATION
When those who belonged to the family circle heard the narration of the old
brahmana, they made exclamations showing their disappointment. They all
requested that he not make such a proposal again.
TEXT 39
নীচে कच्छ দিলে কুল যাইবেক নাশ ।
निग সকল লোক করিবে উপহাস ॥” ৩৯ ॥
nice kanya dile kula yaibeka nasa
$unina sakala loka karibe upahasa’
SYNONYMS
nice—to a lower family; kanya —daughter; dile —if offering; kula—family tradi-
tion; yaibeka—will go to; nasa—destruction; sunifia—hearing; sakala—all;
loka—friends; karibe—will do; upahasa—joking.


--- Page 134 ---
132 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
They unanimously agreed: “If you offer your daughter to a degraded family,
your aristocracy will be lost. When people hear of this, they will make jokes
and laugh at you.”
TEXT 40
विथ বলে, -“ङर्थ~वाकए কেমনে করি আন ।
যে হউক্, সে হউক, আমি দিব FHF” ৪০ ॥
vipra bale, — “tirtha-vakya kemane kari ana
ye hauk, se hauka, ami diba kanya-dana”
SYNONYMS
vipra bale—the brahmana says; tirtha-vakya—the promise made on the
pilgrimage; kemane—how; kari—I shall do; ana—otherwise; ye hauk —whatever
may be; se hauk — let it take place; 5701-1; diba—shall give; kanya-dana—my
daughter in charity.
TRANSLATION
The elderly brahmana said: ‘How can | undo the promise | made in a holy
place while on pilgrimage? Whatever may happen, | must give him my
daughter in charity.”
TEXT 41
জ্ঞাতি লোক কহে,-_ CAA তোমাকে ছাড়িব”।
স্রী-পুজ্ vez, — “বিষ খাইয়া az ॥ ৪১ ॥
1[লি3010/8 kahe,— ‘mora tomake chadiba’
stri-putra kahe,— ‘visa khaiya mariba’
SYNONYMS
jhati loka—the relatives; kahe—answer; mora—we all; tomake—you;
chadiba—will give up; stri—wife; putra—sons; kahe—say; visa—poison;
khaiya—drinking; mariba—we shall die.
TRANSLATION
The relatives unanimously said: “If you give your daughter to that boy, we
shall give up all connection with you’ Indeed, his wife and sons declared: “1
such a thing happens, we shall take poison and die.”


--- Page 135 ---
Text 44] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 133
TEXT 42
faz वटल,--५ज। छ (वांना করিবেক স্থ্যায় ৷
किखिः कक] লবে, মোর ব্যর্থ ধর্ম হয় 1” 8२ ॥
vipra bale, — “saksi bolana karibeka nyaya
110 kanya labe, mora vyartha dharma haya’
SYNONYMS
vipra bale—the brahmana says; saksi—a witness; bolana—calling for;
karibeka—there will be; nyaya—justice; jiti’—winning; kanya —the daughter;
labe —he will take; mora—my; vyartha—meaningless; dharma—religious prin-
ciples; haya—will be.
TRANSLATION
The elderly brahmana said: “If | do not give my daughter to the young
brahmana, he will call Sri Gopilaji as a witness. Thus he will take my daughter
by force, and in that case my religious principles will become meaningless.”
TEXT 43
পুত্র বলে, -“প্রতিম৷ সাক্ষী, সেহ দুর দেশে |
কে তোমার সাক্ষী দিবে, চিন্তা কর কিসে ॥ ৪৩ ॥
putra bale, — “pratima saksi, seha dara dese
ke tomara saksi dibe, cinta kara kise
SYNONYMS
putra bale —his son says; pratima—the Deity; saksi—witness; seha—He also;
dara—distant; dese—in country; ke—who; tomara—of you; saksi—witness;
dibe —will give; cinta—anxiety; kara—you do; kise—why.
TRANSLATION
His son replied: “1112 Deity may be a witness, but He is in a distant country.
How can He come to bear witness against you? Why are you so anxious over
this?
TEXT 44
নাহি কহি-_ন৷ কহিও এ মিথ্যা-বচন।
সব্বে কহিবে- “মোর কিছু নাহিক স্মরণ ॥” 88 ॥


--- Page 136 ---
134 इ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
nahi kahi—na kahio € mithya-vacana
sabe kahibe — ‘mora kichu nahika smarana’
SYNONYMS
nahi kahi—I did not say; na kahio—do not say; e—this; mithya-vacana—false
statement; sabe—only; kahibe—you shall say; mora—my; kichu—anything;
nahika—not; smarana—remembrance.
TRANSLATION
‘You do not have to flatly deny that you spoke such a thing. There is no
need to make a false statement. Simply say that you do not remember what
you said.
TEXT 45
তুমি ষদি कङ्‌, “আমি কিছুই ai जोनि' ।
তবে আমি Pra করি” ত্রাঙ্মণেরে किनि ॥ ৪৫ ॥
tumi yadi kaha, — ‘ami kichui na jani’
tabe ami nyaya kari’ brahmanere jini”
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; yadi—if; kaha—say; ami kichui na jani—! do not remember any-
thing; tabe—in that case; ami—I|; nydya kari’—arguing; brahmanere—the
younger brahmana; jini—shall conquer.
TRANSLATION
11 you simply say, ‘l do not remember,’ | shall take care of the rest. By argu-
ment, | shall defeat the young brahmana.””
PURPORT
The son of the elderly brahmana was an atheist and a follower of the
Raghunatha-smrti. He was very expert in dealing with pounds-shillings-pence, but
he was fool number one. Consequently, he did not believe in the spiritual posi-
tion of the Deity, nor did he have any faith in the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Therefore, as a typical idol worshiper, he considered the form of the Lord to
be made of stone or wood. Thus he assured his father that the witness was only a
stone Deity and was not capable of speaking. Besides that, he assured his father
that the Deity was situated far away and consequently could not come to bear
witness. In essence, he was saying: “Have no anxiety. You do not have to lie
directly, but you should speak like a diplomat, like King Yudhisthira when he


--- Page 137 ---
Text 471 The Activities of Saksi-gopala 135
spoke to Dronacarya—asvatthama hata iti gajah. Following this principle, simply
say that you do not remember anything and are completely unaware of the state-
ments given by the young brahmana. If you make the background like that, | shall
know how to fill in the argument and defeat him by word jugglery. Thus | shall
save you from having to give your daughter to him. In this way, our aristocracy
will be saved. You have nothing to worry about.”
TEXT 46
এত निः বিপ্রের खि হৈল মন ৷
একাম্ত-ভাবে চিন্তে বিপ্র গোপাল-চরণ ॥ ৪৬ ॥
eta Suni’ viprera cintita haila mana
ekanta-bhave cinte vipra gopala-carana
SYNONYMS
eta Suni’—hearing this; viprera—of the old brahmana; cintita—agitated;
haila—became; mana—the mind; ekanta-bhave —with single-minded attention;
cinte—thinks; vipra—the brahmana; gopala-carana—of the lotus feet of Sr
Copalaji.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, the mind of the elderly brahmana became very agitated. Feel-
ing helpless, he simply turned his attention to the lotus feet of Gopala.
TEXT 47
“মোর ধর্ম রক্ষ। পায়, न] মরে निज-कन्‌ ।
তুই AW কর, গোপাল, SRF শরণ ॥ 89 ॥
‘mora dharma raksa paya, na mare nija-jana
dui raksa kara, gopala, lainu sarana’
SYNONYMS
mora—my; dharma—religious principles; raksa paya—spared; na—not;
mare—die; nija-jana—own kinsmen; dui—two; raksa kara—You kindly protect;
gopala—my Lord Gopala; lainu—I have taken; sarana—shelter under Your lotus
feet.
TRANSLATION
The elderly brahmana prayed: “My dear Lord Gopala, ॥ have taken shelter
of Your lotus feet, and therefore | request You to please protect my religious


--- Page 138 ---
136 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
principles from disturbance and at the same time save my kinsmen from
dying.’
TEXT 48
এইমত বিপ্র চিত্তে চিস্তিতে नाजिल |
আর দিন लघूविथ তর ঘরে আইল ॥ ৪৮ ॥
ei-mata vipra citte cintite lagila
ara dina laghu-vipra tanra ghare aila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; vipra—the elderly brahmana; citte—within the mind;
cintite—to think; lagila—began; ara dina—the next day; laghu-vipra—the young
brahmana; tarra—his; ghare—to the home; aila—came.
TRANSLATION
The next day, the elderly brahmana was thinking deeply about this matter
when the young brahmana came to his house.
TEXT 49
a fee পরমণ-ভক্তেয নমস্কার করি” ।
বিনয় করিঞ! কহে কর তুই যুড়ি' ॥ ৪৯ ॥
asina parama-bhaktye namaskara kari’
vinaya karina kahe kara dui yudi’
SYNONYMS
asina—coming; parama-bhaktye —in great devotion; namaskara kari’—offering
obeisances; vinaya karina—with great humility; kahe —says; kara—hands; dui—
two; yudi’—folding.
TRANSLATION
The young brahmana came to him and offered respectful obeisances. Then,
very humbly folding his hands, he spoke as follows.
TEXT 50
“তুমি মোরে IB দিতে কর্যাছ অঙ্গীকার |
এবে কিছু নাহি কহ, কি তোমার বিচার ॥ ৫০ ॥


--- Page 139 ---
Text 52] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 137
‘tumi more kanya dite karyacha angikara
ebe kichu nahi kaha, ki tomara vicara’
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; more—to me; kanya—your daughter; dite—to give in charity;
karyacha—have made; angikara—a promise; ebe—now; kichu—something;
nahi—not; kaha—you say; ki—what; tomara—your; vicara—conclusion.
TRANSLATION
‘“You have promised to give your daughter in charity to me. Now you do not
say anything. What is your conclusion?”
TEXT 51
এত শুনি” সেই বিপ্র রহে মৌন ধরি” ।
তার পুত্র মারিতে আইল হাতে ঠেঙ্গা করি” ॥ ৫১ ॥
eta suni’ sei vipra rahe mauna dhari’
tanra putra marite ३112 hate thenga kari’
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; sei vipra—the elderly brahmana; rahe —remains; mauna
dhari’—holding silence; tanra—his; putra—son; marite—to strike; aila—came
out; hate—in hand; therga—stick; kari’—taking.
TRANSLATION
After the young brahmana submitted this statement, the elderly brahmana
remained silent. Taking this opportunity, his son immediately came out with a
stick to strike the younger man.
TEXT 52
“আরে অধম | (मात्र SR চাহ বিবাহিতে |
বামন 23 টাদ যেন চাহ © ধরিতে ॥ ৫২ ॥
‘dre adhama! mora bhagni caha vivahite
vamana hana canda yena caha ta’ dharite’
SYNONYMS
are adhama—O most degraded one; mora—my; bhagni—sister; caha—you
want; vivahite—to marry; vamana—a dwarf; haia—being; canda—the moon;
yena—as if; caha—you want; ta’—certainly; dharite—to capture.


--- Page 140 ---
138 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
The son said: “Oh, you are most degraded! You want to marry my sister,
just like a dwarf who wants to catch the moon!”’
TEXT 53
ঠেঞ। দেখি' সেই विथ পলা গেল |
আর দিন গ্রামের লোক একত্র করিল ॥ ৫৩ ॥
10903 dekhi’ sei ৮1013 palana gela
ara dina gramera loka ekatra karila
SYNONYMS
thena dekhi’—seeing the stick in his hand; sei vipra—the young brahmana;
palana gela—fled from that place; ara dina—the next day; gramera loka—the in-
habitants of the village; ekatra karila—gathered in one place.
TRANSLATION
Seeing a stick in the hand of the son, the younger briahmana fled. The next
day, however, he gathered together all the people of the village.
TEXT 54
जव লোক বড়বিশ্রে ডাকিয়৷ सांनिन्‌ ।
তবে সেই লঘুবিপ্র কহিতে লাগিল ॥ ৫৪ ॥
saba loka bada-vipre dakiya anila
tabe sei laghu-vipra kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
saba loka—all the village inhabitants; bada-vipre—to the senior brahmana;
dakiya—calling; anila—brought; tabe—then; sei laghu-vipra—the junior
brahmana; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
All the people of the village then called for the elderly brahmana and
brought him to their meeting place. The young brahmana then began to speak
before them as follows.


--- Page 141 ---
Text 57] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 139
TEXT 55
Fr মোরে कच দিতে কর্যাছে অঙ্গীকার |
এবে যে না দেন, পুছ ই"হার ব্যবহার ॥” ৫৫ ॥
‘inha more kanya dite karyache angikara
ebe ye na dena, pucha inhara vyavahara’
SYNONYMS
inha—this gentleman; more—to me; kanya—his daughter; dite—to give in
charity; karyache —has made; angikara—promise; ebe —now; ye—indeed; na—
not; dena—he gives; pucha—kindly ask; inhara—of him; vyavahara—the
behavior.
TRANSLATION
“This gentleman has promised to hand over his daughter to me, yet now he
does not follow his promise. Please ask him about his behavior.”
TEXT 56
ভবে সেই বিপ্রেরে পুছিল সর্বজন ।
‘TP কেনে A দেহ, যদি দিয়াছ বচন ॥ ৫৬ ॥
tabe sei viprere puchila sarva-jana
‘kanya kene na deha, yadi diyacha vacana’
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; sei—that; viprere—brahmana; puchila—asked; sarva-jana—all
the people; kanya—daughter; kene —why; na deha—you do not give in charity;
yadi—if; diyacha—have given; vacana—word of honor.
TRANSLATION
All the people gathered there asked the elderly brahmana: “If you have
already promised to give him your daughter in charity, why are you not fulfill-
ing your promise? You have given your word of honor.”
TEXT 57
fae কহে,- “শুন, লোক, মোর নিবেদন |
কবে কি বলিয়াছি, মোর নাহিক স্মরণ ॥” ৫৭ ॥


--- Page 142 ---
140 इष Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
vipra kahe, — ‘Suna, loka, mora nivedana
kabe ki baliyachi, mora nahika smarana’
SYNONYMS
vipra kahe —the senior brahmana replied; suna—please hear; loka—all people;
mora—my; nivedana—submission; kabe—when; ki—what; baliyachi—| have
said; mora—my; nahika—there is not; smarana—remembrance.
TRANSLATION
The elderly brahmana said: “My dear friends, please hear what | have to
submit. | do not exactly remember making a promise like that.”
TEXT 58
এত শুনি” তার পুত্র বাক্য-দ্ছল शौन |
শ্রগল্ভ TRAN কহে ALLY साजिश] ॥ ৫৮ ॥
eta suni’ tanra putra vakya-cchala pana
pragalbha ha-iya kahe sammukhe asina
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; tanra putra—his son; vakya-cchala—for jugglery of
words; pana—getting a chance; pragalbha—impudent; ha-iya—becoming;
kahe —says; sammukhe—in the front; asiid—coming.
TRANSLATION
When the elderly brahmana’s son heard this, he took the opportunity to
juggle some words. Becoming very impudent, he stood before the assembly
and spoke as follows.
TEXT 59
তীর্থবাত্রায় পিতার जटक्त ছিল বছ धन |
ধন দেখি এই PERF LATS হৈল মন ॥ ৫৯ ॥
‘tirtha-yatraya pitara 53086 chila bahu dhana
dhana dekhi ei dustera laite haila mana
SYNONYMS
tirtha-yatraya—when touring the holy places; pitara—my father; sange —with;
chila—there was; bahu—much; dhana—money; dhana—money; dekhi—


--- Page 143 ---


--- Page 144 ---
142 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 62
তোমরা नकन्‌ লোক করহ বিচারে ।
“মোর পিতার कचा দিতে যোগ্য কি ইহারে ॥” ৬২॥
tomara sakala loka karaha vicare
‘mora pitara kanya dite yogya ki ihare’
SYNONYMS
tomara—you; sakala—all; loka—people; karaha—just make; vicare —judg-
ment; mora—my; pitara—of the father; kanya—the daughter; dite—to give in
charity; yogya—befitting; ki—is it; ihare —to him.
TRANSLATION
“All of you assembled here are gentlemen. Please judge whether it is befit-
ting to offer this poor brahmana my father’s daughter.”
TEXT 63
এত শুনি” লোকের मटन হইল THT ।
*'সম্ভবে,_ ধনলোভ্ে লোক ছাড়ে ধর্মভয় ॥” ৬৩ ॥
eta suni’ lokera mane ha-ila samsaya
‘sambhave, — dhana-lobhe loka chade dharma-bhaya’
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing all this; lokera—of all the people; mane —in the minds; ha-
ila—there was; sarmsaya—doubt; sambhave —possible; dhana-lobhe —by greed
for money; loka—some man; chade—gives up; dharma-bhaya—religious prin-
ciples.
TRANSLATION
Hearing all these statements, all the people gathered there became a little
doubtful. They thought that it was quite possible that because of attraction for
riches, one might give up his religious principles.
TEXT 64
তবে ছোটবিপ্র कटक, “শুন, মহাজন |
oF জিনিবারে কহে অসত্য-বচন ॥ ৬৪ ॥


--- Page 145 ---
Text 66] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 143
tabe chota-vipra kahe,— “Suna, mahajana
nyaya jinibare kahe asatya-vacana
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; chota-vipra—the young brahmana; kahe—says; suna—
please hear; maha-jana—all gentlemen; nyaya—the argument; jinibare—to win;
kahe—he says; asatya-vacana—untruthful statements.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the young brahmana said: “My dear gentlemen, please hear.
Just to gain victory in an argument, this man is lying.
TEXT 65
এই विष्थं মোর সেবায় তুষ্ট षटव হৈল। ।
“তোরে আমি কন্যা দিব' আপনে কহিল ॥ ৬৫ ॥
ei vipra mora sevdya tusta yabe haila
‘tore ami kanya diba’ apane kahila
SYNONYMS
ei vipra—this brahmana; mora—my; sevadya—by the service; tusta—fully
satisfied; yabe —when; haila—he was; tore—to you; ami—I; kanya—daughter;
diba—shall give; apane—of his own accord; kahila—promised.
TRANSLATION
‘Being very satisfied with my service, this brahmana said to me of his own
accord, ‘I promise to hand over my daughter to you.
TEXT 66
তবে भूय নিষেধিশু, শুন, দ্বিজবর ।
তোমার কন্যার যোগ্য নহি মু বর ॥ ৬৬ ॥
tabe muni nisedhinu,——suna, dvija-vara
tomara kanyara yogya nahi 171८171 vara
SYNONYMS
tabe —at that time; muni—I; nisedhinu—forbade; suna—hear; dvija-vara—O
best of the brahmanas; tomara—your; kanyara—for the daughter; yogya—suit-
able; nahi—not; 171८471 -- 1; vara—husband.


--- Page 146 ---
144 §ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
“At that time, | forbade him to do this, telling him, ‘O best of the
brahmanas, | am not a fit husband for your daughter.
TEXT 67
का] তুমি পণ্ডিত, ধনী, পরম FA ।
काद] मूः দরিদ্র, 34 নীচ, কুলহীন va ॥
kahan tumi pandita, dhani, parama kulina
kahan muni daridra, markha, nica, kula-hina
SYNONYMS
kahan—whereas; tumi—you; pandita—learned scholar; dhani—rich man;
parama—first-class; kulina—aristocracy; kahari—whereas; muni—I; daridra—
poor man; miarkha—not educated; nica—fallen; kula-hina—without aristocracy.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Whereas you are a learned scholar, a rich man belonging to an
aristocratic family, | am a poor man, uneducated and with no claim to
aristocracy.’
TEXT 68
তবু এই বিপ্র মোরে কহে বার বার ।
তোরে কন্যা किक, তুমি করহ স্বীকার ॥ ৬৮ ॥
tabu ei vipra more kahe bara bara
tore kanya dilun, tumi karaha svikara
SYNONYMS
tabu —still; ei—this; vipra—brahmana; more—to me; kahe—says; bara bara—
again and again; tore—to you; kanya—my daughter; dilun—I have given in
charity; tumi—you; karaha—make; svikara—acceptance.
TRANSLATION
‘Still, this brahmana insisted. Again and again he asked me to accept his
proposal, saying, “1 have given you my daughter. Please accept her.”
TEXT 69
তবে আমি কহিলাঙ — শুন, মহামতি ।
তোমার শ্রী-পুজ্র-চ্ঞাতির न হবে সম্মতি ॥ ৬৯ ॥


--- Page 147 ---
Text 71] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 145
tabe ami kahilarn—suna, maha-mati
tomara stri-putra-jiatira na habe sammati
SYNONYMS
tabe —at that time; ami—I; kahilarn—said; suna—please hear; maha-mati—O
intelligent brahmana; tomara—your; stri-putra—wife and children; jAatira—kins-
men; na habe sammati—will not agree.
TRANSLATION
‘I then said, ‘Please hear. You are a learned brahmana. Your wife, friends
and relatives will never agree to this proposal.
TEXT 70
कन দিতে নারিবে, হবে অসত্য-বচন |
পুনরপি কহে fae sR যতন ॥ ৭০ ॥
kanya dite naribe, habe asatya-vacana
punarapi kahe vipra kariya yatana
SYNONYMS
kanya—daughter; dite—to give; naribe—you will not be able; habe —it will
become; asatya-vacana—a false statement; punarapi—again; kahe—he says;
vipra—the brahmana; kariya yatana—with great attention.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘My dear sir, you will not be able to fulfill your promise. Your promise will
be broken. Yet, again and again the brahmana emphasized his promise.
TEXT 71
কন্যা তোরে fag, foul না कच्चि foes ।
আত্মকল্যা किव, (Fal পারে নিষেধিতে ॥ ৭১ ॥
kanya tore dilun, dvidha na kariha cite
atma-kanya diba, keba pare nisedhite
SYNONYMS
kanya—the daughter; tore—to you; dilurn—I have given; dvidha—hesitation;
na—do not; kariha—do; cite—within your mind; atma-kanya—my own
daughter; diba—I shall give; keba—who; pare —is able; nisedhite —to forbid.


--- Page 148 ---
146 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
^“ 4 have offered you my daughter. Do not hesitate. She is my daughter, and
1 shall give her to you. Who can forbid me?’
TEXT 72
তবে আমি কহিলাঙ gp করি” मन ।
গোপালের আগে কহ এ-সত্য বচন ॥ ৭২ ॥
tabe ami kahilan 01003 kari’ mana
gopalera age kaha e-satya vacana
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; ami—I; kahilan—said; drdha kari’ mana—fixing my mind;
gopalera age —in front of the Gopala Deity; kaha—speak; e-satya vacana—this
truthful statement.
TRANSLATION
“At that time | concentrated my mind and requested the brahmana to make
the promise before the Gopala Deity.
TEXT 73
তবে ই"হে৷ গোপালের আগেতে কহিল |
তুমি জান, এই বিশ্রে कनः] खमि দিল ॥ ৭৩ ॥
tabe inho gopalera agete kahila
tumi jana, ei vipre kanya ami dila
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; inho—this gentleman; gopalera—of the Gopala Deity;
agete—in front; kahila—he said; tumi jana—My Lord, please know; ei vipre—
unto this young brahmana; kanya—my daughter; ami—I; dila—have offered.
TRANSLATION
“Then this gentleman said in front of the Gopala Deity: ‘My dear Lord,
please bear witness. | have offered my daughter to this brahmana in charity.”
TEXT 74
তবে আমি গোপালেরে সাক্ষী Fae ।
কহিলাঙ তার পদে মিনতি করিএঃ1 ॥ ৭৪ ॥


--- Page 149 ---
Text 76] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 147
tabe ami gopalere saksi karina
kahilan tarnra pade minati karina
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; ami—I; gopalere—to the Gopala Deity; saksi—the wit-
ness; karinda—making; kahilan—said; tanra pade—at His lotus feet; minati—
humility; karina —making.
TRANSLATION
‘Accepting the Gopala Deity as my witness, | then submitted the following
at His lotus feet.
TEXT 75
যদি GR বিপ্র মোরে না দিবে কন্যাদান।
সাক্ষী বোলাইমু তোমায়, হইও সাবধান ॥ ৭৫ ॥
yadi ei vipra more na dibe kanya-dana
saksi bolaimu tomdaya, ha-io savadhana
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; ei—this; vipra—brahmana; more—to me; na—not; dibe—will give;
kanya-dana—his daughter in charity; saksi bolaimu—I shall call as witness;
tomaya—You; ha-io savadhana—kindly be attentive.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘If this brahmana later hesitates to give me his daughter, my dear Lord, |
shall call on You as a witness. Please note this with care and attention.
TEXT 76
এই वाटकः সাক্ষী মোর আছে মহাজন |
যাঁর বাক্য সত্য করি মানে তিিভুবন ॥” ৭৬ ॥
ei vakye saksi mora ache mahajana
yanra vakya satya kari mane tribhuvana”
SYNONYMS
ei vakye—in this statement; saksi—witness; mora—my; ache —there is; maha-
jana—a great personality; yarnra—whose; vakya—words; satya—true; kari—tak-
ing as; mane —accepts; tri-bhuvana—the whole world.


--- Page 150 ---
148 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
‘Thus | have called upon a great personality in this transaction. 1 have asked
the Supreme Godhead to be my witness. The entire world accepts the words
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”
PURPORT
Although the young brahmana described himself as having no claims to
aristocracy and being an uneducated common man, still he had one good
qualification: he believed that the Supreme Personality of Godhead was the top-
most authority, he accepted the words of Lord Krsna without hesitation, and he
had firm faith in the Lord's consistency. According to Prahlada Maharaja, another
authority on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such a staunch and faithful
devotee of the Lord must be understood to be a most learned scholar: tan manye
‘dhitam uttamam (Srimad-Bhagavatam 7.5.24). A pure devotee who has firm faith
in the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is to be considered a most
learned scholar, the topmost aristocrat and the richest man in the whole world. All
godly qualities automatically exist in such a devotee. In the preaching work of the
Krsna consciousness movement, we, as the servant of the servant of the servant
of the servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, fully believe in the words
of Krsna and His servants, the disciplic succession. In this way we are presenting
the words of Krsna throughout the world. Even though we are neither a rich man
nor a very learned scholar, and even though we do not belong to any aristocracy,
this movement is still being welcomed and is very easily spreading all over the
world. Although we are very poor and have no professional source of income,
Krsna supplies money whenever we need it. Whenever we need some men, Krsna
supplies them. Thus it is stated in Bhagavad-gita (6.22): yam labdhva caparar
labham manyate nadhikam tatah. Actually, if we can attain the favor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, we do not need anything else. We cer-
tainly do not need those things which a mundane person considers to be material
assets.
TEXTS 77-78

তবে বড়বিপ্র কছে,--“এই সত্য কথা |

গোপাল ষদি সাক্ষী দেন, আপনে আসি” এথা naan

তবে কল্যা দিব আমি, জা৷নিহ নিশ্চয় ।”

তাঁর FT कटर, “अदे ভাল বাত হয় ॥” ৭৮ ॥

tabe bada-vipra kahe, — “ei satya katha

gopala yadi saksi dena, apane asi’ etha


--- Page 151 ---
Text 79] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 149
tabe kanya diba ami, janiha niscaya”
tanra putra kahe,— ‘ei bhala vata haya’
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; bada-vipra—the elderly brahmana; kahe—says; ei satya
katha—this is true; gopala—the Gopala Deity; yadi—if; saksi—witness; dena—
gives; apane—personally; dsi’—coming; etha—here; tabe—at that time; kanya—
daughter; diba—must give in charity; ami—I; janiha—you all know it; niscaya—
certainly; tanra—his; putra—son; kahe—says; ei—this; bhala—nice; vata—state-
ment; haya—is.
TRANSLATION
Taking this opportunity, the elderly brahmana immediately confirmed that
this was really true. He said: “If Gopala personally comes here to serve as a
witness, | shall surely give my daughter to the young brahmana.”” The elderly
brahmana’s son immediately confirmed this, saying, ‘Yes, this is a very nice
settlement.”
PURPORT
As the Supersoul within the heart of all living entities, Krsna knows everyone's
desire, everyone's request and everyone's prayer. Although all these may be con-
tradictory, the Lord has to create a situation in which everyone will be pleased.
This is an instance of a marriage negotiation between an elderly brahmana and a
youthful one. The elderly brahmana was certainly willing to give his daughter in
charity to the young brahmana, but his son and relatives became impediments to
this transaction. The elderly brahmana considered how to get out of this situation
and still offer his daughter to the young brahmana. His son, an atheist and a very
cunning fellow, was thinking of how to stop the marriage. The father and son
were thinking in a contradictory way, yet Krsna created a situation wherein they
both agreed. They both agreed that if the Gopala Deity would come and serve as
a witness, the daughter would be given to the young brahmana.
TEXT 79
বড়বিপ্রের মনে,- “কৃষ্ণ বড় भ्रौ वाम्‌ |
অবশ্য মোর বাক্য Sel করিবে গ্রমাণ ॥ ৭৯ ॥
bada-viprera mane,— ‘krsna bada dayavan
avasya mora vakya tenho karibe pramana’


--- Page 152 ---
150 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
bada-viprera mane —within the mind of the elderly brahmana; krsna—Lord
Krsna; bada—very; dayavan—merciful; avasya—certainly; mora—my; vakya—
words; tertho—He; karibe —will make; pramana—evidence.
TRANSLATION
The elderly brahmana thought: ‘Since Lord Krsna is very merciful, He will
certainly come to prove my statement.”
TEXT 80
পুজ্ের बटन,--“ेखिम। ন৷ আসিবে সাক্ষী দিতে”।
এই বুদ্ধের তুইজন হইলা সম্মতে ॥ ৮০ ॥
putrera mane, — ‘pratima na asibe saksi dite’
ei buddhye dui-jana ha-ila sammate
SYNONYMS
putrera mane —in the mind of the son; pratima—the Deity; na—not; asibe —
will come; saksi dite—to give witness; ei—this; buddhye—in understanding;
dui-jana—both the father and the son; ha-ila sammate—agreed.
TRANSLATION
The atheistic son thought: “It is not possible for Gopala to come and bear
witness.” Thinking thus, both father and son agreed.
TEXT 81
ছোটবিপ্র वदन, - “পত্র করহ লিখন ।
পুলঃ যেন নাহি চলে এসব বচন ॥ ৮১ ॥
chota-vipra bale, — ‘patra karaha likhana
punah yena nahi cale e-saba vacana’
SYNONYMS
chota-vipra—the young brahmana; bale—says; patra—paper; karaha—do;
likhana—writing; punah—again; yena—so that; nahi—not; cale—change; €~
saba—all these; vacana—statements.


--- Page 153 ---
Text 83] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 151
TRANSLATION
The young brihmana took this opportunity to speak: “Please write this
down on paper in black and white so that you may not again change your
word of honor.”
TEXT 82
তবে जव লোক মেলি” পত্র ত” লিখিল ।
FT সম্মতি नञ] মধ্যস্থ রাখিল ॥ ৮২ ॥
tabe saba loka meli’ patra ta’ likhila
dunhara sammati lana madhyastha rakhila
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; saba loka—all the people; meli’—gathered together; patra—
paper; ta’—indeed; likhila—wrote; dunhara—of both of them; sammati—the
agreement; lana—taking; madhya-stha—as mediator; rakhila—remained.
TRANSLATION
All the assembled people got this statement down in black and white and,
taking the signatures of agreement from both of them, served as the media-
tors.
TEXT 83
তবে ছোটবিপ্র কহে,-_ শুন, সর্বজন |
এই विष्य ज-वा क), ধর্মপরায়ণ ॥ ৮৩ ॥
tabe chota-vipra kahe,—suna, sarva-jana
ei vipra——satya-vakya, dharma-pardayana
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; chota-vipra—the young brahmana; kahe—says; suna—
please hear; sarva-jana—O all gentlemen present here; ei vipra—this elderly
brahmana; satya-vakya—always truthful; dharma-parayana —religious.
TRANSLATION
The young brahmana then said: “Will all you gentlemen present please
hear me? This elderly brahmana is certainly truthful and is following religious
principles.


--- Page 154 ---
152 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 84
স্ববাক্য ছাড়িতে ইহার নাহি কভু মন ৷
স্বজন-মৃত্যযু-ভয়ে কহে অসত্য-বচন ॥ ৮৪ ॥
sva-vakya chadite inhara nahi kabhu mana
svajana-mrtyu-bhaye kahe asatya-vacana
SYNONYMS
sva-vakya—his own promise; chadite—to give up; inhara—of this brahmana;
nahi—not; kabhu —at any time; mana—the mind; sva-jana—of his own kinsmen;
mrtyu-bhaye —fearing the suicide; kahe —says; asatya-vacana—untruthful words.
TRANSLATION
‘He had no desire to break his promise, but fearing that his kinsmen would
commit suicide, he deviated from the truth.
TEXT 85
ইহার পুণ্যে কৃষ্ণে আনি” সাক্ষী বোলাইব।
তবে এই বিপ্রের সত্য-প্রতিজ্ঞা রাখিব ॥ ৮৫ ॥
inhara punye krsne ani’ saksi bolaiba
tabe ei viprera satya-pratijia rakhiba
SYNONYMS
inhara punye—by his piety; krsne—Lord Krsna; ani’—bringing; saksi—witness;
bolaiba—I shall call; tabe—at that time; ei viprera—of this brahmana; satya—
truthful; pratijia—the promise; rakhiba—1 shall keep.
TRANSLATION
‘By the piety of the elderly brahmana, I shall call the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as a witness. Thus I shall keep his truthful promise intact.”
TEXT 86
এত শুনি” নাস্তিক লোক উপহাস করে |
CTE বলে, ঈশ্বর-_দয়াল্দু, আসিতেহ পারে ॥ ৮৬ ॥
eta suni’ nastika loka upahasa kare
keha bale, iSvara——dayalu, asiteha pare


--- Page 155 ---
Text 88] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 153
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; nastika—atheistic; loka—class of men; upahasa—jok-
ing; kare—do; keha bale—someone says; isvara—God; dayalu—merciful; asiteha
pare—He is able to come.
TRANSLATION
Hearing the emphatic statement of the younger brahmana, some atheists in
the meeting began to cut jokes. However, someone else said, “After all, the
Lord is merciful, and if He likes, He can come.”
TEXT 87
তবে সেই ছোটবিপ্ গেল৷ বৃন্দাবন |
wage করি” কহে সব বিবরণ ॥ ৮৭ ॥
tabe sei chota-vipra gela vindavana
dandavat kari’ kahe saba vivarana
SYNONYMS
tabe—after this; sei—that; chota-vipra—young brahmana; gela—went;
vrndavana—to Vindavana; dandavat kari’—after offering respects; kahe—tells;
saba—all; vivarana—the description.
TRANSLATION
After the meeting, the young brahmana started for Vrndavana. Upon arriv-
ing there, he first offered his respectful obeisances to the Deity and then nar-
rated everything in full detail.
TEXT 88
“ব্রহ্মণ;দেব তুমি বড় দয়াময় |
দুই বিপ্রের ধর্ম রাখ হঞ। AGT ॥ ৮৮ ॥
“brahmanya-deva tumi bada daya-maya
dui viprera dharma rakha hana sadaya
SYNONYMS
brahmanya-deva—O Lord of brahminical culture; tumi—You; bada—very;
daya-maya—merciful; dui—two; viprera—of brahmanas; dharma—the religious
principles; rakha—protect; hafia—becoming; sa-daya—merciful.


--- Page 156 ---
154 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
He said: “My Lord, You are the protector of brahminical culture, and You
are also very merciful. Therefore, kindly show Your great mercy by protecting
the religious principles of us two brahmanas.
TEXT 89
कन] পাব,-__মোর মনে Bel নাহি खथ ।
ত্রাহ্মণের প্রতিজ্ঞা যায়_ এই বড় দুঃখ ॥ ৮৯ ॥
kanya paba, — mora mane 103 nahi sukha
brahmanera pratijia yaya—ei bada duhkha
SYNONYMS
kanya paba—| shall get the daughter; mora—my; mane —in the mind; iha—
this; nahi—is not; sukha—happiness; brahmanera—of a pure brahmana;
pratijia—the promise; ydya—becomes lost; ei—this; bada—very much;
duhkha—unhappiness.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Lord, | am not thinking to become happy by getting the daughter
as a bride. | am simply thinking that the brahmana has broken his promise,
and that is giving me great pain.’
PURPORT
It was not at all the intention of the young brahmana to get the daughter of the
elderly brahmana in marriage and thus enjoy material happiness and sense grati-
fication. It was not for that reason that the young brahmana went to Vrndavana
to ask the Supreme Personality of Godhead to act as a witness. His only concern
was that the elderly brahmana had promised something, and if Gopala did not
bear witness to that transaction, then the older brahmana would incur a spiritual
blemish. Therefore, the young brahmana wanted protection and help from the
Deity. The young brahmana was thus a pure Vaisnava, and he had no desire for
sense gratification. He wanted only to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and the older brahmana, who was also a Vaisnava and very devoted to the Lord.
TEXT 90
এত জানি” তুমি সাক্ষী দেহ, দয়াময় |
জানি” সাক্ষী নাহি দেয়, তার পপ হয় ॥ ৯০ ॥


--- Page 157 ---
Text 91] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 155
eta jani’ tumi saksi deha, daya-maya
jani’ saksi nahi deya, tara papa haya
SYNONYMS
eta jani’—knowing this; tumi—You; saksi—witness; deha—please give; daya-
maya—O most merciful; jani’—knowing; saksi—witness; nahi deya—does not
give; tara—for him; papa—sin; haya—there is.
TRANSLATION
The young brahmana continued: “My dear sir, You are very merciful and
You know everything. Therefore, kindly be a witness in this case. A person
who knows things as they are and still does not bear witness becomes in-
volved in sinful activities.”
PURPORT
The dealings between a devotee and the Lord are very simple. The young
brahmana said to the Lord, “You know everything, but if You do not bear witness,
You will be involved in sinful activities!” There is no possibility, however, of the
Lord's being involved in sinful activities. A pure devotee, even though he knows
everything of the Supreme Lord, can speak with the Lord exactly as if He were a
common man. Although the dealings between the Lord and His devotee are al-
ways very simple and open, there is formality. All these things happen because of
the connection between the Lord and the devotee.
TEXT 91
কৃষ্ণ কহে, विष्य, তুমি যাহ স্ব-ভবনে।
সভা করি” মেরে তুমি कत्रि স্মরণে ॥ >> ॥
krspa kahe,—vipra, tumi yaha sva-bhavane
sabha kari’ more tumi kariha smarane
SYNONYMS
krsna kahe —Lord Krsna says; vipra—My dear brahmana; tumi—you; yaha—go
back; sva-bhavane—to your own home; sabha kari’—calling a meeting of all the
men; more—of Me; tumi—you; kariha—just do; smarane —remembering.
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna replied: “My dear brahmana, go back to your home and call a
meeting of all the men. In that meeting, just try to remember Me.


--- Page 158 ---
156 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 92
আবির্ভাব হঞ। আমি তাহ সাক্ষী দিব।
टव দুই বিপ্রের সত্য প্রতিজ্ঞা রাখিব ॥ ৯২ ॥
avirbhava hana ami tahan saksi 0129
tabe dui viprera satya pratijia rakhiba
SYNONYMS
avirbhava—appearance; hana—making; ami—I; tahan—there; saksi —witness;
diba—shall give; tabe—at that time; dui—two; viprera—of the brahmanas;
satya—truthful; pratijia—promise; rakhiba—I shall keep.
TRANSLATION
‘I shall certainly appear there, and at that time | shall protect the honor of
both you brahmanas by bearing witness to the promise.”
TEXT 93
বিপ্র ae, “যদি হও एद -ज-गूङि।
তবু তোমার CTT काक्र না| হবে প্রতীতি ॥ ৯৩ ॥
vipra bale, — “yadi hao caturbhuja-marti
tabu tomara vakye karu na habe pratiti
SYNONYMS
vipra bale —the young brahmana says; yadi—if; hao—You become; catuh-
bhuja—four-handed; marti—Deity; tabu—still; tomara—Your; vakye—in the
word; karu—of anyone; ni—not; habe—there will be; pratiti—belief.
TRANSLATION
The young brahmana replied: “My dear sir, even if You appear there as a
four-handed Visnu Deity, still, none of those people will believe in Your
words.
TEXT 94
এই মুত fatal सक्ति এই Sauces |
সাক্ষী দেহ যদি- তবে সর্বলোক শুনে ॥ 58 ॥
ei marti giya yadi ei $/1-৮303/75
saksi deha yadi——tabe sarva-loka sune


--- Page 159 ---
Text 96] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 157
SYNONYMS
ei—this; marti—in the form; giya—going; yadi—if; ei—this; sri-vadane —from
Your beautiful face; saksi—witness; deha—You give; yadi—if; tabe—then; sarva-
loka—all people; sune—will hear.
TRANSLATION
‘Only if You go there in this form of Gopala and speak the words from Your
beautiful face will Your testimony be heard by all the people.”
TEXT 95
কৃষ্ণ কহে,-_ “প্রতিমা! চলে, কোথাহ না खनि 1
বিপ্র বলে, “প্রতিম| ङग কহ কেনে বাণী ॥ ৯৫ ॥
krsna kahe, — “pratima cale, kothaha na suni”
vipra bale, — “pratima hana kaha kene vani
SYNONYMS
krsna kahe—Lord Krsna says; pratima cale—a Deity walks; kothaha—any-
where; na suni—I have not heard; vipra bale —the young brahmana replies; pra-
tima hafid—in Your Deity form; kaha kene vani—how do You speak words.
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna said: “I’ve never heard of a Deity’s walking from one place to
another.” The brahmana replied: “That is true, but how is it that You are
speaking to me, although You are a Deity?
TEXT 96
প্রতিম৷ ag इचि, সাক্ষাৎ ত্রজেন্দ্রনম্দন |
fae লাঠি” কর তুমি অকার্য-করণ ॥” ৯৬ ॥
pratima naha tumi, —saksat vrajendra-nandana
vipra lagi’ kara tumi akarya-karana”
SYNONYMS
pratima—a statue; naha—are not; tumi—You; saksat—directly; vrajendra-nan-
dana—the son of Nanda Maharaja; vipra lagi’—for the sake of the brahmana; kara
tumi—You can do; akdrya-karana—an action You have never done before.


--- Page 160 ---
158 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION

“My dear Lord, You are not a statue; You are directly the son of Maharaja
Nanda. Now, for the sake of the old brahmana, You can do something You have
never done before.”

TEXT 97
হাসিঞা। গোপাল কহে,--“শুনহ, ব্রাহ্মণ |
তোমার পাছে পাছে আমি করিৰ গমন ॥ ৯৭ ॥
hasina gopala kahe,— “sunaha, brahmana
tomara pache pache ami kariba gamana
SYNONYMS

hasina—smiling; gopala—the Lord Copala; kahe—says; sunaha—just hear;
brahmana—O my dear brahmana; tomara—you; pache pache—behind; ami—I;
kariba—shall do; gamana—walking.

TRANSLATION

Sri Gopalaji then smiled and said: “My dear brahmana, just listen to Me. ॥

shall walk behind you, and in this way | shall go with you.”
PURPORT

The conversation between Lord $ri Krsna and the brahmana is proof that the
Lord in His arca-mdrti, or form made of material elements, is not material, for those
elements, although separated from the Lord, are also a part of the Lord's energy, as
stated in Bhagavad-gita. Because the elements are the Lord's own energy and be-
cause there is no difference between the energy and the energetic, the Lord can
appear through any element. Just as the sun can act through the sunshine and
thus distribute its heat and light, so Krsna, by His inconceivable power, can appear
in His original spiritual form in any material element, including stone, wood, paint,
gold, silver and jewels, because the material elements are all His energy. The
$astras warn, arcye visnau $ila-dhih: one should never think of the arca-marti, the
Deity within the temple, as stone, wood or any other material element. Because
of his advanced devotional position, the younger brahmana knew that although
the Deity of Gopala appeared to be stone, He was not stone. He was the son of
Nanda Maharaja, Vrajendra-nandana Himself.

As such, the Deity can act exactly as the Lord did in His original form as Krsna.
Lord Krsna was talking to the young brahmana just to test his knowledge about
the arca-vigraha. In other words, those who have understood the science of
Krsna—Krsna's name, form, quality and so forth—can also talk with the Deity. To


--- Page 161 ---
Text 99] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 159
an ordinary person, however, the Deity will appear to be made of stone, wood or
some other material. In the higher sense, since all material elements ultimately
emanate from the supreme spiritual entity, nothing is really material. Being om-
nipotent, omnipresent and omniscient, Krsna can deal with His devotees in any
form without difficulty. By the mercy of the Lord, the devotee knows perfectly
well about the Lord's dealings. Indeed, he can talk face to face with the Lord.
TEXT 98
উলটিয়া। আমা তুমি না| কর্নিহ দরশনে |
আমাকে দেখিলে, আমি রহিব সেই স্থানে ॥ ৯৮- ॥
ulatiya ama tumi na kariha darasane
amake dekhile, ami rahiba sei sthane
SYNONYMS
ulatiya—turning your face; ama—Me; tumi—you; na—not; kariha—do;
darasane —seeing; amake —Me; dekhile—if you see; 2701-1; rahiba—shall stay;
sei sthane—in that very place.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: “Do not try to see Me by turning around. As soon as
you see Me, I shall remain stationary in that very place.
TEXT 99
নুপুরের ধ্বনিমাত্র আমার निवा ।
সেই শব্দে আমার গমন প্রতীতি করিব ॥ >> ॥
napurera dhvani-matra amara sSuniba
sei sabde amara gamana pratiti kariba
SYNONYMS
napurera—of the ankle bells; dhvani-matra—the sound only; amara—My;
Suniba—you will hear; sei sabde —by hearing that sound; amara—My; gamana—
coming; pratiti—understanding; kariba—you will do.
TRANSLATION
‘You will know that I am walking behind you by the sound of My ankle
bells.


--- Page 162 ---
160 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 100
একসের खन्न AE করিহ সমর্পণ |
তাহা Wie! তোমার সঙ্গে করিব গমন ॥ ১০০ ॥
eka-sera anna randhi’ kariha samarpana
taha khana tomara sarge kariba gamana
SYNONYMS
eka-sera—one kilo; anna—of rice; randhi’—cooking; kariha—do; samarpana—
offering; taha—that; khana—eating; tomara—of you; sarnge—in the company;
kariba—I shall do; gamana—walking.
TRANSLATION
“Cook one kilo of rice daily and offer it. | shall eat that rice and follow
behind you.”
TEXT 101
আর দিন আজ্ঞা माजि, চলিল।৷ लोकन ।
তার পাছে পাছে গোপাল করিল গমন ॥ ১০১ ॥
ara dina ajna magi’ calila brahmana
tara pache pache gopala karila gamana
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; djia—permission; magi’—begging; calila—started;
brahmana—the young brahmana; tara—him; pache—behind; pache —behind;
gopala—Lord Gopala; karila—began; gamana—following.
TRANSLATION
The next day, the brahmana begged permission from Gopala and started for
his country. Gopala followed him, step by step.
TEXT 102
নুপুরের ধ্বনি শুনি” আনন্দিত गन ।
উত্তমান্ন পাক করি” করায় ভোজন ॥ ১০২ ॥
napurera dhvani suni’ anandita mana
uttamanna paka kari’ karaya bhojana


--- Page 163 ---
Text 104] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 161
SYNONYMS
napurera—of the ankle bells; dhvani—the sounds; suni’—hearing; anandita—
very much pleased; mana—the mind; uttama-anna—first-class rice; paka—cook-
ing; kari’—doing; kardya—causes; bhojana—eating.
TRANSLATION
While Gopala followed the young brahmana, the tinkling sound of His ankle
bells could be heard. The brahmana became very pleased, and he cooked
first-class rice for Gopala to eat.
TEXT 103
এইমতে চলি” বিপ্র নিজ-দেশে আইল |
গ্রামের নিকট আসি” মনেতে চিস্তিলা ॥ ১০৩ ॥
ei-mate cali’ ৮1013 nija-dese aila
gramera nikata asi’ manete cintila
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; cali’—walking; vipra—the brahmana; nija—own; dese —
to the country; dila—returned; gramera—to the village; nikata—near; asi’—com-
ing; manete—within his mind; cintila—thought.
TRANSLATION
The young brahmana walked and walked in this way until he eventually ar-
rived in his own country. When he neared his own village, he began to think as
follows.
TEXT 104
এবে মুণঞে जाट्य खादेद्‌, যাইমু खयन |
লোকেরে কহিব গিয়া সাক্ষীর আগমন ॥ ১০৪ ॥
ebe muni grame ainu, yaimu bhavana
lokere kahiba giya siksira agamana
SYNONYMS
ebe —now; muni—I; grame—to the village; ainu—have come; yaimu—I shall
go; bhavana—to my home; lokere —the people; kahiba—I shall tell; giya—going
there; saksira—of the witness; agamana—about the arrival.


--- Page 164 ---
162 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
‘I have now come to my village, and 1 shall go to my home and tell all the
people that the witness has arrived.”
TEXT 105
সাক্ষাতে ন| দেখিলে মনে প্রতীতি না 23)
ट] যদি রহেন, তবু নাহি কিছু ভয় ॥” ১০৫ ॥
saksate na dekhile mane pratiti na haya
ihan yadi rahena, tabu nahi kichu bhaya’
SYNONYMS
saksate—directly; na—not; dekhile—if seeing; mane—in the mind; pratiti—
assurance; na—not; haya—there is; ihan—here; yadi—if; rahena—the Lord
stays; tabu—still; nahi—there is not; kichu—any; bhaya—fear.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana then began to think that if the people didn’t directly see the
Gopala Deity, they would not believe that He had arrived. ‘But even if Gopala
stays here,” he thought, “there is still nothing to fear.”
TEXT 106
এত ভাবি” সেই fae ফিরিয়া চাহিল ।
হাসিঞ। গোপাল-দেব তথায় রহিল ॥ ১০৬ ॥
eta bhavi’ sei vipra phiriya cahila
hasina gopala-deva tathaya rahila
SYNONYMS
eta bhavi’—thinking like this; sei—that; vipra—brahmana; phiriya—turning;
cahila—saw; hasina—smiling; gopala-deva—Lord Gopaladeva, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; tathdaya—there; rahila—stayed.
TRANSLATION
Thinking this, the brahmana turned to look back, and He saw that Gopala,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was standing there smiling.


--- Page 165 ---
Text 109] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 163
TEXT 107
ত্রাহ্মণেরে কহে,-_ “তুমি যাহ নিজ-ঘর ।
এখায় রহিব আমি, না৷ যাব অতঃপর ॥” ১০৭ ॥
brahmanere kahe, — “tumi yaha nija-ghara
ethaya rahiba ami, na yaba atahpara”
SYNONYMS
brahmanere kahe—He asked the brahmanpa; tumi—you; yaha—go; nija-
ghara—to your own home; ethaya—here in this place; rahiba—shall stay; ami —I;
na—not; yaba—shall go; atahpara—hereafter.
TRANSLATION
The Lord told the brahmana: ‘“Now you can go home. I shall stay here and
shall not leave.”
TEXT 108
তবে সেই বিপ্র যাই নগরে কহিল।
₹नि) সকল লোক চমৎকার হৈল ॥ ১০৮ ॥
tabe sei vipra yai nagare kahila
Sunina sakala loka camatkara haila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; sei—that; vipra—brahmana; yai—going; nagare—to the
town; kahila—said; suniina—hearing; sakala—all; loka—the people; camatkara—
struck with wonder; haila—were.
TRANSLATION
The young brihmana then went to the town and informed all the people
about Gopala’s arrival. Hearing this, the people were struck with wonder.
TEXT 109
আইল সকল লোক সাক্ষী দেখিবারে।
গোপাল দেখিঞা। লোক দণ্ডবৎ করে ॥ ১০৯ ॥
dila sakala loka saksi dekhibare
gopala dekhina loka dandavat kare


--- Page 166 ---
164 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
SYNONYMS
aila—came; sakala—all; loka—the people; saksi—the witness; dekhibare —to
see; gopala—Lord Gopala; dekhina—seeing; loka—all the people; dandavat—
offering obeisances; kare—do.
TRANSLATION
All the townspeople went to see the witness Gopala, and when they saw the
Lord actually standing there, they all offered their respectful obeisances.
TEXT 110
গোপাল-সৌন্দর্য দেখি' লোকে আনন্দিত ।
প্রতিমা চলিঞা৷ আইলা, শুনিঞ। [fas ॥ ১১০ ॥
gopala-saundarya dekhi’ loke anandita
pratima calina aila, — sunina vismita
SYNONYMS
gopala—of Lord Gopala; saundarya—the beauty; dekhi’—seeing; loke—
everyone; anandita—pleased; pratima—the Deity; calina—walking; dila—came;
Sunina—hearing this; vismita—surprised.
TRANSLATION
When the people arrived, they were very pleased to see the beauty of
Gopila, and when they heard that He had actually walked there, they were all
surprised.
TEXT 111
তবে সেই ABFA আনন্দিত ङ्ग |
গোপালের অআগে পড়ে wwe 3] ॥ ১১১ ॥
tabe sei bada-vipra anandita hana
gopalera age pade dandavat hana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; sei—that; bada-vipra—elderly brahmana; anandita—
pleased; haina—becoming; gopalera—of Lord Gopala; age—in front; pade —falls
down; dandavat—like a stick; hafia—becoming.


--- Page 167 ---
Text 113] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 165
TRANSLATION
Then the elderly brahmana, being very pleased, came forward and im-
mediately fell like a stick in front of Gopala.
TEXT 112
সকল লোকের WITH গোপাল সাক্ষী निन ।
বড়বিপ্র ছোটবিপ্রে কদ্কাদান কৈল ॥ ১১২ ॥
sakala lokera age gopala saksi dila
bada-vipra chota-vipre kanya-dana kaila
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; lokera—of the people; age—in the presence; gopala—Lord
Copila; saksi—witness; dila—gave; bada-vipra—the elderly brahmana; chota-
vipre —unto the young brahmana; kanya-dana—giving the daughter in charity;
kaila—did.
TRANSLATION
Thus in the presence of all the townspeople, Lord Gopaila bore witness that
the elderly brahmana had offered his daughter in charity to the young
brahmana.
TEXT 113
তবে সেই তুই বিপ্রে কহিল ঈশ্বর ।
“তুমি-তুই _জন্মে-জন্মে আমার FFA ॥ ১১৩ ॥
tabe sei dui ৮1076 kahila isvara
“tumi-dui——janme-janme amara kirikara
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; sei—those; dui—two; vipre—unto the brahmanas; kahila—
spoke; isvara—the Lord; tumi-dui—both of you; janme-janme —birth after birth;
amara—My; kirkara—servants.
TRANSLATION
After the marriage ceremony was performed, the Lord informed both
brahmanas: “You two brahmanas are My eternal servants birth after birth.”


--- Page 168 ---
166 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
PURPORT

Like these two brahmanas of Vidyanagara, there are many devotees who are
eternal servants of the Lord. They are specifically known as nitya-siddha, eternally
perfect. Although the nitya-siddhas appear in the material world and seem to be
common members of the world, they never forget the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in any condition. This is the symptom of a nitya-siddha.

There are two kinds of living entities —nitya-siddha and nitya-baddha. The
nitya-siddha never forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality, whereas
the nitya-baddha is always conditioned, even before the creation. He always
forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here the Lord
informs the two brahmanas that they are His servants birth after birth. The phrase
birth after birth refers to the material world because in the spiritual world there is
no birth, death, old age or disease. By the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the nitya-siddha remains within this material world like an ordinary
man, but the only business of the nitya-siddha is to broadcast the glories of the
Lord. This incident appears to be an ordinary story about a marriage transaction
involving two ordinary people. However, Krsna accepted the two brahmanas as
His eternal servants. Both brahmanas took much trouble in these negotiations, just
like mundane people, yet they were acting as eternal servants of the Lord. All
nitya-siddhas within this material world may appear to toil like ordinary men, but
they never forget their position as servants of the Lord.

Another point: The elderly brahmana belonged to an aristocratic family and
was learned and wealthy. The young brahmana belonged to an ordinary family
and was uneducated. But these mundane qualifications do not concern a nitya-
siddha engaged in the service of the Lord. We have to accept the fact that the
nitya-siddhas are completely distinct from the nitya-baddhas, who are ordinary
human beings. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura confirms this statement:

gaurangera sangi-gane,  nitya-siddha kari’ mane,
se yaya vrajendra-suta pasa
$ri-gauda-mandala-bhami,  yeba jane cintamani
tara haya vraja-bhame vasa
One who accepts the associates of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu as nitya-siddhas is
certain to be elevated to the spiritual kingdom to become an associate of the
Supreme Lord. One should also know that Gauda-mandala-bhami—those places
in Bengal where Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed —are equal to Vrajabhami, or
Vrndavana. There is no difference between the inhabitants of Vindavana and
those of Gauda-mandala-bhami, or Sridhama Mayapura.
TEXT 114
=, ७
তু'হার সত্যে তুষ্ট হইলাঙ, BCT মাগ” वन्न ।”
তুইবিপ্র বর মাগে আনন্দ-অনস্তর ॥ ১১৪ ॥


--- Page 169 ---
Text 116) The Activities of Saksi-gopila 167
dunhara satye tusta ha-ilan, dunhe maga’ vara”
dui-vipra vara mage ananda-antara
SYNONYMS
dunhara satye—in the truthfulness of both of you; tusta ha-ilan—I have be-
come satisfied; durihe —both of you; maga’—ask; vara—some benediction; dui-
vipra—both the brahmanas; vara—a benediction; mage —beg; ananda—pleased;
antara—within.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: “I have become very pleased by the truthfulness of
you both. Now you can ask for a benediction.” Thus with great pleasure the
two brahmanas begged for a benediction.
TEXT 115
“सनिं বর দিবে, তবে রহ এই স্থানে |
কি্ছরেরে FI তব সর্বলোকে জানে ॥” ১১৫ ॥
“yadi vara dibe, tabe raha ei sthane
kinkarere daya tava sarva-loke jane”
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; vara—benediction; dibe—You will offer; tabe—then; raha—stay; ei
sthane—in this quarter; kinkarere—to Your servants; daya—mercy; tava—Your;
sarva-loke —all people; jane—may know.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas said: ‘/Please remain here so that people all over the world
will know how merciful You are to Your servants.”
TEXT 116
গোপাল রহিলা, दङ्‌ कटत्रन সেবন |
দেখিতে আইলা जव দেশের লোক-জন ॥ ১১৬ ॥
gopala rahila, dunhe karena sevana
dekhite aila saba desera loka-jana
SYNONYMS
gopala—Lord Gopala; rahila—stayed; durihe—both of them; karena—do;
sevana—service; dekhite—to see; aila—came; saba—all; desera—of the coun-
tries; loka-jana—the people.


--- Page 170 ---
168 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Lord Gopaila stayed, and the two brahmanas engaged in His service. After
hearing of the incident, many people from different countries began to come
to see Gopala.
TEXT 117
সে দেশের AN আইল আশ্চর্য खनिः) |
পরম সন্তোষ পাইল গোপালে Flea] ॥ ১১৭ ॥
se desera raja aila ascarya sunina
parama santosa pdila gopale dekhina
SYNONYMS
se desera—of that country; raja—the King; aila—came; ascarya—about the
wonder; sunind—hearing; parama—great; santosa—satisfaction; paila—
achieved; gopale—Copaila; dekhifia—by seeing.
TRANSLATION
Eventually the King of that country heard of this wonderful story, and he
also came to see Gopala and thus became very satisfied.
TEXT 118
মন্দির করিয়া রাজ! जव চালাইল ।
“সাক্ষিগোপাল' বলি” Sta নাম খ্যাতি टेन ॥১১৮॥
mandira kariya raja seva calaila
‘saksi-gopala’ bali’ tanra nama khyati haila
SYNONYMS
mandira—a temple; kariya—constructing; raja—the King; seva—service;
calaila—regularly carried on; saksi-gopala—by the name Saksi-gopala; bali’—
known as; tanra—His; nama—name; khyati—celebrated; haila—was.
TRANSLATION
The King constructed a nice temple, and regular service was executed.
Gopila became very famous under the name of Saksi-gopala [the witness
Gopalal.


--- Page 171 ---
Text 120] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 169
TEXT 119
এই মত वि्ठानगटन्त সাক্ষিগোপাল ।
সেবা অঙ্গীকার করি” আছেন চিরকাল ॥ ১১৯ ॥
ei mata vidyanagare saksi-gopala
seva angikara kari’ achena cira-kala
SYNONYMS
ei mata—in this way; vidyanagare—in the town of Vidyanagara; saksi-
gopala—the witness Copala; seva—service; arigikara—acceptance; kari’—doing;
achena—remains; cira-kala—a long time.
TRANSLATION
Thus Saksi-gopala stayed in Vidyanagara and accepted service for a very
long time.
PURPORT
This city of Vidyanagara is situated in Trailanga-de3a, South India, on the bank
of the River Godavari. The place where the Godavari flows into the Bay of Bengal
is called Kotade$a. The Orissa kingdom was very powerful, and this Kotade$a was
the capital of Orissa. It was then known as Vidyanagara. Formerly this city was
situated on the southern side of the River Godavari. At that time King Purusot-
tama managed to control Orissa and appoint a government. The present city of
Vidyanagara is on the southeast side of the river, only twenty to twenty-five miles
from Rajamahendri. During the time of Maharaja Prataparudra, Sri Ramananda
Raya was the governor there. Vijaya-nagara is not identical with Vidyanagara.
TEXT 120
Be FLAT AIT পুবুষোত্তমদেব নাম |
সেই (कमे জিমি निन করিয়। সংগ্রাম ॥ ১২০ ॥
utkalera raja purusottama-deva nama
sei desa jini’ nila kariya sangrama
SYNONYMS
utkalera—of Orissa; raja—the King; purusottama-deva—Purusottama; nama—
named; sei desa—this country; jini’—conquering; nila—took; kariya—executing;
sangrama—fight.


--- Page 172 ---
170 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Later there was a fight, and this country was conquered by King Purusot-
tama of Orissa.
TEXT 121
সেই Ate किनि' निन তার সিংহাসন |
মাণিক্য-সিংহাসন” নাম অনেক ASH ॥ ১২১ ॥
sei raja jini’ nila tanra simhasana
‘manikya-sirhhasana’ nama aneka ratana
SYNONYMS
sei raja—that King (Maharaja Purusottama); jini’—conquering; nila—took;
tanra—his; sirhha-asana—the throne; manikya-sirmhhasana—the throne known as
Manikya-simhasana; nama—named; aneka—various; ratana—bedecked with
jewels.
TRANSLATION
That King was victorious over the King of Vidyanagara, and he took posses-
sion of his throne, the Manikya-sirmhhasana, which was bedecked with many
jewels.
TEXT 122
পুঝুষেত্তম-দেব সেই বড় ভক্ত আর্থ |
গোপাল-চরণে মাগে,-_“চল মোর রাজ্য ॥ ১২২ ॥
purusottama-deva sei bada bhakta arya
gopala-carane mage, — ‘cala mora rajya
SYNONYMS
purusottama-deva—the King; sei—that; bada—very great; bhakta—devotee;
arya—Aryan; gopala-carane—at the lotus feet of Gopala; mage—begs; cala—
please come; mora—my; rajya—to the kingdom.
TRANSLATION
That King became known as Purusottama-deva. He was a great devotee and
was advanced in the civilization of the Aryans. He begged at the lotus feet of
Gopala: “Please come to my kingdom.”


--- Page 173 ---
Text 125] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 171
TEXT 123
তার ভক্তিবশে গোপাল তারে আজ্ঞা দিল |
গোপাল লইয়া সেই কটকে আইল ॥ ১২৩ ॥
tanra bhakti-vase gopala tanre ajia dila
gopala la-iya sei katake aila
SYNONYMS
tanra—his; bhakti-vase—under the obligation of the devotional service;
gopala—Lord Gopala; tanre—unto Him; ajia dila—gave the order; gopala—the
Gopala Deity; la-iya—taking; sei —that King; katake —to the city of Kataka; aila—
returned.
TRANSLATION
When the King begged Him to come to his kingdom, Gopila, who was
already obliged for his devotional service, accepted his prayer. Thus the King
took the Gopala Deity and went back to Kataka.
TEXT 124
জগন্নাথে আনি” দিল মাণিক্য-সিংহাসন ।
কটকে গোপাল-সেব৷ করিল স্থাপন ॥ ১২৪ ॥
jagannathe ani’ dila manikya-simhasana
katake gopala-seva karila sthapana
SYNONYMS
jagannathe —unto Jagannatha; ani’—bringing; dila—presented; manikya-
sirhhasana—the throne of the name Manikya-sirnhasana; katake—at Kataka;
gopala-seva—the service of the Gopala Deity; karila sthapana— established.
TRANSLATION
After winning the Manikya throne, King Purusottama took it to Jagannatha
Puri and presented it to Lord Jagannatha. In the meantime, he also established
regular worship of the Gopala Deity at Kataka.
TEXT 125
তাহার মহিবী আইল। গোপাল-দর্ণনে।
ভক্তি করি” বছ অলঙ্কার কৈল সমর্পণে ॥ ১২৫ ॥


--- Page 174 ---
172 ওল Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
tanhara mahisi aila gopala-darsane
bhakti kari’ bahu alankara kaila samarpane
SYNONYMS
tanhara mahisi—his Queen; aila—came; gopala-darsane —to see the Gopala
Deity; bhakti kari’—in great devotion; bahu—various; alarnkara—of ornaments;
kaila—made; samarpane —presentation.
TRANSLATION
When the Gopala Deity was installed at Kataka, the Queen of Purusottama-
deva went to see Him and, with great devotion, presented various kinds of or-
naments.
TEXT 126
তাঁহার নাসাতে व गलः S| 27 |
তাহা দিতে ইচ্ছ৷ হৈল, মনেতে চিন্তয় ॥ ১২৬ ॥
tanhara nasate bahu-malya mukta haya
taha dite iccha haila, manete cintaya
SYNONYMS
tanhara nasate—on the nostril of the Queen; bahu-malya—very valuable;
mukta—pearl; haya—there was; taha—that; dite—to give; iccha—the desire;
haila—there was; manete—in the mind; cintaya—thinks.
TRANSLATION
The Queen had a very valuable pearl, which she wore on her nose, and she
wished to give it to Gopaila. She then began to think as follows.
TEXT 127
ঠাকুরের নাসাতে যদি fam थो किङ ।
তবে এই দাসী মুক্ত। নাসায় ARIES ॥ ১২৭ ॥
thakurera nasate yadi chidra thakita
tabe ei dasi mukta nasaya paraita
SYNONYMS
thakurera nasate—in the nose of the Deity; yadi—if; chidra—a hole; thakita—
there were; tabe—then; ei—this; dasi—maidservant; mukta—pearl; nasaya—on
the nose; paraita—could put on.


--- Page 175 ---
Text 130] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 173
TRANSLATION
“If there were a hole in the Deity’s nose, | could transfer the pearl to Him.”
TEXT 128
এত চিস্তি” নমস্করি” গেল। স্বভবনে |
রাত্রিশেষে গোপাল তারে কহেন স্বপনে ॥ ১২৮ ॥
eta cinti’ namaskari’ gela sva-bhavane
ratri-sese gopala tanre kahena svapane
SYNONYMS
eta cinti’—thinking like that; namaskari’—offering obeisances; geld—went;
sva-bhavane —to the palace of the King; ratri-Sese—at the end of night; gopala—
the Gopala Deity; tarre—unto her; kahena—says; svapane—in a dream.
TRANSLATION
Considering this, the Queen offered her obeisances to Gopila and returned
to her palace. That night she dreamed that Gopala appeared and began to
speak to her as follows.
TEXT 129
“বাল্যকালে মাতা মোর নাসা fem করি”।
মুক্ত। পরাঞএ ছিল ag যত্ন করি” ॥ ১২৯ ॥
“balya-kale mata mora nasa chidra kari’
mukta paranachila bahu yatna kari’
SYNONYMS
balya-kale —in My childhood; mata—mother; mora—My; nasa—nose; chidra
kari’—making a hole; mukta —a pearl; paranachila—was put on it; bahu—much;
yatna—endeavor; kari’—taking.
TRANSLATION
“During My childhood My mother made a hole in My nose and with great
endeavor set a pearl there.
TEXT 130
সেই fom खषोगिङ আছয়ে নাসাতে |
সেই মুক্ত। পরাহ, যাহা চাহিয়াছ দিতে ॥” ১৩০ ॥


--- Page 176 ---
174 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
sei chidra adyapiha achaye nasate
sei mukta paraha, yaha cahiyacha dite”
SYNONYMS
sei chidra—that hole; adyapiha—still, until now; achaye—is; nasate—in the
nose; sei—that; mukta—pearl; paraha—put on; yaha—which; cahiyacha—you
desired; dite—to give to Me.
TRANSLATION
‘That very hole is still there, and you can use it to set the pearl you desired
to give Me.”
TEXT 131
স্বপ্নে দেখি” সেই রাণী রাজাকে कङ्िनि |
রাজাসহ मृ] লঞ।৷ মন্দিরে আইল ॥ ১৩১ ॥
svapne dekhi’ sei rani rajake kahila
raja-saha mukta lana mandire aila
SYNONYMS
svapne dekhi’—seeing the dream; sei rani—the Queen; rajake —unto the King;
kahila—spoke; raja-saha—with the King; mukta—the pearl; laia—taking; man-
dire—to the temple; aila—they went.
TRANSLATION
After dreaming this, the Queen explained it to her husband, the King. Both
the King and the Queen then went to the temple with the pearl.
TEXT 132
পরাইল gE নাসায় ছিদ্র দেখিএ |
মহৃামহোৎসব বৈল আনন্দিত Zw ॥ ১৩২ ॥
9/3//9 mukta nasaya chidra dekhina
maha-mahotsava kaila anandita hana
SYNONYMS
paraila—set; muktia—the pearl; nasiya—on the nose; chidra—the hole;
dekhina—seeing; maha-mahotsava—a great festival; kaila—performed; anan-
dita—pleased; hana —being.


--- Page 177 ---
Text 134] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 175
TRANSLATION
Seeing the hole in the nose of the Deity, they set the pearl there and, being
very pleased, held a great festival.
TEXT 133
সেই হৈতে গোপালের কটকেতে স্ছিতি।
এই লাগি 'সাক্ষিগোপাল” নাম হৈল খ্যাতি ॥১৩৩॥
sei haite gopalera katakete 50010
ei lagi ‘saksi-gopala’ nama haila khyati
SYNONYMS
sei haite—since that time; gopalera—of Gopala; katakete—in the town of
Kataka; sthiti—the establishment; ei lagi —for this reason; saksi-gopala—the wit-
ness Gopala; nama—named; haila—became; khyati—celebrated.
TRANSLATION
Since then, Gopila has been situated in the city of Kataka [Cuttak], and He
has been known ever since as Saksi-gopala.
TEXT 134
মিত্যানম্দ-মুখে শুনি” গোপাল-চরিত।
তুষ্ট হৈল। মহাপ্রভু স্বভক্ত-সহিত ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
nityananda-mukhe suni’ gopala-carita
tusta haila mahaprabhu svabhakta-sahita
SYNONYMS
nityananda-mukhe —from the mouth of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; suni’—hear-
ing; gopala-carita—the narration of Gopala; tusta haila—became very pleased;
mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sva-bhakta-sahita—with His devotees.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard the narration of Gopala’s activities.
Both He and His personal devotees became very pleased.


--- Page 178 ---
176 इषा Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 135
গোপালের আগে যবে প্রভুর হয় স্থিতি ।
ভক্তগণে দেখে- যেন তুঁহে TALS ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
gopalera age yabe prabhura haya sthiti
bhakta-gane dekhe —yena dunhe eka-marti
SYNONYMS
gopalera age—in front of Gopala; yabe—when; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; haya—is; sthiti—situation; bhakta-gane—all the devotees;
dekhe—see; yena—as if; dunnhe—both of Them; eka-marti—one form.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was sitting before the Gopala Deity, all the
devotees saw Him and the Deity as being of the same form.
TEXT 136
তু'হে- थक বর্ণ, দু'হে _প্রকাণ্ড-শরীর |
दङ्‌ - ब्रख। चत्त, EEA खराय গম্ভীর ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
dunhe —eka varpa, durihe — prakanda-sarira
dunhe——raktambara, durihara svabhava——gambhira
SYNONYMS
durihe —both of Them; eka varna—one complexion; durnhe—both of Them;
prakanda-sarira—gigantic bodies; dunhe—both of Them; rakta-ambara—red
clothes; dunhara—of both; svabhava—the natures; gambhira—grave.
TRANSLATION
Both of Them were of the same complexion, and both had the same gigantic
bodies. Both wore saffron cloth, and both were very grave.
TEXT 137
মহৃ-তেজো ময় दं ट्‌ কমল-নয়ন |
2 217 ভাবাবেশ, দুঁহে- চন্দ্রবদন ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
maha-tejo-maya dunhe kamala-nayana
dunhara bhavavesa, dunhe —candra-vadana


--- Page 179 ---
Text 139] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 177
SYNONYMS
maha-tejah-maya—brilliantly effulgent; dunhe—both of Them; kamala-
nayana—Ilotus-eyed; durhara—of both of Them; bhava-avesa—absorbed in
ecstasy; dunhe—both of Them; candra-vadana—moon-faced.
TRANSLATION
The devotees saw that both Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Gopaila were
brilliantly effulgent and had eyes like lotuses. They were both absorbed in
ecstasy, and Their faces resembled full moons.
TEXT 138
2 Tl দেখি” নিত্য।নম্দপ্রভু মহারঙ্গে ৷
ঠারাঠারি করি” হাসে ভক্তগণ-মঙ্গে ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
00703 dekhi’ nityananda-prabhu maha-range
tharathari kari’ hase bhakta-gana-sange
SYNONYMS
dunha dekhi’—seeing both of Them; nityananda-prabhu—Lord Nityananda
Prabhu; maha-rarige—in great jubilation; tharathari—indication; kari’—doing;
hase—laughs; bhakta-gana-sarnge—along with the other devotees.
TRANSLATION
When Nityananda saw both the Gopaila Deity and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
in that way, He began to exchange remarks with the devotees, all of whom
were smiling.
TEXT 139
এইমত মহারঙ্গে সে রাত্রি বঞ্চিয়া।
প্রভাতে চলিল৷ মঙ্গল-আরতি Hie! ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
ei-mata maha-range se ratri vanciya
prabhate calila marigala-arati dekhina
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; maha-rarige—in great pleasure; se—that; ratri—night;
varciyd—passing; prabhate—in the morning; calila—departed; mangala-arati—
the marigala-arati performance; dekhifna—seeing.


--- Page 180 ---
178 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Thus with great pleasure Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed that night in
the temple. After seeing the mangala-arati ceremony in the morning, He
started on His journey.
TEXT 140
ভুবনেশ্বর-পথে বৈছে टेकल দরশন |
বিস্তারি” বণিয়াছেন দাস-বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১৪০ ॥
bhuvanesvara-pathe yaiche kaila darasana
vistari’ varpiyachena dasa-vrndavana
SYNONYMS
bhuvanesvara-pathe —on the way to Bhuvane$vara; yaiche —as; kaila—He did;
darasana—uvisiting;  vistari’—vividly;  varniydchena—has described; dasa-
vrndavana—Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
TRANSLATION
[In his book Caitanya-bhagavata] Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has very
vividly described the places visited by the Lord on the way to Bhuvanesvara.
PURPORT

In his book Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khanda, Srila Vindavana dasa Thakura
has very nicely described the Lord's journey en route to Kataka (Cuttak). On that
journey, the Lord visited a place known as Balihasta, or Balakaticati. He then visited
the city of Bhuvanesvara, where Lord Siva's temple is located. The temple of
Bhuvanesvara is situated about five to six miles from Balakaticati. The temple of
Lord Siva is mentioned in the Skanda Purana in the narration about the Lord's
garden and the one mango tree. A king named Kasiraja wanted to fight with Lord
Krsna, and consequently he took shelter of Lord Siva to acquire the power to fight
the Lord. Being pleased with his worship, Lord Siva helped him fight Krsna. Lord
Siva's name is Ajutosa, which indicates that he is very easily satisfied when one
worships him, regardless of the purpose, and he gives his devotee whatever
benediction the devotee wants. Therefore, people are generally very fond of
worshiping Lord Siva. Thus Kasiraja was helped by Lord Siva, but in the fight with
Lord Krsna he was not only defeated but killed. In this way the weapon known as
Pasupata-astra was baffled, and Krsna set fire to the city of Kasi. Later Lord Siva be-
came conscious of his mistake in helping Kasiraja, and he begged Lord Krsna's
forgiveness. As a benediction from Lord Krsna, he received a place known as


--- Page 181 ---
Texts 142-143] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 179
Ekamra-kanana. Later, the kings of the Ke$arT dynasty established their capital
there, and for many hundreds of years they reigned over the state of Orissa.
TEXT 141
কমলপুরে আসি ভাগীনদী-স্লান কৈল |
নিত্যানচ্দ-হাতে প্রভু দণ্ড ধরিল ॥ ১৪১ ॥
kamalapure asi bharginadi-snana kaila
nityananda-hate prabhu danda dharila
SYNONYMS
kamala-pure—to the place known as Kamalapura; asi —coming; bhargi-nadi—
in the small river of the name Bharginadi; snana kaila—took bath; nityananda-
hate—in the hands of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; prabhu—Lord 50 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; danda—the sannyasa staff; dharila—left.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived at Kamalapura, He took His bath in
the Bharginadi River and left His sannyasa staff in the hands of Lord Nityanan-
da.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-bhagavata (Antya-khanda, Chapter Two) it is said that when
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived at Sri Bhuvanesvara, He visited the temple
of Lord Siva known as Gupta-kasi (the concealed Varanasi). Lord Siva established
this as a place of pilgrimage by bringing water from all holy places and creating the
lake known as Bindu-sarovara. ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu took His bath in this lake,
feeling a great regard for Lord Siva. From the spiritual point of view, people still go
to take a bath in this lake. Actually, by taking a bath there, one becomes very
healthy even from the material viewpoint. Taking a bath and drinking the water of
this lake can cure any disease of the stomach. Regular bathing certainly cures in-
digestion. The River Bhargi or Bharginadi is now known as Danda-bhanga-nadi. It
is situated six miles north of Jagannatha Puri. The reason for the change in names
is given as follows.
TEXTS 142-143
কপোতেস্বর দেখিতে গেল৷ ভক্তগণ সঙ্গে ।
Well নিত্যানন্দপ্রভু কৈল দণ্ড-ভঙ্গে ॥ ১৪২ ॥
তিন খণ্ড করি” দণ্ড দিল खाज |
ভক্ত-সঙ্গে আইলা প্রভু মহেশ CTI! ॥ ১৪৩ ॥


--- Page 182 ---
180 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 5
kapotesvara dekhite gela bhakta-gana sarge
etha nityananda-prabhu kaila danda-bharige
tina khanda kari’ danda dila bhasana
bhakta-sange aila prabhu mahesa dekhifa
SYNONYMS

kapotesvara—the Siva temple of the name Kapote$vara; dekhite—to see;
gela—went; bhakta-gana sarige—with the devotees; etha—here; nityananda-
prabhu—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; kaila—did; danda—of the sannyasa staff;
bharige—breaking; tina khanda—three parts; kari’—making; danda—the staff;
dila—threw in; bhasafa—washing away; bhakta-sarige—with the devotees;
aila—returned; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mahesa dekhifia—having
seen the temple of Lord Siva.

TRANSLATION

When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the temple of Lord Siva known as
Kapotesvara, Nityananda Prabhu, who was keeping His sannyasa staff in
custody, broke the staff in three parts and threw it into the River Bharginadi.
Later this river became known as Danda-bhanga-nadi.

PURPORT

The mystery of the sannyasa-danda (staff) of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
been explained by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu accepted the order of sannyasa from a Mayavadi sannyasi. The
Mayavadi sannyasis generally carry one staff, or danda. Taking advantage of ऽते
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s absence, Srila Nityananda Prabhu broke the staff into
three parts and threw it into the river now known as the Danda-bhanga-nadi. In
the sannyasa order there are four divisions —kuticaka, bahddaka, harnsa and
paramaharinsa. Only when the sannyasi remains on the kuticaka and bahidaka
platforms can he carry a staff. However, when one is elevated to the status of
harihsa or paramaharnsa, after touring and preaching the bhakti cult, he must give
up the sannyasa staff.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is $ri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is
therefore said, sri-krspa-caitanya, radha-krspa nahe anya: “Two personalities —
Srimati Radharani and 577 Krsna—are combined in the incarnation of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.” Therefore, considering Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be an extraor-
dinary person, Lord Nityananda Prabhu did not wait for the paramaharisa stage.
He reasoned that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is automatically on the
paramaharnsa stage; therefore He does not need to carry the sannyasa-danda.


--- Page 183 ---
Text 145] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 181
This is the reason $ri Nityananda Prabhu broke the staff into three pieces and
threw it into the water.
TEXT 144
জগন্নাথের দেউল দেখি” আবিষ্ট হৈলা ।
कर्व করি প্রেমে নাচিতে লাগিল। ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
jagannathera deula dekhi’ avista haila
dandavat kari preme nacite lagila
SYNONYMS
jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; deula—the temple; dekhi’—seeing;
avista—ecstatic; haila—became; dandavat kari —offering obeisances; preme—in
the ecstasy of love of God; nacite —to dance; lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
After seeing the temple of Jagannatha from a distant place, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu immediately became ecstatic. After offering obeisances to the
temple, He began to dance in the ecstasy of love of God.
PURPORT
The word deula refers to the temple where the Supreme Personality of God-
head is situated. The present temple of Jagannatha Puri was constructed by King
Ananga-bhima. Historians say this temple must have been constructed at least
two thousand years ago. During the time of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the small
buildings surrounding the original temple had not been constructed. Nor was the
high platform in front of the temple present during the time of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 145
ভক্তগণ আবিষ্ট gel, সবে নাচে AH |
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভ্ু-সঙ্গে রাজমার্গে যায় ॥ ১৪৫ |
bhakta-gana avista hana, sabe nace gaya
premavese prabhu-sarige raja-marge yaya
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gana—the devotees; avista—ecstatic; hafia—being; sabe —all; nace —
dance; gadya—sing; prema-avese —absorbed in love of God; prabhu-sarige —with
Lord Caitanya; raja-marge—on the pathway; yaya—going.


--- Page 184 ---
182 §ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
All the devotees became ecstatic in the association of Lord Caitanya, and
thus absorbed in love of God, they were dancing and singing while going
along the main road.
TEXT 146
হাসে, কান্দে, নাচে প্রভু THIF গর্জন |
তিননক্রোশ পথ হৈল _সহজ্ব যোজন ॥ ১৮৬ ॥
hase, kande, nace prabhu hunkara garjana
tina-krosa patha haila——sahasra yojana
SYNONYMS
hase—laughs; kande—cries; nace—dances; prabhu—Lord Sn Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hunkara—ecstatic vibrations; garjana—resonations; tina-krosa—six
miles; patha—the way; haila—became; sahasra yojana—thousands of miles.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu laughed, cried, danced and made many ecstatic
vibrations and sounds. Although the temple was only six miles away, to Him
the distance seemed thousands of miles.
PURPORT
When ऽर Caitanya Mahaprabhu was in ecstasy, He considered one moment to
last as long as twelve years. After seeing the Jagannatha temple from a distant
place, the Lord became so ecstatic that He considered the six-mile path many
thousands of miles long.
TEXT 147
চলিতে চলিতে প্রভু আইল “আঠ।রনালা' |
তাহ আসি” প্রভু কিছু বাহু প্রকাশিলা ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
calite calite prabhu aila ‘atharanala’
tahan asi’ prabhu kichu bahya prakasila
SYNONYMS
calite calite—walking in this way; prabhu—the Lord; aila—arrived; athara-
nala—at a place known as Atharanala; tahar—there; asi’—coming; prabhu—the
Lord; kichu—some; bahya—external consciousness; prakasila—expressed.


--- Page 185 ---
Text 149] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 183
TRANSLATION
Thus walking and walking, the Lord eventually arrived at the place known
as Atharanala. Arriving there, He expressed His external consciousness,
speaking to Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
PURPORT
There is a bridge situated at the entrance of Jagannatha Puri called Atharanala
which has eighteen arches. Athiara means eighteen.
TEXT 148
নিত্যাননম্দে কহে यू, (णड মোর দণ্ড |
নিত্যানন্দ বলে,- দণ্ড হৈল তিন খণ্ড ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
nityanande kahe prabhu,——deha mora danda
nityananda bale, —danda haila tina khanda
SYNONYMS
nityanande —to Lord Nityananda; kahe —asks; prabhu—Lord Caitanya; deha—
give; mora—My; danda—sannyasa staff; nityananda bale—Sri Nityananda
replies; danda—Your sannyasa staff; haila—became; tina khanda—divided in
three parts.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu had thus regained external conscious-
ness, He asked Lord Nityananda Prabhu, ‘Please return My staff.’ Nityananda
Prabhu then replied, “It has been broken into three parts.”
TEXT 149
প্রেম।বেশে পড়িলা তুমি, তোমারে «fy
তোমা-সহ সেই দণ্ড-উপরে পড়িনু ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
premavese padila tumi, tomare dharinu
toma-saha sei danda-upare padinu
SYNONYMS
prema-avese—in an ecstatic condition; padila—fell down; tumi—You;
tomare—You; dharinu—| caught; toma-saha—with You; sei—that; danda-
upare —upon that staff; padinu—I fell down.


--- Page 186 ---
184 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Nityananda Prabhu said: “When You fell down in ecstasy, | caught You, but
both of Us together fell upon the staff.
TEXT 150
তুইজনার ভরে দণ্ড খণ্ড খণ্ড হৈল।
সেই খণ্ড $12! পড়িল, কিছু न। জানিল ॥ ১৫০ ॥
dui-janara bhare 03003 khanda khanda haila
sei khanda kanha padila, kichu na janila
SYNONYMS
dui-janara—of Us two; bhare —by the weight; danda—the staff; khanda khan-
da—broken to pieces; haila—became; sei—those; khanda—pieces; kanha
padila—where they fell; kichu—anything; na janila—is not known.
TRANSLATION
‘Thus the staff broke under Our weight. Where the pieces have gone, | can-
not say.
TEXT 151
মোর অপরাধে তোমার দণ্ড হইল খণ্ড |
যে উচিত হয়, মোর কর তার দণ্ড ॥ ১৫১ ॥
mora aparadhe tomara 03003 ha-ila khanda
ye ucita haya, mora kara tara danda
SYNONYMS
mora—My; aparadhe —by the offense; tomara—Your; danda—sannyasa staff;
ha-ila—became; khanda—broken; ye—whatever; ucita—fitting; haya—is;
mora—to Me; kara—do; tara—for that; danda—punishment.
TRANSLATION
‘It is certainly because of My offense that Your staff has broken. Now You
can punish Me on this account as You think proper.”
TEXT 152
শুনি” কিছু মহাপ্রভু তুঃখ প্রকাশিলা |
Bae ক্রোধ করি” কিছু কহিতে লাগিল। ॥ sex ॥


--- Page 187 ---
Text 153] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 185
Suni’ kichu mahaprabhu duhkha prakasila
isat krodha kari’ kichu kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing this; kichu—some; mahaprabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
duhkha—unhappiness; prakasila—expressed; isat—little; krodha—anger; kari’—
showing; kichu —something; kahite —to speak; lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the story about how His staff had been broken, the Lord ex-
pressed a little sadness and, displaying a bit of anger, began to speak as
follows.
PURPORT
Sri Nityananda Prabhu considered Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s acceptance of
sannyasa to be useless. He therefore relieved the Lord of the trouble of carrying
the staff. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu expressed anger because He wanted to teach
all other sannyasis that they should not give up the staff before attaining the plat-
form of paramaharnsa. Seeing that the regulative principles could be slackened by
such action, Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to carry the staff personally. However,
Nityananda broke it. For this reason Caitanya Mahaprabhu displayed a little anger.
It is said in Bhagavad-gita, yad yad acarati sresthas tat tad evetaro janah: Whatever
great people do, others follow. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to follow the
Vedic principles strictly in order to save inexperienced neophytes who try to imi-
tate paramaharnsas.
TEXT 153
নীলাচলে আনি” মোর সবে হিত বকৈল। ।
সবে দণ্ডধন ছিল, डांङ्‌। al রাখিল। ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
nilacale ani’ mora sabe hita kaila
sabe danda-dhana chila, taha na rakhila
SYNONYMS
nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; ani’—bringing; mora—My; sabe—all of you;
hita—benefit; kaila—did; sabe—only; danda-dhana—one staff; chila—there
was; taha—that also; na—not; rakhila—you kept.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: “You have all benefited Me by bringing Me to
Nilacala. However, My only possession was that one staff, and you have not
kept it.


--- Page 188 ---
186 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TEXT 154
তুমি-সব আগে যাহ ঈশ্বর দেখিতে |
কিবা আমি আগে যাই, না যাব সহিত্তে ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
tumi-saba age yaha isvara dekhite
kiba ami age yai, na yaba sahite
SYNONYMS
tumi-saba—all of you; age—ahead; yaha—go; isvara dekhite—to see Jagan-
natha; kiba—or; ami—l; age—ahead; yai—go; na—not; yaba—I shall go;
sahite—with you.
TRANSLATION
‘So all of you should go before or behind Me to see Lord Jagannatha. | shall
not go with you.”
TEXT 155
ATW দত্ত কহে, - প্রভু, তুমি যাহ আগে |
অআমি-সব পাছে যাব, না যাব তোমার সঙ্গে ॥ See ॥
mukunda datta kahe, —prabhu, tumi yaha age
ami-saba pache yaba, na yaba tomara sarige
SYNONYMS
mukunda datta kahe—a devotee named Mukunda Datta said; prabhu—my
Lord; tumi—You; yaha—go; age—in front; ami-saba—all of us; pache—behind;
yaba—shall go; na—not; yaba—shall go; tomara sarige—with You.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda Datta told $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu: “My Lord, You should go
ahead and allow all the others to follow. We shall not go with You.”
TEXT 156
এত wf প্রভু আগে एनिन। শীঘ্রগতি ।
বুঝিতে না পারে (कड्‌ দুই প্রভুর মতি ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
eta suni’ prabhu age calila sighra-gati
bujhite na pare keha dui prabhura mati


--- Page 189 ---
Text 158] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 187
SYNONYMS
eta $uni’—hearing this; prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; age —in front
of the other devotees; calila—began to go; sighra-gati —very swiftly; bujhite —to
understand; na—not; pare—able; keha—anyone; dui—two; prabhura—of the
Lords; mati—intentions.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu then began to walk very swiftly before all the
other devotees. No one could understand the real purpose of both the Lords,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu.
TEXT 157
ই"হে। কেনে দণ্ড ভাঙ্গে, (ITT কেনে SAT |
ভাঙ্গাঞা (Tit তেঁহো ইহাকে দোষায় ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
inho kene danda bharge, tenho kene bhangaya
bhangana krodhe tenho inhake dosaya
SYNONYMS
| inho—Nityananda; kene —why; danda—the staff; bharnge —breaks; teriho—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kene—why; bhangaya—allows to break it;
bhangana—after allowing to break it; krodhe—in anger; tenho—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; inhake — Lord Nityananda; dosaya—accuses.
TRANSLATION
The devotees could not understand why Nityananda Prabhu broke the staff,
why ऽप Caitanya Mahaprabhu permitted Him to do so, nor why, after permit-
ting Him, Caitanya Mahaprabhu became angry.
TEXT 158
দণ্ডভঙ্গ-লীল। दे — পরম গম্ভীর |
সেই বুঝে, দু'হার পদে HA ভক্তি ধীর ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
danda-bhanga-lila ei—parama gambhira
sei bujhe, dunhara pade yanra bhakti dhira
SYNONYMS
danda-bhanga-lila—the pastime of breaking the staff; ei—this; parama—very;
gambhira—grave; sei bujhe —one can understand; dunhara—of both of Them;
pade—to the lotus feet; yarnra—whose; bhakti—devotional service; dhira—
fixed.


--- Page 190 ---
188 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
The pastime of the breaking of the staff is very deep. Only one whose devo-
tion is fixed upon the lotus feet of the two Lords can understand it.
PURPORT
One who understands Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu in
reality can understand Their identity as well as the breaking of the staff. All the
previous acaryas, being induced to engage themselves fully in the service of the
Lord, gave up attachment for material life and thus accepted the staff, which sig-
nifies full engagement of the mind, speech and body in the service of the Lord. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the regulative principles of the renounced order
of life. That is completely clear. However, in the paramahamsa stage there is no
need to accept a danda (staff), and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was certainly in the
paramahamsa stage. Nonetheless, to indicate that everyone should take sannyasa
at the end of life in order to engage fully in the service of the Lord, even
paramahamsas like Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His confidential devotees follow
the regulative principles unfailingly. Indeed, that was His purpose. Nityananda
Prabhu, who was His eternal servitor, believed that there was no need for ऽत
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to carry the staff, and to declare to the world that Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was above all regulations, He broke it into three pieces.
The pastime known as danda-bharga-lila is thus explained by Srila Bhaktisiddhan-
ta Sarasvati Thakura.
TEXT 159
ত্রম্মণ্যদেব-গোপালের AZ এই ध |
নিত্যানন্দ- व| যার, শ্রোত।--ল্রীচৈতন্তয ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
brahmanya-deva-gopalera mahima ei dhanya
nityananda——vakta yara, srota—S$ri-caitanya
SYNONYMS
brahmanya-deva—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is merciful to the
brahmanas; gopalera—of GCopala; mahima—glories; ei—these; dhanya—
glorified; nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; vakta—the speaker; yara—of the
narration; srotd—the hearer; $ri-caitanya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The glories of Lord Gopala, who is merciful to brahmanas, are very great.
The narration of Saksi-gopala was spoken by Nityananda Prabhu and heard by
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 191 ---
Text 161] The Activities of Saksi-gopala 189
PURPORT
There are four points of instruction one should consider in the story of Saksi-
gopala. First, the Deity (arca-vigraha) of 51 Gopala is eternally sac-cid-ananda-
vigraha, the transcendental form of the Lord. Second, the Deity surpasses material
regulative principles and extends the reality of transcendental principles. Third,
one can be situated in a transcendental position after becoming a brahmana, but
as a brahmana, one has to follow the regulative principles very strictly. Lastly,
brahmanya-deva indicates Lord Sri Krsna Himself, who is worshiped thus: namo
brahmanya-devaya go-brahmana-hitdya ca/ jagad-dhitaya krspaya govindaya
namo namah. This indicates that a devotee who is under the protection of Krsna is
automatically situated as a brahmana, and such a brahmana is not illusioned. This
is factual.
TEXT 160
SFE হঞ। ङ] শুনে যেই ऊन ।
অচিরে মিলয়ে তারে গোপাল-চরণ ॥ ১৬০ ॥
$/30003-%/0/0(3 hana iha sune yei jana
acire milaye tare gopala-carana
SYNONYMS
$raddha-yukta—with faith and love; haa —being; iha—this narration; sune—
hears; yei—which; jana—person; acire—very soon; milaye—gets; tare—he;
gopala-carana—the lotus feet of Lord Gopala.
TRANSLATION
One who hears this narration of Lord Gopaila with faith and love very soon
attains the lotus feet of Lord Gopala.
TEXT 161
লীরূপ-রঘুন।থ-পদে যার আশ |
চৈতন্কচরিতাম্বৃত কহে কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ১৬১ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—


--- Page 192 ---
190 ওরা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-ila, Ch. 5
the book named Caitanya-caritimrta; kahe —describes; krspa-disa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION

Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rapa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
lila, Fifth Chapter, describing the activities of Saksi-gopala.


--- Page 193 ---
CHAPTER 6
The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya

A summary study of the Sixth Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in
his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows: When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered the
temple of Jagannatha, He immediately fainted. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya then
took Him to his home. Meanwhile, Gopinatha Acarya, the brother-in-law of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya, met Mukunda Datta and talked to him about Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s acceptance of sannyasa and His journey to Jagannatha Puri. After
hearing about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's fainting and His being carried to the
house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, people crowded there to see the Lord. Srila
Nityananda Prabhu and other devotees then visited the Jagannatha temple, and
when they came back to the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu returned to external consciousness. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
received everyone and distributed maha-prasada with great care. Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya then became acquainted with 6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu and arranged
accommodations at his aunt’s house. His brother-in-law, Gopinatha Acarya,
established that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was Krsna Himself, but Sarvabhauma
and his many disciples could not accept this. However, Gopinatha Acarya con-
vinced Sarvabhauma that no one can understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead without being favored by Him. He proved by $astric quotation, quota-
tions from the revealed scriptures, that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was Krsna Him-
self in person. Still, Sarvabhauma did not take these statements very seriously.
Hearing all these arguments, Caitanya Mahaprabhu told His devotees that Sar-
vabhauma was His spiritual master and that whatever he said out of affection was
for everyone's benefit.

When Sarvabhauma met 6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he asked Him to hear
Vedanta philosophy from him. $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted this proposal,
and for seven days He continuously heard Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya explain
Vedanta-satra. However, the Lord remained very silent. Because of His silence, the
Bhattacarya asked Him whether He was understanding the Vedanta philosophy,
and the Lord replied, “Sir, | can understand Vedanta philosophy very clearly, but 1
cannot understand your explanations.” There was then a discussion between the
Bhattacarya and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu concerning the authority of the Vedic
scriptures, specifically the Upanisads and Vedanta-satra. The Bhattacarya was an
impersonalist, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu proved that the Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He proved that the conceptions of the
Mayavadi philosophers concerning the impersonal Absolute Truth are incorrect.

191


--- Page 194 ---
192 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
The Absolute Truth is neither impersonal nor without power. The greatest mistake
made by Mayavadi philosophers is in conceiving the Absolute Truth to be imper-
sonal and without energy. In all the Vedas, the unlimited energies of the Absolute
Truth have been accepted. It is also accepted that the Absolute Truth has His
transcendental, blissful, eternal form. According to the Vedas, both the Lord and
the living entity are equal in quality, but they are different quantitatively. The real
philosophy of the Absolute Truth states that the Lord and His creation are incon-
ceivably and simultaneously one and different. The conclusion is that the
Mayavadi philosophers are actually atheists. There was much discussion on this
issue between Sarvabhauma and Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but despite all his en-
deavors, the Bhattacarya was defeated in the end.

At the request of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then ex-
plained the atmarama verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam in eighteen different ways.
When the Bhattacarya came to his senses, ऽर Caitanya Mahaprabhu disclosed His
real identity. The Bhattacarya then recited one hundred verses in praise of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and offered his obeisances. After this, Gopinatha Acarya
and all the others, having seen the wonderful potencies of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, became very joyful.

One morning after this incident, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu received some
prasada from Jagannatha and offered it to Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya. Without car-
ing for formality, the Bhattacarya immediately partook of the maha-prasada. On
another day, when the Bhattacarya asked Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the best way
to worship and meditate, the Lord advised him to chant the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. On another day, the Bhattacarya wanted to change the reading of the tat
te ‘nukampam verse because he did not like the word mukti-pada. He wanted to
substitute the word bhakti-pada. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised Sarvabhauma
not to change the reading of $rimad-Bhagavatam because mukti-pada indicated
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. Having become
a pure devotee, the Bhattacarya said, “Because the meaning is hazy, | still prefer
bhakti-pada!’ At this, 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu and the other inhabitants of Jagan-
natha Puri became very pleased. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya thus became a pure
Vaisnava, and the other learned scholars there followed him.

TEXT 1
নৌমি তং গৌরচল্দ্রং यः কুতর্ক-কর্কশাশয়ম্‌ |
সার্বভৌমং সর্বভুম৷ ভক্তিভুমানমাচরৎ ॥ > ॥
naumi tarn gaura-candram yah
kutarka-karkasasayam


--- Page 195 ---
Text 3] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 193
sarvabhaumari sarva-bhama
bhakti-bhamanam acarat
SYNONYMS
naumi—! offer my respectful obeisances; tam—unto Him; gaura-candram—
who is known as Lord Gauracandra; yah—who; ku-tarka—by bad arguments;
karkasa-asayam—whose heart was hard; sarvabhaumam—Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; sarva-bhama—the Lord of everything; bhakti-bhadmanam—into a great
personality of devotion; acarat—converted.
TRANSLATION
1 offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Gauracandra, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who converted the hardhearted Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya, the reservoir of all bad logic, into a great devotee.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় গৌরচন্দ্র জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya gaura-candra—all glories to Lord Caurahari; jaya nityananda—all glo-
ries to Nitydnanda Prabhu; jaya advaita-candra—all glories to Advaita Acarya;
jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda—all glories to the devotees of Lord ঠা Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda
Prabhu! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to the devotees of Lord
Caitanya!
TEXT 3
আবেশে চলিলা প্রভু জগন্নাথ-মন্দিরে |
জগন্নাথ দেখি” প্রেমে হইল অস্থিরে ॥ ৩ ॥
avese calila prabhu jagannatha-mandire
jagannatha dekhi’ preme ha-ila asthire


--- Page 196 ---
194 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
avese—in ecstasy; calili—went; prabhu—tord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
jagannatha-mandire —to the temple of Jagannatha; jagannatha dekhi’—seeing the
Jagannatha Deity; preme—in ecstasy; ha-ila—became; asthire—restless.
TRANSLATION
In ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went from Atharanila to the temple of
Jagannitha. After seeing Lord Jagannatha, He became very restless due to love
of Godhead.
TEXT 4
জগন্নাথ खानिकिटङ চলিলা ধাঞ। ।
মন্দিরে পড়িল। প্রেমে আবিষ্ট ङ्य ॥ ৪ ॥
jagannatha alingite calila 00373
mandire padila preme avista hana
SYNONYMS
jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; alingite—to embrace; calila—went; dhana—
very swiftly; mandire—in the temple; padila—fell down; preme—in ecstasy;
avista—overwhelmed; hafia—becoming.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went swiftly to embrace Lord Jagannatha,
but when He entered the temple, He was so overwhelmed with love of God-
head that He fainted on the floor.
TEXT 5
দৈবে সার্বভৌম STRICT করে দরশন |
পড়িছা মারিতে তেঁহে। কৈল নিবারণ ॥ ¢ ॥
daive sarvabhauma tanhake kare darasana
padicha marite tenho kaila nivarapa
SYNONYMS
daive—by chance; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; tanhake —Him;
kare —does; darasana—seeing; padicha—the watchman in the temple; marite —
to beat; tenho—he; kaila—did; nivarana—forbidding.


--- Page 197 ---
Text 7] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 195
TRANSLATION
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell down, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya hap-
pened to see Him. When the watchman threatened to beat the Lord, Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya immediately forbade him.
TEXT 6
প্রভুর সৌন্দর্য আর প্রেমের বিকার ।
দেখি” সার্বভৌম হৈলা বিস্মিত অপার ॥ ৬ ॥
prabhura saundarya ara premera vikara
dekhi’ sarvabhauma haila vismita apara
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; saundarya—the beauty; ara—
and; premera vikara—ecstatic transformations; dekhi’—seeing; sarvabhauma—
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; haila—became; vismita—surprised; apara—very
much.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was very surprised to see the personal beauty of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu as well as the transcendental transformations
wrought on His body due to love of Godhead.
TEXT 7
ATHCE| (BSD নহে, ভোগের कान হৈল।
সার্বভৌম মনে তবে উপায় চিস্তিল ॥ ৭ ॥
bahu-ksane caitanya nahe, bhogera kala haila
sarvabhauma mane tabe upaya cintila
SYNONYMS
bahu-ksane—for a long time; caitanya—consciousness; nahe —there was not;
bhogera—of offering food; kala—the time; haila—it became; sarvabhauma —Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; mane —in the mind; tabe —at that time; upaya—remedy;
cintila—thought.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained unconscious for a long time. Mean-
while, the time for offering prasada to Lord Jagannatha came, and the Bhat-
tacarya tried to think of a remedy.


--- Page 198 ---
196 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 8
শিষ্য পড়িছা-দ্বারা প্রভু निन agi |
ঘরে আনি” পবিত্র স্থানে রাখিল (नौश्नांजगं ॥ ४ ॥
Sisya padicha-dvara prabhu nila vahana
ghare ani’ pavitra sthane rakhila soyana
SYNONYMS
Sisya—disciples; padicha—and watchmen; dvara—by means of; prabhu—Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nila—brought; vahafia—carrying; ghare—at home;
ani’—bringing; pavitra— purified; sthane—in a place; rakhila—kept; soyana—
lying down.
TRANSLATION
While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was unconscious, Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya, with the help of the watchmen and some disciples, carried Him to his
home and laid Him down in a very sanctified room.
PURPORT
At that time, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya lived on the southern side of the Jagan-
natha Temple. His home was practically on the beach and was known as Markan-
deya-sarastata. At present it is used as the monastery of Cangamata.
TEXT 9
শ্বাস-প্রশ্বাস নাহি উদর-স্পন্দন।
দেখিয়া চিন্তিত হৈল ভট্টাচার্যের মন ॥ > ॥
$vasa-prasvasa nahi udara-spandana
dekhiya cintita haila bhattacaryera mana
SYNONYMS
$vasa-prasvasa—breathing; nahi—there was not; udara—of the abdomen;
spandana—movement; dekhiya—seeing; cintita—full of anxiety; haila—be-
came; bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Examining the body of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sarvabhauma saw that His
abdomen was not moving and that He was not breathing. Seeing His condi-
tion, the Bhattacarya became very anxious.


--- Page 199 ---
Text 12] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 197
TEXT 10
गृच्म তুল৷ আনি” নাসা-অঞেতে ধরিল।
ঈষৎ, চলয়ে Gol দেখি” ধৈর্য হৈল ॥ ১০ ॥
$0105779 tula ani’ nasa-agrete dharila
isat calaye tula dekhi’ dhairya haila
SYNONYMS
saksma—fine; tula—cotton; ani‘—bringing; nasa—of the nostril; agrete—in
front; dharila—held; isat—slightly; calaye—moves; tula—the cotton; dekhi’—
seeing; dhairya—patience; haila—there was.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya then took a fine cotton swab and put it before the Lord’s
nostrils. When he saw the cotton move very slightly, he became hopeful.
TEXT 11
वजि, ভট্টাচার্য মনে করেন বিচার ।
এই কৃষ্ণ-সহাপ্রেমের সাস্ধিক বিকার ॥ ১১ ॥
vasi’ bhattacarya mane karena vicara
ei krsna-mahapremera sattvika vikara
SYNONYMS
vasi’—sitting down; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; mane—in his
mind; karena—does; vicara—consideration; ei—this; krsna-maha-premera—of
ecstatic love for Krsna; sattvika—transcendental; vikara—transformation.
TRANSLATION
Sitting beside Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he thought: “This is a transcen-
dental ecstatic transformation brought about by love of Krsna.”
TEXT 12
apne AEE এই নাম যে ‘ea |
নিত্যসিদ্ধ ভক্তে সে ‘Paid ভাব” হুয় ॥ ১২ ॥
‘saddipta sattvika’ ei nama ye ‘pralaya’
nitya-siddha bhakte se ‘siddipta bhava’ haya


--- Page 200 ---
198 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
su-uddipta sattvika—of the name saddipta-sattvika; ei—this; nama—named;
ye —which; pralaya—devastation; nitya-siddha—eternally perfected; bhakte—in
the devotee; se—that; su-uddipta bhava—ecstasy known as saddipta; haya—
becomes manifest.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the sign of siddipta-sattvika, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya could
immediately understand the transcendental ecstatic transformation in the
body of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Such a sign takes place only in the bodies
of eternally liberated devotees.
PURPORT
The word saddipta-sattvika is explained as follows by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura: “The Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu mentions eight kinds of transcen-
dental transformations in the bodies of advanced devotees. These are sometimes
checked by the devotee, and there are two stages of such checking, technically
known as dhamayita and jvalita. The dhamayita (smoking) stage is exhibited
when only one or two transformations are slightly present and it is possible to
conceal them. When more than two or three transcendental transformations are
manifest and it is still possible to conceal them, although with great difficulty, that
stage is called jvalita (lighted). When four or five symptoms are exhibited, the
dipta (blazing) stage has been reached. When five, six or all eight symptoms are
simultaneously manifest, that position is called uddipta (inflamed). And when all
eight symptoms are multiplied a thousand times and are all visible at once, the
devotee is in the sdddipta (intensely inflamed) stage. Nitya-siddha-bhakta indi-
cates the eternally liberated associates of the Lord. Such devotees enjoy the com-
pany of the Lord in four relationships —as servant, friend, parent or conjugal
lover.”
TEXT 13
८ क्ष i सँ हरै
অধিরূঢ় ভাব” যার, তার এ বিকার।
“মনুয়যের দেহে দেখি,- বড় চমৎকার ॥ ১৩ ॥
‘adhiradha bhava’ yanra, tanra € vikara
manusyera dehe dekhi,—bada camatkara
SYNONYMS
adhiradha bhava—an ecstasy technically known as adhiradha; yanra—of
whom; tanra—of Him; e—this; vikara—transformation; manusyera—of a human
being; dehe—in the body; dekhi—I see; bada camatkara—very wonderful.


--- Page 201 ---
Text 15] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 199
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya considered: “1116 uncommon ecstatic symptoms
of adhiriidha-bhava are appearing in the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
This is very wonderful! How are they possible in the body of a human being?’’
PURPORT
Adhiradha-bhava, or adhiradha-mahabhava, is explained in the Ujjvala-nilamani
by Srila Rapa Gosvami. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura quotes Rapa
Gosvami as follows: “The loving propensity of the asraya (devotee) toward the
visaya (Lord) becomes so ecstatic that even after enjoying the company of the
beloved, the devotee feels that his enjoyment is insufficient. At such a time, the
lover sees the beloved in different ways. Such a development of ecstasy is called
anuraga. When anuraga reaches its highest limit and becomes perceivable in the
body, it is called bhava. When the bodily symptoms are not very distinct,
however, the emotional state is still called anuraga, not bhava. When bhava
ecstasy is intensified, it is called mahabhava. The symptoms of mahabhava are visi-
ble only in the bodies of eternal associates like the gopis!”
TEXT 14
এত B®’ ভট্টাচার্য আছেন বসিয়া |
নিত্যানন্দাদি সিংহদ্বারে মিলিল আসিয়া ॥ ১৪ ॥
eta cinti’ bhattacarya achena vasiya
nityanandadi simha-dvare milila asiya
SYNONYMS
eta cinti’—thinking like this; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; achena—
was; vasiya—sitting; nityananda-adi—all the devotees, headed by Nityananda
Prabhu; simha-dvare —at the entrance door of the Jagannatha Temple; milila—
met; dsiya—coming.
TRANSLATION
While the Bhattacarya was thinking in this way at his home, all the devotees
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, headed by Nityananda Prabhu, approached the
Sirmha-dvara [the entrance door of the temple].
TEXT 15
Srl শুনে লোকে কহে ADD वाङ ।
এক সন্ন্যাসী আসি” দেখি” জগন্নাথ ॥ ১৫ ॥


--- Page 202 ---
200 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
tanha Sune loke kahe anyonye vat
eka sannyasi asi’ dekhi’ jagannatha
SYNONYMS
tanha—at that place; sune—they hear; loke —the people in general; kahe —
talk; anyonye—among themselves; vat—topics; eka—one; sannyasi—mendi-
cant; asi’—coming there; dekhi’—seeing; jagannatha—the Deity of Lord Jagan-
natha.
TRANSLATION
There the devotees heard the people talking about a mendicant who had
come to Jagannatha Puri and had seen the Deity of Jagannatha.
TEXT 16
ग्ड হৈল, চেতন না হয় শরীরে |
সার্বভৌম Feel গেল৷ আপনার ঘরে ॥ ১৬ ॥
17701000/(3 haila, cetana na haya sarire
sarvabhauma lana gela apanara ghare
SYNONYMS
muadrcchita—unconscious; haila—became; cetana—consciousness; na—not;
haya—there is; sarire—in His body; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
lana—taking Him; gela—went; apanara—his own; ghare—to the home.
TRANSLATION
The people said that the sannyasi fell unconscious upon seeing the Deity of
Lord Jagannatha. Because His consciousness did not return, Sarvabhauma
Bhattiacarya took Him to his home.
TEXT 17
শুনি” সবে कोनिल। এই মহাপ্রভুর কার্ |
হেনকালে আইলা তাহ cat RAGE ॥ ১৭ ॥
Suni’ sabe janila ei mahaprabhura karya
hena-kale aila tahan gopinathacarya
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing this; sabe—all the devotees; janila—could understand; ei—
this; mahaprabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karya—the activities; hena-


--- Page 203 ---
Text 19] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 201
kale—at that time; dila—came; tahan—there; gopinatha-acarya—of the name
Copinatha Acarya.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, the devotees could understand that they were speaking of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Just then, Sri Gopinatha Acarya arrived.
TEXT 18
নদীয়া-নিবাসী, বিশারদের ents ।
মহাপ্রভুর ভক্ত তেঁহো AFSTRIS ॥ ১৮ ॥
nadiya-nivasi, visaradera jamata
mahaprabhura bhakta tenho prabhu-tattva-jiata
SYNONYMS
nadiya-nivasi—an inhabitant of Nadiya; visaradera—of Visarada; jamata —the
son-in-law; mahaprabhura bhakta—a devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tenho—he; prabhu-tattva-jiagtai—a knower of the true identity of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya was aresident of Nadiya, the son-in-law of Visarada and a
devotee of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He knew the true identity of His Lordship.
PURPORT
Mahesvara Visarada was a classmate of Nilambara Cakravarti’s. He lived in the
Nadiya district in a village called Vidyanagara and had two sons named
Madhustadana Vacaspati and Vasudeva Sarvabhauma. His son-in-law was
Gopinatha Acarya.
TEXT 19
মুকুন্দ-সহিত পূর্বে আছে পরিচয় |
মুকুন্দ দেখিয়া তার হুইল বিস্ময় ॥ ১৯ ॥
mukunda-sahita parve ache paricaya
mukunda dekhiya tanra ha-ila vismaya
SYNONYMS
mukunda-sahita—with Mukunda Datta; parve —previously; ache —there was;
paricaya—acquaintance; mukunda—Mukunda Datta; dekhiya —seeing; tanra—
of him (Copinatha Acarya); ha-ila—there was; vismaya—astonishment.


--- Page 204 ---
202 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya had previously been acquainted with Mukunda Datta,
and when he saw him at Jagannatha Puri, he was very astonished.
TEXT 20
IFW তঁহারে দেখি” কৈল নমণ্কার।
তেঁহে৷। আলিঙ্গিয়া পুছে প্রভুর সমাচার ॥ ২০ ॥
mukunda tanhare dekhi’ kaila namaskara
tenho alingiya puche prabhura samacara
SYNONYMS
mukunda—Mukunda Datta; tanhare—him; dekhi’—seeing; kaila—offered;
namaskara—obeisances; tenho—he; alingiya—embracing; puche—inquires;
prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; samacara—news.
TRANSLATION
When Mukunda Datta met Gopiniatha Acirya, Mukunda Datta offered obei-
sances unto him. After embracing Mukunda Datta, Gopinatha Acarya inquired
about news of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 21
TM কহে,- প্রভুর ইই। হৈল আগমনে |
আমি-সব আসিয়াছি মহাপ্রভুর সনে ॥ ২১ ॥
mukunda kahe, —prabhura ihan haila agamane
ami-saba asiyachi mahaprabhura sane
SYNONYMS
mukunda kahe —Mukunda replies; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
iharn—here; haila—there was; agamane —coming; ami-saba—all of us; asiyachi—
have come; mahaprabhura—Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sane—with.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda Datta replied: “The Lord has already arrived here. We have come
with Him.”


--- Page 205 ---
Text 24] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattaciarya 203
TEXT 22
নিত্যানন্দ-গোসাঞ্িকে আচার্য কৈল নমস্কার |
সবে মেলি” পুছে প্রভুর বার্তা বার বার ॥ ২২ ॥
nityananda-gosanike acarya kaila namaskara
sabe meli’ puche prabhura varta bara bara
SYNONYMS
nityananda-gosanike—unto Lord Nityananda Prabhu; acarya—Gopinatha
Acarya; kaila namaskara—offered obeisances; sabe meli’—meeting them all;
puche—inquires; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; varta—news; bara .
bara—again and again.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Gopinatha Acirya saw Nitydnanda Prabhu, he offered his obei-
sances unto Him. In this way, meeting all the devotees, he asked about news
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu again and again.
TEXT 23
IW कट्ङ्‌,- “মহাপ্রভু TATA করিয়া ।
নীলাচলে আইলা সঙ্গে আমা-সবা Awl ॥ ২৩ ॥
mukunda kahe, — ‘mahaprabhu sannyasa kariya
nilacale aila sarige ama-saba lana
SYNONYMS
mukunda kahe—Mukunda Datta replies; mahaprabhu—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sannyasa kariya—after accepting the renounced order of life;
nilacale —toJagannatha Puri; 3ila—has come; sarige —with Him; ama-saba —all of
us; lana—taking.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda Datta continued: ‘After accepting the sannyasa order, Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has come to Jagannatha Puri and has brought all of us
with Him.
TEXT 24
আমা-লবা ছাড়ি” আগে গেলা দরশনে।
আমি-লব পাছে আইলাঙ তার অন্বেবণে॥ WI


--- Page 206 ---
204 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
ama-saba chadi’ age gela darasane
ami-saba pache ailan tanra anvesane
SYNONYMS
ama-saba—all of us; chadi’—leaving; age—ahead; gela—went; darasane —to
see Lord Jagannatha; ami-saba—all of us; pache—behind; 21120 —came; tarira—
of Him; anvesane—in search.
TRANSLATION
“Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu left our company and walked ahead to see Lord
Jagannatha. We have just arrived and are now looking for Him.
TEXT 25
অস্তথ্যোস্কে লোকের মুখে যে কথা শুনিল ।
সার্বভৌম-গৃহে প্রভু, FAH কৈল ॥ ২৫ ॥
anyonye lokera mukhe ye katha sunila
sarvabhauma-grhe prabhu, —anumana kaila
SYNONYMS
anyonye —among themselves; lokera—of the people in general; mukhe —in
the mouths; ye—that which; katha—talk; sSunila—was heard; sarvabhauma-
grhe —at the home of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prabhu—the Lord; anumana—a
guess; kaila—made.
TRANSLATION
“From the talk of the people in general, we have guessed that the Lord is
now at the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TEXT 26
ঈশ্থর-দর্শনে প্রভু প্রেমে অচেতন |
সার্বভৌম লঞ। গেলা আপন-তবন ॥ ২৬ ॥
iSvara-darsane prabhu preme acetana
sarvabhauma 127 gela apana-bhavana
SYNONYMS
i$vara-darsane—by seeing Lord Jagannatha; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; preme —in the ecstasy of love of Godhead; acetana—unconscious;


--- Page 207 ---
Text 28] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 205
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; lana gela—has taken; dpana-
bhavana—to his own home.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Upon seeing Lord Jagannatha, Caitanya Mahaprabhu became ecstatic and
fell unconscious, and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya has taken Him to his home in
this condition.
TEXT 27
(डो मान्न মিলনে যবে আমার হৈল मन |
দৈৰে সেই ক্ষণে পাইল্ু* তোমার দরশন ॥ ২৭ ॥
tomara milane yabe amara haila mana
daive sei ksane pailun tomara darasana
SYNONYMS
tomara—of you; milane—in meeting; yabe—when; amara—of me; haila—
there was; mana—the mind; daive—by chance; sei ksane —at that very moment;
pailun—got; tomara—your; darasana—meeting.
TRANSLATION
“Just as | was thinking of meeting you, by chance we have actually met.
TEXT 28
চল, সবে যাই সার্বভৌমের वन |
প্রভু (कयि, পাছে করিব ঈশ্বর দর্শন ॥ २४ ॥
cala, sabe yai sarvabhaumera bhavana
prabhu dekhi’ pache kariba isvara darsana’
SYNONYMS
cala—let us go; sabe—all; yai—we shall go; sarvabhaumera bhavana—to the
house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prabhu dekhi’—seeing Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; pache —later; kariba—we shall do; isvara darsana—seeing of Lord
Jagannatha.
TRANSLATION
“First let us all go to the house of Siarvabhauma Bhatticarya and see
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Later we shall come to see Lord Jagannatha.”


--- Page 208 ---
206 §ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 29
এত শুনি” গোপীনাথ সবারে नयम |
সার্বভৌম-খঘরে গেল৷ হরবষিত হএঞ ॥ ২৯ ॥
eta Suni’ gopinatha sabare lana
sarvabhauma-ghare gela harasita hana
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; gopinatha—GCopinatha Acarya; sabare—all of them;
lana —taking with him; sarvabhauma-ghare —to the house of Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; gela—went; harasita hafia—becoming very pleased.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this and feeling very pleased, Gopinitha Aciarya immediately took
all the devotees with him and approached the house of Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya.
TEXT 30
সার্বভৌম-স্থানে গিয়া গ্রভুকে দেখিল।
প্রভু দেখি” আচার্ধের তুংখ-হুর্ষ হৈল ॥ ৩০ ॥
sarvabhauma-sthane giya prabhuke dekhila
prabhu dekhi’ acaryera duhkha-harsa haila
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma-sthane —to the place of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; giya—going
there; prabhuke—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhila—all of them saw;
prabhu dekhi’—seeing the Lord; acaryera—of Gopinatha Acarya; duhkha—
unhappiness; harsa—happiness; haila—there was.
TRANSLATION
Arriving at the home of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya, everyone saw the Lord
lying unconscious. Seeing Him in this condition, Gopinatha Acirya became
very unhappy, but at the same time he was happy just to see the Lord.
TEXT 31
লার্বভৌমে জানাঞ। जव] निन অত্যম্তরে।
নিত্যানন্দ-গোসাঞ্চিরে (Stal কৈল নমস্কারে ॥৩১॥


--- Page 209 ---
Text 33] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 207
sarvabhaume janana saba nila abhyantare
nityananda-gosanire tenho kaila namaskare

SYNONYMS
sarvabhaume —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; janana—informing and taking per-
mission; saba—all the devotees; nila—took; abhyantare—within the house;
nityananda-gosanire—unto Nityananda Prabhu; teriho—Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; kaila—offered; namaskare —obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya permitted all the devotees to enter his house, and
upon seeing Nityananda Prabhu, the Bhattacarya offered Him obeisances.
TEXT 32
সবা সহিত যথাযোগ্য করিল মিলন |
पथ्‌ দেখি” সবার देखन হরষিত मन ॥ ৩২ ॥
saba sahita yatha-yogya karila milana
prabhu dekhi’ sabara haila harasita mana
SYNONYMS
saba sahita—with all of them; yatha-yogya—as it was befitting; karila—did;
milana—meeting; prabhu dekhi’—seeing the Lord; sabara—of all; haila—be-
came; harasita—pleased; mana—the minds.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma met with all the devotees and offered them a proper welcome.
They were all pleased to see Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 33
সার্বভৌম পাঠাইল সবা দর্শন করিতে |
“চন্দনেশ্বর” নিজপুত্র দিল সবার সাথে ॥ ৩৩ ॥
sarvabhauma pathaila 5363 darsana karite
‘candanesvara’ nija-putra dila sabara sathe
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; pathaila—sent them; saba—all; dar-

Sana karite —to see Lord Jagannatha; candana-isvara—of the name Candaneévara;

nija-putra—his son; dila—gave; sabara sathe—with all of them.


--- Page 210 ---
208 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya then sent them all back to see Lord Jagannatha, and he
asked his own son Candanesvara to accompany them as a guide.
TEXT 34
জগন্নাথ দেখি” সবার হইল আনন্দ |
ভাবেতে WIAD হৈলা প্রভু নিত্যানন্দ ॥ ৩৪ ॥
jagannatha dekhi’ sabara ha-ila ananda
bhavete avista haila prabhu nityananda
SYNONYMS
jagannatha dekhi’—seeing Lord Jagannatha; sabara—of everyone; ha-ila—
there was; ananda—pleasure; bhavete—in ecstasy; avista—overwhelmed;
haila—became; prabhu nityananda—Lord Nityananda.
TRANSLATION
Everyone was then very pleased to see the Deity of Lord Jagannatha. Lord
Nityananda in particular was overwhelmed with ecstasy.
TEXT 35
সবে মেলি” ধরি তারে whew করিল।
ঈশ্বর-সেবক মালা-প্রসাদ আনি” দিল ॥ ৩৫॥
sabe meli’ dhari tanre susthira karila
iSvara-sevaka mala-prasada ani’ dila
SYNONYMS
sabe meli’—meeting all together; dhari—caught; tarire—Him; su-sthira—
steady; karila—made; i$vara-sevaka—the priest of the Deity; mala—garland;
prasada—offering; ani’—bringing; dila—gave.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Nityananda Prabhu nearly fainted, all the devotees caught Him
and steadied Him. At that time, the priest of Lord Jagannatha brought a gar-
land that had been offered to the Deity and offered it to Nityananda Prabhu.


--- Page 211 ---
Text 38] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 209
TEXT 36
প্রসাদ नश সবে হৈল। আনন্দিত मटन |
পুলরপি আইলা जटव মহাপ্রভুর স্থানে ॥ ৩৬ ॥
prasada pana sabe haila anandita mane
punarapi aila sabe mahaprabhura sthane
SYNONYMS
prasada pana—getting this honor of the garland; sabe —all of them; haila—be-
came; anandita mane—pleased in the mind; punarapi—again; aila—came back;
sabe—all; mahaprabhura sthine—to the place where $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was staying.
TRANSLATION
Everyone was pleased to receive this garland worn by Lord Jagannatha.
Afterwards they all returned to the place where Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was staying.
TEXT 37
উচ্চ করি” করে MA নাম-সংকীর্তন।
তৃতীয় প্রহরে হৈল প্রভুর চেতন ॥ ৩৭ ॥
ucca kari’ kare sabe nama-sankirtana
trtiya prahare haila prabhura cetana
SYNONYMS
ucca—very loudly; kari’—doing; kare—began; sabe—all; nama-sarnkirtana—
chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra; trtiya prahare—in the forenoon; haila—
there was; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya; cetana—consciousness.
TRANSLATION
All of the devotees then began to loudly chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Just
before noon the Lord regained His consciousness.
TEXT 38
হুঙ্কার করিয়| উঠে “হরি” “হরি” वलिः ।
BACH সার্বভৌম তার লৈল পদধুলি ॥ ৩৮ ॥


--- Page 212 ---
210 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
hunkara kariya uthe ‘hari’ hari’ bali’
anande sarvabhauma tanra laila pada-dhali
SYNONYMS
hunkara kariya—making a loud sound; uthe—got up; hari hari bali’—chanting
Hari, Hari; dnande—in pleasure; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
tanra—His; laila—took; pada-dhali—the dust of the feet.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu got up and very loudly chanted, “Hari! Hari!” Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya was very pleased to see the Lord regain consciousness,
and he took the dust of the Lord's lotus feet.
TEXT 39
সার্বভৌম TCT — NY করহ AGE |
fap few দিমু सांकि মহা-গ্রসাদানন ॥ ৩৯ ॥
sarvabhauma kahe, — Sighra karaha madhyahna
mui bhiksa dimu &ji maha-prasadanna
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhuma Bhattacarya; kahe—says; sighra—very soon;
karaha—do; madhya-ahna—midday duties; mui -।; bhiksa—alms; dimu—shall
offer; dji—today; maha-prasada-anna—remnants of food offered to Lord Jagan-
natha.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya informed all of them: ‘‘Please take your midday baths im-
mediately. Today ॥ shall offer you maha-prasada, the remnants of food offered
to Lord Jagannatha.””
TEXT 40
मगल स्नान क्रि" মহাগ্রভু নীঘ আইল |
চরণ नो नि" গ্রভু আসনে afer ॥ ৪০ ॥
samudra-snana kari’ mahaprabhu Sighra aila
carana pakhali’ prabhu asane vasila


--- Page 213 ---
Text 42] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 211
SYNONYMS
samudra-snana—a bath in the sea; kari’—taking; mahaprabhu —Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sighra—very soon; dila—returned; carana—feet; pakhali’—wash-
ing; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dsane—on a seat; vasila—sat.
TRANSLATION
After bathing in the sea, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His devotees
returned very soon. The Lord then washed His feet and sat down on a carpet to
take lunch.
TEXT 41
বহুত প্রসাদ সার্বভৌম আনাইল |
তবে মহাপ্রভু FL ভোজন করিল ॥ ৪১ ॥
bahuta prasada sarvabhauma anaila
tabe mahaprabhu sukhe bhojana karila
SYNONYMS
bahuta prasada—uvarieties of foods offered to Lord Jagannatha; sarvabhauma—
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; anaila—caused to bring them; tabe—at that time;
mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sukhe —in happiness; bhojana—lunch;
karila—accepted.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya made arrangements to bring various kinds of
maha-prasiada from the Jagannatha temple. $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then ac-
cepted lunch with great happiness.
TEXT 42
স্ববর্ণ-খালীর অন্ন উত্তম ব্যঞ্জন |
ভক্তগণ-সঙ্গে RIF করেন ভোজন ॥ ৪২ ॥
50৮3/03-003/1/3 anna uttama vyanjana
bhakta-gana-sarige prabhu karena bhojana
SYNONYMS
suvarna-thalira—on golden plates; anna—rice; uttama—first-class; vyaijana—
vegetables; bhakta-gana—the devotees; sarige—with; prabhu—Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena—accepts; bhojana—Ilunch.


--- Page 214 ---
212 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was offered special rice and first-class vegetables on
golden plates. He thus took lunch in the company of His devotees.
TEXT 43
সার্বভৌম পরিবেশন করেন আপনে |
প্রভু कटक, মোরে দেহ লাফ রা-ব্যঞঙনে ॥ ৪৩ ॥
sarvabhauma parivesana karena apane
prabhu (८2/0९, —more deha laphra-vyarijane
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; parivesana—distribution; karena—
does; apane —personally; prabhu kahe —Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; more—
unto Me; deha—please give; laphra-vyanjane —boiled vegetables.
TRANSLATION
While Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya personally distributed the prasada,
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested him: ‘/Please give Me only boiled
vegetables.
PURPORT
Laphra-vyarijana is a preparation in which many vegetables are boiled together,
and then a cherka is added, consisting of spices like cumin, black pepper and
mustard seed.
TEXT 44
পীঠা-পান৷ দেহ তুমি ই"হা-সবাকারে |
তবে ভট্টাচার্য কহে सूः দুই করে ॥ ৪৪ ॥
pitha-pana deha tumi inha-sabakare
tabe bhattacarya kahe yudi’ dui kare
SYNONYMS
pitha-pana—cakes and condensed milk; deha—give; tumi—you; inha-
sabakare —to all these devotees; tabe —at that time; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya; kahe—said; yudi’—folding; dui kare—two hands.


--- Page 215 ---
Text 46] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 213
TRANSLATION
“You can offer the cakes and other preparations made with condensed milk
to all the devotees.” Hearing this, the Bhattacarya folded his hands and spoke
as follows.
TEXT 45
FIT কৈছে করিয়াছেন ভোজন |
আজি সব মহাপ্রসাদ কর আস্বাদন ॥ ৪৫ ॥
jagannatha kaiche kariyachena bhojana
2/1 saba mahaprasada kara asvadana
SYNONYMS
jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; kaiche—as; kariyachena—has accepted; bho-
jana—lunch; &ji—today; saba—all of you; maha-prasada—the remnants of food
offered to the Lord; kara—do; asvadana—tasting.
TRANSLATION
“Today, all of you please try to taste the lunch just as Lord Jagannatha ac-
cepted it.”
TEXT 46
এত বলি” পীঠা-পানা! जव খাওয়াইলা |
fowl করাঞা৷ আচমন করাইলা ॥ ৪৬ ॥
eta bali’ pitha-pana saba khaoyaila
bhiksa (८2/३7 acamana karaila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; pitha-pana —many kinds of cakes and condensed-milk
preparations; saba—all; khaoyaila—made to eat; bhiksa karana—after offering
prasada; acamana karaila—made them wash their hands, feet and mouths.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, he made them all eat the various cakes and condensed-
milk preparations. After feeding them, he offered them water to wash their
hands, feet and mouths.


--- Page 216 ---
214 §ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 47
আজ্ঞা মাশি” গেলা গোপীনাথ আচার্থকে ae |
প্রভুর নিকট আইলা ভোজন wel ॥ ৪৭ ॥
2/7 magi’ gela gopinatha acaryake lana
prabhura nikata aila bhojana karina
SYNONYMS
ajia magi’—taking permission; gela—went; gopinatha acaryake lana —taking
Copinatha Acarya; prabhura—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nikata—near; aila—
went; bhojana karifia—after taking lunch.
TRANSLATION
Begging permission from Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His devotees, Sar-
vabhauma Bhattaciarya then went with Gopinatha Acarya to take lunch. After
finishing their lunch, they returned to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 48
নমো নারায়ণায়” वणि" নমস্কার কৈল।
“কৃষ্ণে মতিরস্ত? বলি? ८भोजां ॐ কহিল ॥ ৪৮ ॥
‘namo narayanaya’ bali’ namaskara kaila
‘krsne matir astu’ bali’ gosani kahila
SYNONYMS
namah narayanaya—I| offer my respects to Narayana; bali’—saying; namaskara
kaila—offered respects to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsne—unto Lord Krsna;
matih astu—let there be attraction; bali’—saying; gosani—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kahila—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Offering his obeisances to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
said, “Namo narayandya’” [I offer my obeisances to Narayanal. In return,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “Krsne matir astu’’ [Let your attention be on
Krsnal.
PURPORT
It is the etiquette among sannyasis, those on the fourth platform of spiritual life,
to offer respects by saying, orm namo narayandya (“I offer my respectful obei-


--- Page 217 ---
Text 50] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 215
sances unto Narayana’). This greeting is used especially by Mayavadi sannyasis.
According to the smirti scriptures, ৪ sannyasi should not expect anything from
anyone, nor should he consider himself identical with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Vaisnava sannyasis never think of themselves as being one with the
Lord; they always consider themselves eternal servants of Krsna, and they want to
see everyone in the world become Krsna conscious. For this reason, a Vaisnava
sannyasi always offers his blessings to everyone, saying, krsne matir astu (“May
you become Krsna conscious").
TEXT 49
खनिः সার্বভৌম মনে বিচার করিল।
বৈষ্ণব-সন্ল্যাসী ই"হো, বচনে জানিল ॥ ৪৯ ॥
Suni’ sarvabhauma mane vicara karila
vaisnava-sannyasi inho, vacane janila
SYNONYMS
Suni‘—hearing this; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; mane —within
the mind; vicara karila—considered; vaispava-sannyasi—Vaisnava sannyasi;
inho—this person; vacane—by words; janila—understood.
TRANSLATION
Hearing these words, Sarvabhauma understood Lord Caitanya to be a
Vaisnava sannyasi.
TEXT 50
গোপীলাথ আচার্যেরে কহে সার্বভৌম |
গোসাঞ্চির জানিতে চাহি 1&1 পুর্বাশ্ম ॥ ৫০
gopinatha acaryere kahe sarvabhauma
gosaiiira janite cahi kaharn parvasrama
SYNONYMS
gopinatha acaryere—to Gopinatha Acarya; kahe—said; sarvabhauma—Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; gosaiira—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; janite—to
know; cahi—I want; kahan—what; parva-asrama—previous situation.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma then said to Gopinatha Acarya: “I want to know Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s previous situation.”


--- Page 218 ---
216 ওঃ Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
PURPORT
The word parvasrama refers to one’s previous situation in life. Sometimes a per-
son will accept the renounced order from householder life, and sometimes even
from student (brahmacar life. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya wanted to know of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s previous situation as a householder.
TEXT 51
গোপীনাথাচার্য কহে, নবদ্বীপে चन्न |
জগঙ্সাথ'- নাম, পদবী-_মিশ্র ewe ॥ ৫১ ॥
gopinathacarya kahe, — navadvipe ghara
‘jagannatha’—— nama, padavi—‘misra purandara’
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-acarya kahe—GCopinatha Acarya replied; navadvipe —in Navadvipa;
ghara—residence; jagannatha—of the name Jagannatha; nama—named;
padavi—the surname; misra purandara—Misra Purandara.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya replied: “There was a man named Jagannatha, who was a
resident of Navadvipa, and whose surname was Misra Purandara.
TEXT 52
Fg नाम ই"হার, Sia ই"হো चरू ।
নীলাম্ব্বর চক্রবত্তার হয়েল দৌহিত্র ॥ ৫২ ॥
‘visvambhara’——nama inhara, tanra inho putra
nilambara cakravartira hayena dauhitra
SYNONYMS
viSvambhara—of the name Viévambhara; nama—the name; inhara—His;
tanra—of Jagannatha Misra; inho—He; putra—son; nilambara cakravartira—of
Nilambara Cakravarti; hayena—is; dauhitra—grandson (daughter's son).
TRANSLATION
‘Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the son of that Jagannatha Misra, and His
former name was Visvambhara Misra. He also happens to be the grandson of
Nilambara Cakravarti.”


--- Page 219 ---
Text 55] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 217
TEXT 53
সার্বভৌম কহে, नोग)न्र চক্রবর্তী |
বিশারদের সমাধ্যায়ী,__এই তাঁর খ্যাতি ॥ ৫৩ ॥
sarvabhauma kahe, — nilambara cakravarti
visaradera samadhyayi,——ei tanra khyati
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma kahe —Sarvabhauma said; nilambara cakravarti—the gentleman
named Nilambara Cakravarti; visaradera—of Mahes$vara Visarada (Sarvabhauma'’s
father); samadhyayi—class friend; ei —this; tarira—of him; khyati —acquaintance.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya said: ‘“Nilambara Cakravarti was a classmate of my father,
Mahesvara Visarada. He knew him as such.
TEXT 54
“মিশ্র পুরন্দর” Sia মান্য, হেন জানি।
পিতার সম্বন্ধে দৌহুকে পুজ্য করি” মানি ॥ ৫৪ ॥
‘misra purandara’ tarira manya, hena jani
pitara sambandhe donhake pajya kari’ mani
SYNONYMS
misra purandara—Jagannatha Misra Purandara; tarira—his; manya—respect-
able; hena—thus; jani—I| know; pitara sambandhe—in relationship to my father;
donhake —both of them (Nilambara Cakravarti and Jagannatha Misra); pajya—
respectable; kari’—thinking; mani—I accept.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Jagannatha Misra Purandara was respected by my father. Thus because of
their relationship with my father, 1 respect both Jagannitha Misra and
Nilambara Cakravarti.’’
TEXT 55
নদ্ীয়া-সম্বন্ধে সার্বন্ভৌম & হৈল। |
AS zen! গোসাঞ্ঞিরে কহিতে লাগিলা ॥ ৫৫ ॥


--- Page 220 ---
218 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
nadiya-sambandhe sarvabhauma hrsta haila
prita hana gosanire kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
nadiya-sambandhe —in connection with Nadiya; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya; hrsta—pleased; haild—became; prita handa—thus being pleased;
gosanire —unto Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Hearing that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu belonged to the Nadiya district, Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya became very pleased and addressed the Lord as
follows.
TEXT 56
“সহজেই পুজ্য তুমি, আরে ত' সন্ন্যাস |
অতএব ङ তোমার আমি নিজ-দাস ॥ ৫৬ ॥
‘sahajei pajya (0177, are ta’ sannyasa
ataeva hari tomara ami nija-dasa’
SYNONYMS
sahajei—naturally; pajya—respectable; tumi—You; are—over and above this;
ta’—certainly; sannyasa—the renounced order of life; ataeva—therefore; han—
am; tomara—Your; ami—I|; nija-dasa—personal servant.
TRANSLATION
‘’You are naturally respectable. Besides, You are a sannyasi; thus | wish to
become Your personal servant.”
PURPORT
A sannyasi is always to be worshiped and offered all kinds of respect by the
grhasthas (householders). Although Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was older than $ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sarvabhauma respected Him as a sannyasi and as one who
had attained the topmost platform of spiritual ecstasy. Thus the Bhattacarya cer-
tainly accepted Him as his master.
TEXT 57
fer মহাপ্রভু কৈল Afagp স্মরণ |
ভট্টাচার্যে কহে কিছু বিনয় বচন ॥ ৫৭ ॥


--- Page 221 ---
Text 58] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 219
Suni’ mahaprabhu kaila $ri-visnu smarana
bhattacarye kahe kichu vinaya vacana
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing this; mahaprabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—did; sri-
visnu smarana—remembering Lord Visnu; bhattacarye—to Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; kahe—speaks; kichu—some; vinaya vacana—very humble statements.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this from the Bhattacarya, He im-
mediately remembered Lord Visnu and began to speak humbly to him as
follows.
TEXT 58
“তুমি জগছ্প্ডরু_ সর্বলোক-হিতকর্তা।
(वकता পড়া ও, ATA BFE! ॥ ৫৮ ॥
“tumi jagad-guru—— sarvaloka-hita-karta
vedanta paddo, sannyasira upakarta
SYNONYMS
tumi jagat-guru—you are the master of all people; sarva-loka—of all people;
hita-karta—the well-wisher; vedanta padio—you teach Vedanta philosophy;
sannyasira—of the mendicants in the renounced order of life; upakarta—the
benefactor.
TRANSLATION
‘Because you are a teacher of Vedanta philosophy, you are the master of all
the people in the world and their well-wisher as well. You are also the
benefactor of all kinds of sannyasis.
PURPORT
Because the Mayavadi sannyasis teach Vedanta philosophy to their students or
disciples, they are customarily called jagad-guru. This indicates that they are the
benefactors of all people. Although Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was not a sannyasi
but a householder, he used to invite all the sannyasis to his home and offer them
prasada. Thus he was accepted as the best well-wisher and friend of all the san-
nyasis.


--- Page 222 ---
220 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
TEXT 59
আমি বালক-সন্ল্যাসী-_ভান্দ-মন্দ নাহি लानि ।
তোমার আশ্রয় निच, গুরু कत्रि মানি ॥ ৫৯ ॥
ami balaka-sannyasi——bhanda-manda nahi jani
tomara asraya nilun, guru kari’ mani
SYNONYMS
ami—|; balaka-sannyasi—a young sannyasi; bhanda-manda—good and bad;
nahi—not; jani—know; tomara—your; asraya—shelter; nilun—have taken;
guru —spiritual master; kari’—taking as; mani—I accept.
TRANSLATION
“| am a young sannyasi, and | actually have no knowledge of what is good
and what is bad. Therefore | am taking shelter of you and accepting you as My
spiritual master.
TEXT 60
তোমার সঙ্গ लानि" মোর BE আগমন |
সর্বপ্রকারে করিবে আমায় পালন ॥ ৬০ ॥
tomara sanga lagi’ mora ihan agamana
sarva-prakare karibe amaya palana
SYNONYMS
tomara—your; sanga—association; lagi’—for the sake of; mora—My; ihan—
here; agamana—arrival; sarva-prakare—in all respects; karibe—you will do;
amaya—unto Me; palana—maintaining.
TRANSLATION
‘‘l have come here only to associate with you, and | am now taking shelter of
you. Will you kindly maintain Me in all respects?
TEXT 61
আজি যে হৈল আমার বড়ই বিপত্তি |
তাহ হৈতে देकटन তুমি আমার অব্যাহতি ॥” ৬১॥
3// ye haila amara bada-i vipatti
taha haite kaile tumi amara avyahati”


--- Page 223 ---
Text 63] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattiacarya 221
SYNONYMS
aji—today; ye—that which; haila—happened; amara—My; bada-i—very
great; vipatti—obstacle; taha—that danger; haite—from; kaile —did; tumi—you;
amara—My; avyahati—relief.
TRANSLATION
“The incident that happened today was a great obstacle for Me, but you
have kindly relieved Me of it.”
TEXT 62
ভট্টাচার্য কহে, -একলে তুমি না যাইহ দর্শনে |
আমার সঙ্গে যাবে, কিন্ছ৷ আমার লোক-সনে ॥ ৬২ ॥
bhattacarya kahe, —ekale tumi na yaiha darsane
amadra sange yabe, kimva amara loka-sane
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya kahe—the Bhattacarya said; ekale—alone; tumi—You; na—not;
ydiha—go; darsane —to see the Deity; amara sarige—with me; yabe —You should
go; kimva—or; amara loka-sane —with my men.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya replied: ‘Do not go alone to see the Deity at the Jagan-
natha Temple. It is better that You go with me or my men.”
TEXT 63
প্রভু कटर, "मन्कित्र ভিতরে न। যাইব।
গরুড়ের পাশে রহি” দর্শন করিব ॥” ৬৩ ॥
prabhu kahe, —‘mandira bhitare na yaiba
garudera pase rahi’ darsana kariba’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —5ri Caitanya replied; mandira—the temple; bhitare—inside;
na—never; yaiba—I shall go; garudera—of the column known as the Garuda-
stambha; pase—by the side; rahi’—staying; darsana—seeing; kariba—I shall do.
TRANSLATION
The Lord said: “I shall never enter the temple but shall always view the Lord
from the side of the Garuda-stambha.”


--- Page 224 ---
222 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 6
TEXT 64
গোগপীনাথাচার্যকে কহে ALCS |
“তুমি গোসাঞ্িরে লঞ। করাইহ দরশন ॥ ৬৪ ॥
gopinathacaryake kahe sarvabhauma
‘tumi gosanire lana karaiha darasana
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-acaryake—to Copinatha Acarya; kahe—says; sarvabhauma—Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; tumi—you; gosanire—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
lania—taking; karaiha—make Him do; darasana—seeing of Lord Jagannatha.
TRANSLATION
Sirvabhauma Bhatticarya then told Gopinatha Acarya: “Take Gosvamiji
and show Him Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 65
আমার মাতৃস্বলা-গৃহ- নির্জন স্থান |
তাহ বাসা দেহ, কর সর্ব সমাধান ॥ we ॥
amara matr-svasa-grha——nirjana sthana
tahan vasa deha, kara sarva samadhana’
SYNONYMS
amara—My; matr-svasa—of the aunt; grha—the home; nirjana sthana—very
solitary place; tahan—there; vasa—an apartment; deha—give; kara—make; sar-
va—all; samadhana—arrangements.
TRANSLATION
‘Also, the apartment belonging to my maternal aunt is in a very solitary
place. Make all arrangements for Him to stay there.”
TEXT 66
গোপীনাথ প্রভু नय। তাহ वाज দিল |
জল, জলপাত্রাদি ক সর্ব সামাধান কৈল ॥ ৬৬ ॥
gopinatha prabhu lana tahan vasa dila
jala, jala-patradika sarva samadhana kaila


--- Page 225 ---
Text 68] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 223
SYNONYMS
gopinatha—Gopinatha Acarya; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; lana —
taking; tahan—there; vasa—apartment; dila—gave; jala—water; jala-patra-
adika—water pots and other vessels; sarva—all; samadhana—arrangements;
kaila—made.
TRANSLATION
Thus Gopinatha Acarya took Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to the residential
quarters and showed Him where to find water, tubs and water pots. Indeed, he
arranged everything.
TEXT 67
আর দিন গোপীনাথ প্রভু স্থানে fata ।
শয্যোখান দরশন করাইল লঞ। ॥ ৬৭ ॥
ara dina gopinatha prabhu sthane giya
Sayyotthana darasana karaila lana
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; gopinatha—Gopinatha Acarya; prabhu—of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sthane—to the place; giya—going; sayya-utthana—the
rising from bed of Lord Jagannatha; darasana—seeing; kardila—caused; lana—
taking Him.
TRANSLATION
The next day Gopiniatha Acarya took Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to see the
early rising of Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 68
FHS ST] আইলা সার্বভৌম স্থানে।
সার্বভৌম কিছু Sica বলিল৷ বচনে ॥ ৬৮ ॥
mukunda-datta lana aila sarvabhauma sthane
sarvabhauma kichu tanre balila vacane
SYNONYMS
mukunda-datta—of the name Mukunda Datta; lana—taking; aila—went; sar-
vabhauma—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; sthane—to the place; sarvabhauma—
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kichu—something; tarnre—to Mukunda Datta;
balila—said; vacane—in words.


--- Page 226 ---
224 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya then took Mukunda Datta with him and went to Sar-
vabhauma’s house. When they arrived, Sarvabhauma addressed Mukunda
Datta as follows.
TEXT 69
“প্রকৃতি-বিনীত, ATHY দেখিতে छत्र |
আমার RAS বাড়ে ইহার উপর ॥ ৬৯ ॥
‘prakrti-vinita, sannyasi dekhite sundara
amara bahu-priti bade inhara upara
SYNONYMS
prakrti-vinita—by nature very humble and meek; sannyasi=renouncer;
dekhite—to see; sundara—very beautiful; amara—my; bahu-priti—great affec-
tion; bade—increases; inhara—Him; upara—upon.
TRANSLATION
“The sannyasi is very meek and humble by nature, and His person is very
beautiful to see. Consequently my affection for Him increases.
PURPORT
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya considered Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu a very humble
and meek person because although Caitanya Mahaprabhu was a sannyasi, He still
retained His brahmacari name. The Lord took sannyasa from Kesava Bharati in the
Bharati sampradaya, in which the brahmacaris (the assistants of the sannyasis) are
named “Caitanya!’ Even after accepting sannyasa, Caitanya Mahaprabhu retained
the name “Caitanya,” meaning a humble servant of a sannyasi. Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya appreciated this very much.
TEXT 70
CTH সম্প্রদায়ে AWA কর্যাছেন গ্রহণ |
কিবা নাম ইহার, শুনিতে হুয় মন ॥ ৭০ ॥
kon sampradaye sannyasa karyachena grahana
kiba nama inhara, sunite haya mana’
SYNONYMS
kon sampradaye—in which community; sannyasa—the renounced order of
life; karyachena—has made; grahana—acceptance; kiba—what; nama—name;
inhara—His; sunite—to hear; haya—it is; mana—my mind.


--- Page 227 ---
Text 73] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 225
TRANSLATION
‘From which sampradaya has He accepted the sannyasa order, and what is
His name?”’
TEXT 71
গোপীনাথ कटर, নাম BFL |
क्र TTF কেশব-ভারতী गर श ॥ १३ ॥
gopinatha kahe, — nama $ri-krsna-caitanya
guru inhara kesava-bharati maha-dhanya
SYNONYMS
gopinatha kahe—Gopinatha Acarya replied; nama—His name; S$ri-krsna-
caitanya—of the name $ri Krsna Caitanya; guru—sannyasa-guru; inhara—His;
kesava-bharati—of the name Kesava Bharati; maha-dhanya—the greatly fortu-
nate personality.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya replied: “1116 Lord's name is Sri Krsna Caitanya, and His
sannyasa preceptor is the greatly fortunate Kesava Bharati.”
TEXT 72
সার্বভৌম কহে,-“ই"হার নাম সর্বোত্তম |
ভারতী-সপ্প্রদায় ই-হে। _হয়েন মধ্যম ॥' ৭২ ॥
sarvabhauma 13৪06, - ‘inhara nama sarvottama
bharati-sampradaya inho——hayena madhyama’
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma kahe—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied; inhara—His; nama—
name; sarva-uttama—first-class; bharati-sampraddya—the community of the
Bharati sannyasis; inho—He; hayena—becomes; madhyama—middle-class.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya said: “ “517 Krsna’ is a very good name, but He
belongs to the Bharati community. Therefore He is a second-class sannyasi.’
TEXT 73
গোপীনাথ কহে, -_ ইহার নাহি বাছাপেক্ষা ।
অতএব বড় সম্প্রদায়ের নাহিক অপেক্ষা ॥ ৭৩ ॥


--- Page 228 ---
226 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
gopinatha (८2/0९, —inhara nahi bahyapeksa
ataeva bada sampradayera nahika apeksa
SYNONYMS

gopinatha kahe—Gopinatha Acarya replied; inhara—of the Lord; nahi—there
is not; bahya-apeksa —dependence on any external formality; ataeva—therefore;
bada—big; sampradayera—of a community; nahika—there is not; apeksa—
necessity.

TRANSLATION

Gopinatha Acarya replied: “Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu does not rely
on any external formality. There is no need for Him to accept the sannyasa
order from a superior sampradaya.”

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyisa from the Bharati sampradiya
(community), which belongs to the disciplic succession of Sankaracarya.
Sankaracarya introduced names for his sannyasa disciples, and these are ten in
number. Out of these, the surnames Tirtha, Asrama and Sarasvati are considered
topmost. In the monastery at Sringeri, the surname Sarasvati is considered first
class, Bharati second class and Puri third class. A sannyasi who has very nicely
understood the slogan tat tvam asi and who takes his bath at the confluence of
the rivers Ganges, Yamuna and Sarasvati is called a Tirtha. A person who is very
eager to accept sannyasa, who is detached from worldly activities, who has no
desire for any kind of material facilities and who is thus saved from repeated birth
and death is known as Asrama. When a sannyasi lives in a beautiful, solitary place
in the forest and is freed from all material desires, he is called Vana. A sannyasi
who always lives in the forest and renounces all connection with the world in
order to be elevated to the heavenly planets, where he can live in the nandana-
kanana, is called Aranya. One who prefers living in the mountains engaging in the
study of Bhagavad-gita and whose intelligence is fixed is called Giri. One who
prefers living in great mountains, even among ferocious animals, to attain the
summit of philosophical speculation (understanding that the essence of this mate-
rial world is useless) is called Parvata. A sannyasi who has dipped into the ocean of
the Absolute Truth and collected some valuable stones of knowledge from that
ocean, who never falls from the regulative principles of a sannyasi, is called Sagara.
One who has learned the classical art of music, who engages in its culture and
who has become expert and completely aloof from material attachment is called
Sarasvati. Sarasvati is the goddess of music and learning, and in one hand she
holds a musical instrument called a vipa. A sannyasi who is always engaged in
music for spiritual elevation is called Sarasvati. One who has become completely


--- Page 229 ---
Text 74] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 227
educated and is freed from all kinds of ignorance and who is never unhappy, even
in a distressed condition, is called Bharati. One who has become very expert in ab-
solute knowledge, who is situated in the Absolute Truth and who always dis-
cusses the Absolute Truth is called Puri.

All these sannyasis are assisted by brahmacaris, who are described as follows:
One who knows his real identity and is fixed in his particular occupational duty,
who is always happy in spiritual understanding, is called Svariipa-brahmacari. One
who completely knows the Brahman effulgence and is always engaged in the
practice of yoga is called Prakasa-brahmacari. One who has acquired absolute
knowledge and who always meditates on the Absolute Truth, knowledge, the un-
limited and the Brahman effulgence, thus keeping himself in transcendental bliss,
is called Ananda-brahmacari. One who is able to distinguish between matter and
spirit, who is never disturbed by material transformations and who meditates on
the unlimited, inexhaustible, auspicious Brahman effulgence is a first-class, learned
brahmacari and is named Caitanya.

When Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was talking with Gopinatha Acarya about ऽं
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s sannyasa community, he appreciated the first name, 67
Krsna,” but did not like the surname “Caitanya,” which is the name for a
brahmacari belonging to the Bharati community. He therefore suggested that the
Lord be elevated to the Sarasvati community. However, Gopinatha Acarya
pointed out that the Lord does not depend on any external formality. Gopinatha
Acarya was firmly convinced that ৩11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu was Krsna Himself
and therefore independent of any external ritual or formality. If one wants to
engage in pure devotional service, he does not require titular superiority as a
Bharati or a Sarasvati.

TEXT 74
ভট্টাচার্ষ কহে+- Tem প্রৌঢ় যৌবন।
কেমতে সঙ্প্যাস-ধর্ম হইবে রক্ষণ ॥ ৭৪ ॥
bhattacarya kahe,— ‘inhara praudha yauvana
kemate sannyasa-dharma ha-ibe raksana
SYNONYMS

bhattacarya kahe—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied; inhara—His; praudha—
full; yauvana—youth; kemate —how; sannyasa-dharma—principles of a sannyasi;
ha-ibe—there will be; raksana—protection.

TRANSLATION

The Bhattacarya inquired: “Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is in His full-fledged

youthful life. How can He keep the principles of sannyasa?


--- Page 230 ---
228 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 75
নিরস্তর ই"হাকে (vig শুনাইব।
বৈরাগ্য-অদ্বৈত-মার্গে প্রবেশ করাইব ॥ १८ ॥
nirantara inhake vedanta Sunaiba
vairagya-advaita-marge pravesa karaiba
SYNONYMS
nirantara—continuously; inhake—to Him; vedanta—the Vedanta philosophy;
Sunaiba—I shall recite; vairagya—of renunciation; advaita—of monism; marge—
on the path; pravesa—entrance; karaiba—I shall cause Him to make.
TRANSLATION
“1 shall continuously recite the Vedanta philosophy before Caitanya
Mahaprabhu so that He may remain fixed in His renunciation and thus enter
upon the path of monism.”
PURPORT
According to Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, among sannyasis the cultivation of
Vedanta philosophy helps in becoming detached from sense gratification. Thus a
sannyasi can protect the prestige of wearing a loincloth (kaupina). One has to
practice sense control as well as mind control and subdue the six forces of speech,
mind, anger, tongue, belly and genitals. Then one can become expert in under-
standing the devotional service of the Lord and thus become a perfect sannyasi.
For that purpose one must cultivate knowledge and renunciation regularly. When
one is attached to material sense gratification, he cannot protect his sannyasa
order. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya suggested that by the study of vairagya (renun-
ciation), Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu might be saved from the clutches of full-
fledged youthful desires.
TEXT 76
কহেন যদি, পুনরপি যোগ-পট্ট দিয়া ।
সংস্কার করিয়ে উত্তম-সম্প্রদায়ে আনিয়া ॥” ৭৬ ॥
kahena yadi, punarapi yoga-patta diya
samskara kariye uttama-sampradaye aniya’
SYNONYMS
kahena—says; yadi—if; punarapi—again; yoga-patta diya—offering Him
saffron cloth; samskara—reformatory process; kariye—I perform; uttama—first-
class; sampradaye —to the community; aniya—bringing.


--- Page 231 ---
Text 78] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 229
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya then suggested: ‘/If Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
would like, ॥ could bring Him into a first-class sampradaya by offering Him
saffron cloth and performing the reformatory process again.”
PURPORT
The Bhattacirya wanted to reinstate Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu into the
Sarasvati sampradaya because he did not like the Lord's belonging to the Bharati
sampradaya or Puri sampradaya. Actually, he did not know the position of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu did not depend on an inferior or superior sampradaya. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead remains in the supreme position in all circumstances.
TEXT 77
শুনি” গোপীনাথ-মুকুল্দ তু'হে তুঃখা হৈলা |
গোপীলনাথাচার্থ কিছু কহিতে नागिन] ॥ ৭৭ ॥
Suni’ gopinatha-mukunda 00705 duhkha haila
gopinathacarya kichu kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; gopinatha-mukunda—Gopinatha Acarya and Mukunda Datta;
dunhe—both; duhkha—unhappy; haila—became; gopinatha-acarya—of the
name Copinatha Acarya; kichu—something; kahite—to speak; lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Aciarya and Mukunda Datta became very unhappy when they
heard this. Gopinatha Acarya therefore addressed Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
as follows.
TEXT 78
“ভট্টাচার্য” তুমি ইহার न। জান মহিমা ।
ভগবনত্তা-লক্ষণের ই'হুাতেই সীমা ॥ ৭৮ ॥
‘bhattacarya’ tumi inhara na jana mahima
bhagavatta-laksanera inhatei sima
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—my dear Bhattacarya; tumi—you; inhara—of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; na—not; jana—know; mahima—the greatness; bhagavatta—of


--- Page 232 ---
230 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
being the Supreme Personality of Godhead; laksanera—of symptoms; inhatei —in
Him; sima—the highest degree.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Bhatticarya, you do not know the greatness of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. All the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
found in Him to the highest degree.”
PURPORT
Since the Bhattacarya was an impersonalist, he had no idea of the Absolute
Truth beyond the impersonal effulgence. However, Gopinatha Acarya informed
him that Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Those
who know the Absolute Truth know it in three phases, as explained in Srimad-
Bhagavatam:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvarn yaj jianam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate
“Those who are in knowledge of the nondual Absolute Truth know very clearly
what is Brahman, what is Paramatma and what is the Supreme Personality of God-
head!” (Bhag. 1.2.11) The Supreme Personality of Godhead is sad-aisvarya-parna,
complete with six opulences. Gopinatha Acarya emphasized that all those six
opulences were completely existing in $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 79
তাহাতে বিখ্যাত 8 পরম-টীশ্ষর |
অজ্ঞ-স্থানে কিছু নহে বিজ্ঞের গোচর ॥” ৭৯ ॥
tahate vikhyata inho parama-isvara
ajia-sthane kichu nahe vijiera gocara’
SYNONYMS
tahate —therefore; vikhyata—celebrated; inho—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
parama-isvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ajfa-sthane —before an ig-
norant person; kichu—any; nahe—not; vijiera—of the person who knows;
gocara—information.


--- Page 233 ---
Text 80] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 231
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya continued: “Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is celebrated as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are ignorant in this connec-
tion find the conclusion of knowledgeable men very difficult to understand.”
TEXT 80
শিষ্যগণ কহে,-_-“ঈশ্বর কহ (कान्‌ SATs’ |
আচার্য কহে, “বিজ্ঞমত ঈশ্বর-লক্ষণে” ॥ ৮০ ॥
Sisya-gana kahe,— ‘i$vara kaha kon pramane’
acarya kahe,— ‘vijia-mata isvara-laksane’
SYNONYMS
Sisya-gana kahe —the disciples of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said; 1$৮3/3 kaha—
you say the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kon pramane —by what evidence;
acarya kahe—Gopinatha Acarya replied; vijia-mata—statements of authorized
persons; isvara-laksane —in understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The disciples of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya retaliated: ‘By what evidence do
you conclude that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Lord?” Gopinatha
Acarya replied: “The statements of authorized acaryas who understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are proof.”
PURPORT
Since the appearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, there have been many
pseudo incarnations in India who do not present authorized evidence. Five
hundred years ago the disciples of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, being very learned
scholars, were certainly right in asking Gopinatha Acarya for evidence. If a person
proposes that he himself is God or that someone else is an incarnation of God or
Cod Himself, he must cite evidence from $astra to prove his claim. Thus the re-
quest of the Bhattacarya’s disciples is quite bona fide. Unfortunately, at the pres-
ent moment it has become fashionable to present an incarnation of God without
referring to the $astras. Before an intelligent person accepts someone as an incar-
nation of God, however, he must ask about the evidence. When the disciples of
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya challenged Gopinatha Acarya, he immediately replied
correctly: “We must hear the statements of great personalities in order to under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead!” Lord Krsna is established as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by statements from authorized persons like


--- Page 234 ---
232 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
Brahma, Narada, Vyasadeva, Asita, Arjuna and many others. Similarly, Sr Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is also established as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by evi-
dence from the same personalities. This will be explained later.
TEXT 81
rg কহে,- FIRS जासि অনুমানে”।
আচার্থ কহে,_“অনুমানে নহে ঈশ্বরঙ্ঞানে ॥ ৮১ ॥
৩15৮3 kahe, — ‘I$vara-tattva sadhi anumane’
acarya kahe,—’anumane nahe i$vara-jiane
SYNONYMS
Sisya kahe —the disciples said; iSvara-tattva—the truth of the Absolute; sadhi—
derive; anumane—by hypothesis; dcarya kahe—GCopinatha Acarya replied;
anumane—by hypothesis; nahe—there is not; iSvara-jiane—real knowledge of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The disciples of the Bhatticarya said: ‘We derive knowledge of the Ab-
solute Truth by logical hypothesis’ Gopinitha Acarya replied: “One cannot
attain real knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by such logical
hypothesis and argument.”
PURPORT
The Mayavadi philosophers in particular make certain hypotheses about the
Absolute Truth. They reason that in the material world we experience that every-
thing is created. If we trace the history of anything, we find a creator. Therefore
there must be a creator of this huge cosmic manifestation. By such reasoning they
come to the conclusion that a higher power has created this cosmic manifesta-
tion. The Mayavadis do not accept that great power to be a person. Their brains
cannot accommodate the fact that this huge cosmic manifestation can be created
by a person. This is because as soon as they think of a person, they think of a per-
son within the material world with limited potency. Sometimes the Mayavadi phi-
losophers will accept Lord Krsna or Lord Rama as Bhagavan, but they think of the
Lord as a person having a material body. The Mayavadis do not understand that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, has a spiritual body. They think of
Krsna as a great personality, a human being, within whom there is the supreme im-
personal power, Brahman. Therefore they finally conclude that the impersonal
Brahman is the Supreme, not the personality Krsna. This is the basis of Mayavadi
philosophy. However, from the sastras we can understand that the Brahman
effulgence is the bodily rays of Krsna:


--- Page 235 ---
Text 81] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 233
yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-
kotisv asesa-vasudhadi vibhati-bhinnam
tad brahma niskalam anantam asesa-bhdatarm
govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami
“I serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, the primeval Lord, the
effulgence of whose transcendental body is known as the brahmajyoti. That
brahmajyoti, which is unlimited, unfathomed and all-pervasive, is the cause of the
creation of unlimited numbers of planets with varieties of climates and specific
conditions of life!” (Brahma-sarhhita 5.40)

Mayavadi philosophers study the Vedic literature, but they do not understand
that the Absolute Truth in the last stage of realization is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Krsna. They do accept the fact that there is a creator of this cosmic
manifestation, but that is anumana (hypothesis). The Mayavadi philosopher's logic
is something like seeing smoke on a hill. When there is a forest fire on a high hill,
smoke is first of all visible. The smoke is created when there is fire. Just as one can
conclude that there is fire from smoke, the Mayavadi philosophers conclude that
there must be a creator of the cosmic manifestation.

The disciples of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya wanted evidence to show that Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was actually the creator of the cosmic manifestation. Only
then would they accept Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original
cause of creation. Gopinatha Acarya replied that one could not understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by guesswork. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita:

naham prakasah sarvasya
yoga-maya-samavrtah
madho ‘yam nabhijanati
loko mam ajam avyayam
“I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them | am covered by
My eternal creative potency [yogamayal; and so the deluded world knows Me
not, who am unborn and infallible!” (Bg. 7.25) The Supreme Personality of God-
head reserves the right of not being exposed to nondevotees. He can only be
understood by bona fide devotees. Lord Krsna says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita,
bhaktya mam abhijanati: “One can understand Me only by the devotional pro-
cess” (Bg. 18.55) In the Fourth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna says, bhakto
‘si me sakha ceti rahasyam hy etad uttamam. Here Lord Krsna informs Arjuna that
He is disclosing the secrets of Bhagavad-gita to him because he is His devotee.
Arjunawas not a sannyasi, nor was he a Vedantist or brahmana. He was, however,
a devotee of Krsna. The conclusion is that we have to understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead from the devotees. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself
says, guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija. (Cc. Madhya 19.151)


--- Page 236 ---
234 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lil3, Ch. 6
More evidence can be cited to show that without the mercy of a devotee or
the mercy of Krsna, one cannot understand what is Krsna and what is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in the next verse.
TEXT 82
অনুমান প্রমাণ নহে ঈশ্বরতস্বচ্ছানে |
কৃপা विना ঈথরেরে কেহ নাহি জানে ॥ ৮২ ॥
anumana pramana nahe iSvara-tattva-jiane
krpa vina isvarere keha nahi jane
SYNONYMS
anumana pramana—evidence by hypothesis; nahe—there is not; isvara-tattva-
jAane —in understanding the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of God-
head; krpa vina—without His mercy; isvarere —the Supreme Personality of God-
head; keha—anyone; nahi—not; jane —knows.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya continued: “One can understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead only by His mercy, not by guesswork or hypothesis.”
PURPORT
One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply by ex-
hibiting some mundane magic. Foolish people are enchanted by magical
demonstrations, and when they see a few wonderful things done by mystical
power, they accept a magician as the Personality of Godhead or an incarnation.
This is not the way of realization. Nor should one guess or speculate about an in-
carnation of God or the Personality of Godhead. One has to learn from the bona
fide person or from the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, as Arjuna did,
by the mercy of Krsna. Krsna Himself also gives many hints about His potencies as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead only through the evidence presented by the $astras and the
mahajanas. In any case, one must have the mercy of the Lord in order to under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service.
TEXT 83
ঈশ্বরের কৃপা-লেশ হয় © যাহারে ।
সেই ङ" ঈশ্বর-তস্ব জানিবারে পারে ॥ ৮৩ ॥


--- Page 237 ---
Text 84] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 235
iSvarera krpa-lesa haya ta’ yahare
sei ta’ isvara-tattva janibare pare
SYNONYMS
isvarera—of the Personality of Godhead; krpa-lesa—a little mercy; haya—
there is; ta’—certainly; yahare—upon whom; sei ta’—he certainly; isvara-tattva—
the Absolute Truth; janibare—to know; pare—is able.
TRANSLATION
The Acarya continued: “If one receives but a tiny bit of the Lord’s favor by
dint of devotional service, he can understand the nature of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TEXT 84
অথাপি তে দেব পদা্কুজত্বয়-
প্রসাদ-লেশাহুগৃহীত এব হি ।
জানাতি তত্বং ভগবন্ম হিম্নে
ন চান্য একোইপি চিরং বিচিম্বন্‌ ॥ ৮৪ ॥
athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya-
prasada-lesanugrhita eva hi
janati tattvarn bhagavan-mahimno
na canya eko ‘pi ciram vicinvan
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; api—indeed; te—Your; deva—my Lord; pada-ambuja-
dvaya—of the two lotus feet; prasada—of the mercy; lesa—by only a trace;
anugrhitah —favored; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; janati—one knows; tattvam—
the truth; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahimnah —of the
greatness; na—never; ca—and; anyah—another; ekah—one; api—although;
ciram—for a long period; vicinvan—speculating.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus
feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who
speculate in order to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
unable to know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many
years” ८


--- Page 238 ---
236 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-!ila, Ch. 6
PURPORT

The above verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.29). The Brahma-sarihita
states, vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau (Bs. 5.33). Although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the ultimate goal of knowledge (vedais
ca sarvair aham eva vedyah), one who is not a pure devotee and who is not
engaged in the service of the Lord cannot understand Him. Lord Brahma therefore
confirms this. Vedesu durlabham: “It is very difficult to understand the Supreme
Lord simply through one’s studies!” Adurlabham atma-bhaktau: “However, it is
very easy for the devotees to capture the Lord.” The Lord is known as gjita (un-
conquerable). No one can conquer the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the
Lord consents to be conquered by His devotees. That is His nature. As stated in
the Padma Purana:

atah $ri-krspa-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
Being pleased by devotional activities, the Lord reveals Himself to His devotees.
That is the way to understand Him.

The verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam quoted by Gopinatha Acarya was originally
spoken by Lord Brahma when he was defeated by Lord Krsna. Lord Brahma had
stolen all the calves and cowherd boys in order to test Krsna’s power. Lord Brahma
admitted that his own extraordinary powers within the universe were not in the
least comparable to the unlimited powers of Lord Krsna. If Lord Brahma can make
a mistake in understanding Krsna, what to speak of ordinary persons, who either
misunderstand Krsna or falsely present a so-called incarnation of Krsna for their
own sense gratification.

TEXTS 85-86
যতপি জগদ্গুরু ভুমি - শাল্ন-ভ্ঞানবান্‌ |
পৃথিবীতে নাহি পণ্ডিত তোমার সমান ॥ ve ॥
ঈশ্বরের কৃপা-লেশ নাহিক তোমাতে ।
অতএব ঈশ্বরতন্ব না পার জানিতে ॥ ৮৬ ॥
yadyapi jagad-guru tumi——sastra-jianavan
prthivite nahi pandita tomara samana
iSvarera krpa-lesa nahika tomate
ataeva isvara-tattva na para janite


--- Page 239 ---
Text 87] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 237
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; jagat-guru—a teacher of many disciples; tumi—you;
$astra-janavan—well versed in Vedic knowledge; prthivite—on this earth;
nahi—there is not; pandita—a learned scholar; tomara—your; samana—equal;
iSvarera—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krpa—of mercy; lesa—a bit;
nahika—there is not; tomate —on you; ataeva—therefore; isvara-tattva—the Ab-
solute Truth (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); na para—are not able;
janite—to know.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya then addressed Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya: “You are a
great scholar and a teacher of many disciples. Indeed, there is no other
scholar like you on earth. Nonetheless, because you are bereft of even a pinch
of the Lord’s mercy, you cannot understand Him, even though He is present in
your home.
TEXT 87
তোমার নাহিক দোষ, শাঙ্ত্রে এই কহে।
HQT ঈশ্বরতস্ব-ভ্ঞান কভু নহে ॥” ৮৭ ॥
tomara nahika dosa, sastre ei kahe
pandityadye isvara-tattva-jiana kabhu nahe’
SYNONYMS
tomara—your; nahika—there is not; dosa—fault; Sastre —the scriptures; ei—
this; kahe—mention; panditya-adye—simply by scholarship, etc.; i$vara-tattva-
jAana—knowledge of the principles of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kabhu —ever; nahe —there is not.
TRANSLATION
“It is not your fault; it is the verdict of the scriptures. You cannot under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply by scholarship.”
PURPORT
This is a very important verse. Even big scholars cannot understand Krsna, yet
they dare comment on Bhagavad-gita. Reading Bhagavad-gita means understand-
ing Krsna, yet we actually see many scholars making blunders in trying to under-
stand Krsna. Copinatha Acarya’s statement is confirmed in many places in Vedic
literature. In Katha Upanisad it is stated (Katha Up. 1.2.23):


--- Page 240 ---
238 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
ndyam atma pravacanena labhyo
na medhaya na bahuna srutena
yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyas
tasyaisa atma vivrnute tanam svam
It is also stated in Katha Upanisad (1.2.9):
naisa tarkena matir apaneya
proktanyenaiva sujfianaya prestha
yam tvam 3030 satya-dhrtir vatasi
tvadrri no bhayann aciketah prasta
The fact is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, cannot be at-
tained simply by explanations, logic and erudite scholarship. One cannot under-
stand Him simply by one’s brain substance. Even by studying all Vedic literature,
one cannot understand the Supreme Lord. However, if one is slightly favored by
the mercy of the Lord, if the Lord is pleased, one can understand Him. But who are
the candidates eligible to receive the mercy of the Lord? Only the devotees. They
alone can understand what is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord
reveals Himself to the sincere devotee when He is pleased with his service:
svayam eva sphuraty adah. One should not try to understand the Lord simply from
the statements of the Vedas, nor should one uselessly attempt to decry these
statements through reasoning and logic.
TEXT 88
५
সার্বভৌম কহে,- আচার্য, কহ সাবধানে |
তোমাতে ঈশ্বর-কবপা| ইথে কি প্রমাণে ॥ ৮৮ ॥
sarvabhauma kahe, —acarya, kaha savadhane
tomate i$vara-krpa ithe ki pramane
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma kahe—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya says; acarya—my dear
Copinatha Acarya; kaha—kindly speak; savadhane—very carefully; tomate—
unto you; isvara-krpa—mercy of the Lord; ithe—in this matter; ki pramane—by
what evidence.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied: “My dear Gopinatha Acarya, please
speak with great care. What is the proof that you have received the mercy of
the 10107”


--- Page 241 ---
Text 89] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 239
TEXT 89
আচার্থ কহে,- “वद्छ-विसटञ्च হয় বস্ত-ভ্্তান |
বস্তুতত্ব-ভ্ঞান TA কৃপাতে প্রমাণ ॥ ৮৯ ॥
acarya kahe, — “vastu-visaye haya ৮৭5(0-/83/779
vastu-tattva-jiiana haya krpate pramana
SYNONYMS

acarya kahe—Copinatha Acarya replied; vastu-visaye—in the matter of the
summum bonum; haya—there is; vastu-jiana—knowledge of the Supreme;
vastu-tattva—of the Absolute Truth; jAdana—knowledge; haya—is; krpate —of
the mercy; pramana—the evidence.

TRANSLATION

Gopinatha Aciarya replied: “Knowledge of the summum bonum, the Ab-

solute Truth, is evidence of the mercy of the Supreme Lord.”
PURPORT

Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya informed his brother-in-law, Gopinatha Acarya, “The
Supreme Personality of Godhead may not have shown mercy to me, but what is
the proof of His having shown it to you? Kindly let us know about this!” In reply to
this, Gopinatha Acarya said that the summum bonum, the Absolute Truth, and His
different potencies are identical. Therefore one can understand the substance of
the Absolute Truth by the manifestation of His different potencies. The summum
bonum includes all potencies in one unit. The Absolute Truth combined with dif-
ferent characteristics is the original substance (vastu): parasya saktir vividhaiva
Srayate.

Thus the Vedas state that the Absolute Truth has different potencies. ‘When
one understands the characteristics of the potencies of the Absolute Truth, one is
aware of the Absolute Truth. On the material platform as well, one can under-
stand the substance by the manifestation of its symptoms. For example, when
there is heat, it is to be understood that there is fire. The heat of the fire is per-
ceived directly. The fire may not be visible, but one can search out the fire by feel-
ing heat. Similarly, if one can perceive the characteristics of the Absolute Truth,
we can know that he has understood the substance of the Absolute Truth by the
mercy of the Lord.

In Bhagavad-gita (7.25) it is said, naham prakasah sarvasya. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead reserves the right of not being exposed to everyone. Sevon-
mukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: “The Lord reveals Himself to a
devotee when He is completely satisfied by the devotee’s service!” Thus one can-


--- Page 242 ---
240 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
not understand the Supreme Lord without His mercy. The Absolute Truth cannot
be understood by speculation, and this is the conclusion of Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 90
ইহার শরীরে সব ঈশ্বর-লক্ষণ |
মহা-প্রেমাবেশ তুমি পাঞাছ দর্শন ॥ ৯০ ॥
inhara sarire saba 1$৮3/3-13/5303
maha-premavesa tumi panacha darsana
SYNONYMS
inhara—His; sarire—in the body; saba—all; isvara-laksana—characteristics of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; maha-prema-avesa—absorption in tran-
scendental ecstasy; tumi—you; panacha—have obtained; darsana—seeing.
TRANSLATION
Gopinitha Acarya continued: “You have seen the symptoms of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in the body of Sri Caitanya Mahiprabhu during His
absorption in an ecstatic mood.
TEXT 91
তবু ভ' लेश्वत्र-ञ्डान न। হয় তোমার |
ঈশ্বরের মায়। এই-_বলি ব্যবহার ॥ >> ॥
tabu ta’ isvara-jiana na haya tomara
i$varera maya ei— bali vyavahara
SYNONYMS
tabu ta’—still, however; isvara-jiana—knowledge of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; na—not; haya—there is; tomara—your; isvarera—of the Lord;
maya—the illusion; ei—this; bali—saying; vyavahara—the general term.
TRANSLATION
‘Despite directly perceiving the symptoms of the Supreme Lord in the
body of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, you cannot understand Him. This is com-
monly called illusion.
PURPORT
Gopinatha Acarya is pointing out that Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya had already
seen uncommon symptoms of ecstasy in the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 243 ---
Text 92] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 241
These uncommon symptoms of ecstatic love indicated the Supreme Person, but
despite having seen all these symptoms, the Bhattacarya could not understand
the Lord's transcendental nature. He was considering the Lord's pastimes to be
mundane. This was certainly due to illusion.
TEXT 92
দেখিলে না দেখে তারে বহিমুখে জন ।”
९

শুনি” হাসি” সার্বভৌম বলিল বচন ॥ ৯২ ॥

dekhile na dekhe tare bahirmukha jana”

Suni’ hasi’ sarvabhauma balila vacana

SYNONYMS

dekhile—even after seeing; na—not; dekhe —sees; tare —the Supreme Person;
bahih-mukha jana—a person influenced by the external energy; suni’—hearing
this; hasi’—smiling; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; balila—said;
vacana—the words.

TRANSLATION

“A person influenced by the external energy is called bahirmukha jana, a
mundane person, because despite his perception, he cannot understand the
real substance.” Hearing Gopinatha Acarya say this, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
smiled and began to speak as follows.

PURPORT
When one’s heart is not cleansed, one cannot awaken the transcendental
nature of devotional service. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
yesarn tv anta-gatarn papari
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful ac-
tions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion
engage themselves in My service with determination.” (Bg. 7.28)

When one is actually engaged in pure devotional service, it is understood that
he has already attained freedom from all reactions to sinful activities. In other
words, it is to be understood that devotees are already freed from sin. A sinful
person, a miscreant (duskrti), cannot engage in devotional service. Nor can one


--- Page 244 ---
242 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
engage in devotional service simply on the basis of scholarly speculation. One has
to wait for the mercy of the Lord in order to render pure devotional service.
TEXT 93
Root বিচার করি, ना করিহ (त्रास ।
শাস্তরদৃষ্ট্সে কহি, কিছু न। লইহ দোষ ॥ ৯৩ ॥
ista-gosthi vicara kari, na kariha rosa
$astra-drstye kabhi, kichu na la-iha dosa
SYNONYMS
ista-gosthi—discussion among friends; vicara—consideration; kari—we do;
na—not; kariha—make; rosa—anger; $astra-drstye —according to the conclusion
of scriptures; kahi—we speak; kichu—any; nda—not; la-iha—take; dosa—fault.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya said: “We are just having a discussion among friends and
considering the points described in the scriptures. Do not become angry. | am
simply speaking on the strength of the $astras. Please don’t take any offense.
TEXT 94
মহা-ভাগবত হয়৷ চৈতদ্্য-গোসাি।
এই কলিকালে বিষ্ণুর অবতার নাই ॥ ৯৪ ॥
maha-bhagavata haya caitanya-gosani
ei kali-kale visnura avatara nai
SYNONYMS
maha-bhagavata—a great devotee; haya—is; caitanya-gosani—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei—this; kali-kale—in the age of Kali; visnura—of Lord
Visnu; avatara—incarnation; nai—there is not.
TRANSLATION
“$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is certainly a great, uncommon devotee, but we
cannot accept Him as an incarnation of Lord Visnu because, according to
§astra, there is no incarnation in this age of Kali.


--- Page 245 ---
Text 95] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 243
TEXT 95
অতএব তিযুগ' করি” কহি विकू-नांम ।
কলিযুগে অবতার नङ, - শাস্ত্রজ্ঞান ॥ ৯৫ ॥
ataeva ‘tri-yuga’ kari’ kahi visnu-nama
kali-yuge avatara nahi,—sastra-jiiana
SYNONYMS

ataeva —therefore; tri-yuga—the Lord, who appears in three yugas only; kari’—
making; kahi—we say; vispnu-nama—the holy name of Lord Visnu; kali-yuge—in
the age of Kali; avatara—incarnation; nahi—there is not; sastra-jiana—the verdict
of the scriptures.

TRANSLATION

‘Another name for Lord Visnu is Triyuga because there is no incarnation of

Lord Visnu in Kali-yuga. Indeed, this is the verdict of revealed scriptures.”
PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, is known as Triyuga, which
means that He is manifest in three yugas. However, this means that in the age of
Kali the Lord appears not directly but in disguise. This is confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam:

ittharn nr-tiryag-rsi-deva-jhasavatarair
lokan vibhavayasi harnsi jagat-pratipan
dharma maha-purusa pasi yuganuvrttarm
channah kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo ‘tha sa tvam
“My Lord, You kill all the enemies of the world in Your multifarious incarnations in
the families of men, animals, demigods, rsis, aquatics and so on. Thus You illumi-
nate the worlds with transcendental knowledge. In the age of Kali, O
Mahapurusa, You sometimes appear in a covered incarnation. Therefore You are
known as Triyuga [one who appears in only three yugas]!” (Bhag. 7.9.38)

Srila Sridhara Svami has also verified that Lord Visnu appears in the age of Kali
but does not act as He does in other ages. Lord Visnu incarnates for two pur-
poses: paritrandya sadhanarn vinasaya ca duskrtam. That is, He comes to engage
in pastimes with His devotees and to annihilate the demons. These purposes are
visible in the Satya, Treta and Dvapara yugas, but in Kali-yuga the Lord appears
disguised. He does not directly kill demons and give protection to the faithful. Be-


--- Page 246 ---
244 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
cause the Lord is not directly perceived in Kali-yuga but is directly known in the
other three yugas, His name is Triyuga.
TEXT 96
निग्र আচার্য কহে FA হঞ। मटन |
नभोच्चच्छ कद्रियञ] তুমি কর অভিমানে ॥ ৯৬ ॥
Suniya acarya kahe duhkhi hana mane
Sastra-jia karina tumi kara abhimane
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing this; acarya—Gopinatha Acarya; kahe—says; duhkhi—
unhappy; hafia—becoming; mane —in the mind; sastra-jia—well versed in Vedic
scriptures; kariida—taking as; tumi—you; kara—do; abhimane—pride.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this, Gopinatha Acarya became very unhappy. He said to the
Bhattacarya: ‘You consider yourself the knower of all Vedic scriptures.
TEXT 97
ভাগবত-ভারত তুই नोटछन्न প্রধান |
সেই তুইগ্রন্থ-বাক্যে নাহি অবধান ॥ ৯৭ ॥
bhagavata-bharata dui sastrera pradhana
sei dui-grantha-vakye nahi avadhana
SYNONYMS
bhagavata— Srimad-Bhagavatam; bharata—Mahabharata; dui—two; $astrera—
of all Vedic scriptures; pradhana—the most prominent; sei—those; dui-grantha—
of the two scriptures; vakye—in the statements; nahi—there is not; avadhana—
attention.
TRANSLATION
“$rimad-Bhagavatam and Mahabharata are the two most important Vedic
scriptures, but you have paid no attention to their statements.
TEXT 98
সেই দুই কহে কলিতে সাক্ষাৎ-অবতার |
তুমি কহ, __কলিতে নাহি বিষ্ণুর প্রচার ॥ > ॥


--- Page 247 ---
Text 99] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 245
sei dui kahe kalite saksat-avatara
tumi kaha, —kalite nahi visnura pracara
SYNONYMS
sei—those; dui—two; kahe—say; kalite—in this age of Kali; saksat—direct;
avatara—incarnation; tumi—you; kaha—say; kalite—in this age of Kali; nahi—
there is not; visnura—of Lord Visnu; pracara—manifestation.
TRANSLATION
“In $rimad-Bhagavatam and Mahabharata it is stated that the Lord appears
directly, but you say that in this age there is no manifestation or incarnation of
Lord Visnu.
TEXT 99
কলিযুগে লীলাবতার না করে SHAR |
অতএব ‘feral করি” কহি তার নাম ॥ >> ॥
kali-yuge lilavatara na kare bhagavan
ataeva ‘tri-yuga’ kari’ kahi tara nama
SYNONYMS
kali-yuge —in this age of Kali; lila-avatara—a pastime incarnation; na—not;
kare—does; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ataeva—
therefore; tri-yuga—of the name Triyuga (manifested in three yugas); kari’—ac-
cepting; kahi—I say; tara nama—His holy name.
TRANSLATION
“In this age of Kali there is no lila-avatara of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; therefore He is known as Triyuga. That is one of His holy names.”
PURPORT
A lila-avatara is an incarnation of the Lord who performs a variety of activities
without making any special endeavor. He always has one pastime after another, all
full of transcendental pleasure, and these pastimes are fully controlled by the
Supreme Person. The Supreme Person is totally independent of all others in these
pastimes. While teaching Sanatana Gosvami (Cc. Madhya 20.296-298), Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu pointed out that one cannot count the number of lila-
avataras:
lilavatara krsnera na yaya ganana
pradhana kariya kahi dig-darasana


--- Page 248 ---
246 इ Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
“However,” the Lord told Sanatana, “I shall explain the chief lila-avataras.”
matsya, karma, raghunatha, nrsirhha, vamana
varahadi—lekha yanra na yaya ganana
Thus the Lord's incarnations were enumerated, including Matsya, the fish incama-
tion; Karma, the tortoise; Lord Ramacandra; Nrsirnhadeva; Vamanadeva; and
Varaha, the boar incarnation. Thus there are innumerable lila-avataras, and all of
these exhibit wonderful pastimes. Lord Varaha, the boar incarnation, lifted the en-
tire planet earth from the depths of the Garbhodaka Ocean. The tortoise incarna-
tion, Lord Karma, became a pivot for the emulsification of the whole sea, and Lord
Nrsirhhadeva appeared as half-man, half-lion. These are some of the wonderful
and uncommon features of lila-avataras.

In his book Laghu-bhagavatamrta, $rila Rapa Gosvami has enumerated the
following twenty-five lila-avataras: Catuh-sana, Narada, Varaha, Matsya, Yajia,
Nara-Narayana, Kapila, Dattatreya, Hayasirsa (Hayagriva), Harhsa, Prénigarbha,
Rsabha, Prthu, Nrsirnha, Karma, Dhanvantari, Mohini, Vamana, Para§urama, Ragha-
vendra, Vyasa, Balarama, Krsna, Buddha and Kalki.

$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is not mentioned as a lila-avatara because He is an in-
carnation in disguise (channa-avatara). In this age of Kali there are no lila-avataras,
but there is an incarnation of the Lord manifested in the body of ভা Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. This has been explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam.

TEXT 100
প্রতিযুগে করেন FR যুগ-অবতার |
SES হৃদয় তোমার নাহিক বিচার ॥ ১০০ ॥
pratiyuge karena (00509 yuga-avatara
tarka-nistha hrdaya tomara nahika vicara
SYNONYMS

prati-yuge —in every age or millennium; karena—makes; krspa—Lord Krsna;
yuga-avatara—incarnation for the age; tarka-nistha—hardened by argument;
hrdaya—heart; tomara—your; nahika—there is not; vicara—consideration.

TRANSLATION

Gopinatha Acarya continued: “There is certainly an incarnation in every
age, and such an incarnation is called the yuga-avatara. But your heart has be-
come so hardened by logic and argument that you cannot consider all these
facts.


--- Page 249 ---
Text 102] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 247
TEXT 101
আসন্‌ বণীস্ত্রয়ে৷ FD গৃহ্ুৃতোইলযুগং তনুঃ |
NF রক্তস্তথা NS ইদানীং ककड গতঃ ॥ ১০১ ॥
asan ৮৪/035 trayo hy asya
grhnato ‘nuyugam tanah
Suklo raktas tatha pita
idanim krspatam gatah
SYNONYMS
asan —there were; varnah—colors; trayah —three; hi—indeed; asya—of Him;
grhnatah—accepting; anuyugam—according to the age; tandh—bodies;
Suklah—white; raktah —red; tatha—also; pitah—yellow; idanim—at the present
moment; krspatam—blackish; gatah—has accepted.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘In the past, your son has had bodies of three different colors, according
to the age. These colors were white, red and yellow. In this age [Dvapara-
yugal He has accepted a blackish body.’
PURPORT
This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.8.13) was spoken by Gargamuni when
he was performing the rituals at Lord Krsna's name-giving ceremony. He states
that the incarnations of the Lord in other ages had been white, red and yellow.
This yellow color refers to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whose bodily complexion
was yellowish. This confirms that in the past Kali-yugas, the Lord also had incar-
nated in a body that was yellow in hue. It is understood that the Lord incarnates in
different colors for the different yugas (Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali). Accepting
the color yellow (pita), as well as other characteristics, the Lord incarnated as Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is the verdict of all Vedic authorities.
TEXT 102
ইতি দ্বাপর উবীশ স্তবস্তি জগদীস্বরম্‌ |
নানাতন্ত্রবিধানেন কলাবপি তথা শৃণু ॥ ১০২ ॥
iti dvapara urvisa
stuvanti jagad-isvaram
nana-tantra-vidhanena
kalav api tatha srnu


--- Page 250 ---
248 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS

iti—thus; dvapare—in Dvapara-yuga; uru-isa—O King; stuvanti—offer
prayers; jagat-isvaram—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nana—
various; tantra—of the supplementary Vedic literatures; vidhanena—by regula-
tive principles; kalau—in the age of Kali; api—certainly; tatha—so also; srnu—
hear.

TRANSLATION

^“ ‘In the age of Kali, as well as in Dvapara-yuga, the people offer prayers to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by various mantras and observe the
regulative principles of the supplementary Vedic literatures. Now please hear
of this from me.

PURPORT
This is a quotation from $rimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.31).
TEXT 103
Fad बिष श्कुक९ সাঙ্গোপাঙ্গাস্ত্রপার্যদম্‌ |
यटेखः সংকীর্তনপ্রায়ৈজস্তি হি স্থমেধসঃ ॥ ১০৩ ॥
krsna-varparm tvisakrsnarn
sangoparigastra-parsadam
yajiaih sarikirtana-prayair
yajanti hi sumedhasah
SYNONYMS

krsna-varnam—chanting the two syllables “krs” and “pa”; tvisa—by complex-
ion; akrsnam—not blackish; sa-arnga—accompanied by personal expansions;
upa-ariga—devotees; astra—the weapon of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra; par-
sadam —and associates like Gadadhara, SvarGpa Damodara, etc.; yajiaih—by
sacrifice; sarkirtana—congregational chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra;
prayaih —chiefly consisting of; yajanti—worship; hi—indeed; su-medhasah—
those who are intelligent.

TRANSLATION

^“ “In this age of Kali, those who are intelligent perform the congregational
chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, worshiping the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who appears in this age always describing the glories of Krsna.
That incarnation is yellowish in hue and is always associated with His plenary


--- Page 251 ---
Text 105] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 249
expansions [such as Sri Nityananda Prabhu], and personal expansions [such as
Gadadhara], as well as devotees and associates [such as Svaripa Damodaral.
PURPORT
This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.32) is explained by 67 Jiva Gosvami in
his Krama-sandarbha, as quoted by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in regard to the ex-
planation of Adi-/ila, Third Chapter, verse 51.
TEXT 104
স্বববর্ণবর্ণো হেমাঙ্গে। বরাঙ্গশ্চন্দনাঙ্গদী |
সম্ন্যাসকুচ্ছমঃ শাস্তে নিষ্ঠা-শাস্তি-পরায়ণঃ ॥ sos ॥
suvarpa-varno hemango
varangas candanarngadi
sannyasa-krc chamah santo
nistha-santi-parayanah
SYNONYMS
suvarna-varnah—whose complexion is like gold; hema-arigah —having a body
like molten gold; vara-arigah—whose body is very beautifully constructed; can-
dana-arigadi—smeared with the pulp of sandalwood; sannyasa-krt—accepting
the renounced order of life; samah—self-controlled; santah—peaceful; nistha—
firmly fixed; $anti—bringing peace by propagating the Hare Krsna maha-mantra;
pardayanah—always in the ecstatic mood of devotional service.
TRANSLATION
‘The Lord [in the incarnation of 03011350110 313] has a golden complexion.
Indeed, His entire body, which is very nicely constituted, is like molten gold.
Sandalwood pulp is smeared all over His body. He will take the fourth order of
spiritual life (sannyasa) and will be very self-controlled. He will be dis-
tinguished from Mayavadi sannyasis in that He will be fixed in devotional ser-
vice and will spread the sankirtana movement.’ ^^
PURPORT
Gopinatha Acarya quoted this verse from Mahabharata.
TEXT 105
তোমার আগে এত কথার নাহি প্রয়োজন |
উষর-ভুমিতে যেন বীজের রোপণ ॥ ১০৫ ॥


--- Page 252 ---
250 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
tomara age eta kathara nahi prayojana
asara-bhamite yena bijera ropana
SYNONYMS
tomara age—before you; eta—so many; kathara—of words; nahi—there is
not; prayojana—necessity; Gsara-bhamite —in barren land; yena—like; bijera—of
the seed; ropana—sowing.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya then said: “There is no need to quote so much evidence
from the §astras, for you are a very dry speculator. There is no need to sow
seeds in barren land.
TEXT 106
তোমার উপরে গার কৃপা যবে হবে।
এসব जिक्तांख তবে তুমিহ কহিবে ॥ ১০৬ ॥
tomara upare tanra krpa yabe habe
e-saba siddhanta tabe tumiha kahibe
SYNONYMS
tomara upare—upon you; tarnra—the Lord's; krpa—mercy; yabe—when;
habe —there will be; e-saba—all these; siddhanta—conclusions; tabe—at that
time; tumiha—you 2150; kahibe —will quote.
TRANSLATION
“When the Lord will be pleased with you, you will also understand these
conclusions and will quote from the $astras.
TEXT 107
তোমার যে শিষ্য কছে TIE, নানাবাদ |
ইহার কি দোষ--এই মায়ার প্রসাদ ॥ ১০৭ ॥
tomara ye Sisya kahe kutarka, nana-vada
ihara ki dosa——ei mayara prasada
SYNONYMS
tomara—your; ye —which; sisya—disciples; kahe—say; ku-tarka—false argu-
ments; nana-vada—jugglery of philosophy; ihara—their; ki—what; dosa—fault;
ei—this; mayara—of illusion; prasada—benediction.


--- Page 253 ---
Text 109] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 251
TRANSLATION
“The false arguments and philosophical word jugglery of your disciples are
not faults of theirs. They have simply received the benediction of Mayavada
philosophy.
TEXT 108
THEA বদতাং বাদিনাং বৈ, বিবাদ-সংবাদ-ভুবে ভবস্তি ৷
কুস্তি চৈষাৎ মুহুরাজ্মমো হং,তস্মৈ নমোইনস্তগুণায় FH ॥
yac-chaktayo vadatarn vadinam vai
vivada-samvada-bhuvo bhavanti
kurvanti (21577) muhur atma-mohar
tasmai namo ‘nanta-gundya bhamne
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; saktayah—potencies; vadatam—contending; vadinam—of the
opposing disputants; vai—indeed; vivada—of opposition; sarhvada—of agree-
ment; bhuvah—objects; bhavanti—become; kurvanti—do; ca—also; esam—of
them; muhuh—always; atma-moham—illusion of the self; tasmai—unto Him;
namah—obeisances; ananta—unlimited; gunaya—who has qualities; bhamne —
the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
‘I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is full of unlimited qualities and whose different potencies bring
about agreement and disagreement between disputants. Thus the illusory en-
ergy again and again covers the self-realization of both disputants.’
disputants.
PURPORT
This is a quotation from $rimad-Bhagavatam (6.4.31).
TEXT 109
যুক্তং AME সর্বত্র ভাষস্তে जां कने! যথা |
যায়াং মদীয়ামুদ্গৃহ বদতাং কিং एम्‌ ॥ ১০৯ ॥
yuktarh ca santi sarvatra
bhasante brahmana yatha
mayam madiyam udgrhya
৮৪03 (377 kirh nu durghatam


--- Page 254 ---
252 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-ila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
yuktam—quite befitting; ca—also; santi—are; sarvatra—everywhere; bha-
sante—speak; brahmanah—the learned; yatha—as much; mayam—illusion;
madiyam—of Me; udgrhya—accepting; vadatam—of the speculators; kim—
what; nu—certainly; durghatam —impossible.
TRANSLATION
‘In almost all cases, whatever learned brihmanas speak becomes ac-
cepted; nothing is impossible for one who takes shelter of My illusory energy
and speaks under her influence. ^
PURPORT
In this verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.22.4), the Supreme Personality of
Godhead explains that His illusory energy can perform the impossible; such is the
power of the illusory energy. In many cases philosophical speculators have
covered the real truth and have boldly set forth false theories. In ancient times
philosophers like Kapila, Gautama, Jaimini, Kanada and similar brahmanas pro-
pounded useless philosophical theories, and in modern days so-called scientists
are setting forth many false theories about the creation, backed up by seemingly
logical arguments. This is all due to the influence of the Supreme Lord's illusory
energy. The illusory energy, therefore, sometimes appears correct because it is
emanating from the Supreme Correct. To avoid the very bewildering illusory in-
fluence, one must accept the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
they are. Only then can one escape the influence of the illusory energy.
TEXT 110
তবে ভট্টাচার্য কহে, যাহ গোলাঞ্জির टन |
আমার নামে গণ-সহিত কর নিমন্ত্রণে ॥ ১১০ ॥
tabe bhattacarya kahe, yaha gosaiira sthane
amdara name gana-sahita kara nimantrane
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kahe —says; yaha—
please go; gosanira sthane—to the place of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dmara
name—in my name; gana-sahita—with His associates; kara—make;
nimantrane —invitation.
TRANSLATION
After hearing this from Gopinatha Acarya, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said:
““First go to the place where Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is staying and invite
Him here with His associates. Ask Him on my account.


--- Page 255 ---
Text 113] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 253
TEXT 111
প্রসাদ আনি” কারে করাহ আগে few ।
পশ্চাৎ আসি' আমারে করাইহ मिच्छ] ॥ ১১১ ॥
prasada ani’ (3775 karaha age bhiksa
pascat asi’ amare karaiha Siksa
SYNONYMS
prasada ani’—bringing jagannatha-prasada; tarire—unto Him; karaha—make;
age—first; bhiksa—acceptance; pascat—afterwards; asi’—coming here; amare —
unto me; karaiha—cause; siksa—teaching.
TRANSLATION
‘Take jagannatha-prasada and first give it to Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His
associates. After that, come back here and teach me well.”
TEXT 112
আচার্য_ভগিনীপতি, শ্যালক- ভট্টাচার্য |
নিন্দা-স্ততি-হাস্তে শিক্ষা Tara আচার্য ॥ ১১২ ।
acarya——bhagini-pati, syalaka—bhattacarya
ninda-stuti-hasye Siksa kara’na acarya
SYNONYMS
acarya—Gopinatha Acarya; bhagini-pati—sister's husband; Syalaka—wife’s
brother; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; ninda—sometimes blasphem-
ing; stuti—sometimes by praising; hasye—sometimes by laughing; siksa—in-
struction; kara’na—causes; dcarya—Gopinatha Acarya.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya was the brother-in-law of Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya;
therefore their relationship was very sweet and intimate. Under the circum-
stances, Gopinatha Acarya taught him by sometimes blaspheming him, some-
times praising him and sometimes laughing at him. This had been going on for
some time.
TEXT 113
আচার্যের সিদ্ধান্তে মুকুম্দের হৈল जटखोस |
ভট্টাচার্যের বাকে মনে হৈল দুঃখ-রোষ ॥ ১১৩ ॥


--- Page 256 ---
254 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
acaryera siddhante mukundera haila santosa
bhattacaryera vakya mane haila duhkha-rosa
SYNONYMS
acaryera—of Gopinatha Acarya; siddhante—with the conclusions; mukun-
dera—of Mukunda Datta; haila—there was; santosa—satisfaction; bhat-
tacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; vakye—by the words; mane—in the
mind; haila—there was; duhkha—unhappiness; rosa—and anger.
TRANSLATION
Srila Mukunda Datta felt very satisfied to hear the conclusive statements of
Gopinitha Acarya, but he became very unhappy and angry to hear the state-
ments put forward by Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TEXT 114
গোসাঞ্চির স্থানে আচার্য কৈল আগমন |
ভট্টাচার্যের নামে তারে टेकल নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১১৪ ॥
gosanira sthane acarya kaila agamana
bhattacaryera name tanire kaila nimantrana
SYNONYMS
gosanira sthane—to the place where ऽतं Caitanya Mahaprabhu was staying;
acarya—Gopinatha Acarya; kaila—did; agamana—coming; bhattacaryera
name —on behalf of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; tarire—unto Him; kaila—made;
nimantrana—invitation.
TRANSLATION
According to the instructions of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Gopinatha
Aciarya went to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and invited Him on the Bhattacarya’s
behalf.
TEXT 115
মুকুন্দ-সহিত কহে ভট্টাচার্যের কথা |
ভট্টাচার্যের निन्त করে, মনে “Heel ব্যথা॥ ১১৫ ॥
mukunda-sahita kahe bhattacaryera katha
bhattacaryera ninda kare, mane pana vyatha


--- Page 257 ---
Text 117] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 255
SYNONYMS
mukunda-sahita—along with Mukunda; kahe—describes; bhattacaryera
katha—all the words of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; bhattacaryera—of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; ninda—defamation; kare—does; mane—in the mind;
pana—getting; vyatha—some pain.
TRANSLATION
The Bhatticarya’s statements were discussed before $ri Caitanya
Mahiprabhu. Gopinatha Acarya and Mukunda Datta disapproved of the Bhat-
tacarya’s statements because they caused mental pain.
TEXT 116
শুলি মহাপ্রভু কহে এঁছে মৎ कङ्‌ |
আমা প্রতি ভট্টাচার্যের হয় অনুঞ্রহ ॥ ১১৬ ॥
Suni mahaprabhu kahe aiche mat kaha
ama prati bhattacaryera haya anugraha
SYNONYMS
$uni—hearing them; mahaprabhu—Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahe—says;
aiche —such; mat kaha—do not speak; ama prati —toward Me; bhattacaryera—of
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; haya—there is; anugraha—mercy.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: “Do not speak like
that. Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya has shown great affection and mercy
toward Me.
TEXT 117
আমার AF AAT Gees রাখিতে |
বাৎসলো্যে Fel করেন, कि দোষ ইহাতে ॥ ১১৭ ॥
amara sannyasa-dharma cahena rakhite
vatsalye karuna karena, ki dosa ihate
SYNONYMS
amara—My; sannyasa-dharma—regulative principles of sannyasa; cahena—he
wants; rakhite—to keep; vatsalye—out of paternal affection; karupa—mercy;
karena—does; ki—what; dosa—fault; ihate—in this connection.


--- Page 258 ---
256 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
“Out of paternal affection for Me, he wants to protect Me and see that |
follow the regulative principles of a sannyasi. What fault is there in 11157”
TEXT 118
আর দিন৷ মহাপ্রভু ভট্টাচার্য-সনে |
আনন্দে AE জগন্নাথ দরশনে ॥ ১১৮ ॥
ara dina mahaprabhu bhattacarya-sane
anande karila jagannatha darasane
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhattacarya-
sane—along with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; anande—in great pleasure; karila—
did; jagannatha—to Lord Jagannatha; darasane —visit.
TRANSLATION
The next morning, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
together visited the temple of Lord Jagannatha. Both of them were in a very
pleasant mood.
TEXT 119
ভট্টাচার্য-সঙ্গে সার মন্দিরে আইলা |
গুভুরে আসন দিয়। আপনে वजिन। ॥ ১১৯ ॥
bhattacarya-sange (3/7/9 mandire aila
prabhure asana diya apane vasila
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya-sange—along with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; tarra—His (Lord
Jagannatha’s); mandire—to the temple; aila—came; prabhure—unto Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asana—sitting place; diya—giving; apane—personally;
vasila—sat down.
TRANSLATION
When they entered the temple, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya offered Caitanya
Mahaprabhu a seat, while he himself sat down on the floor out of due respect
for a sannyasi.


--- Page 259 ---
Text 121] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 257
TEXT 120
(वको STI BCS তবে আরম্ভ করিল। ।
স্েহ-ভক্তি করি” কিছু প্রভুরে কহিল। ॥ ১২০ ॥
vedanta padaite tabe arambha karila
sneha-bhakti kari’ kichu prabhure kahila
SYNONYMS
vedanta—Vedanta philosophy; padaite —to instruct; tabe—then; arambha—
beginning; karila—made; sneha—affection; bhakti—and devotion; kari’—show-
ing; kichu—something; prabhure—unto the Lord; kahila—said.
TRANSLATION
He then began to instruct Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu on Vedanta philoso-
phy, and out of affection and devotion, he spoke to the Lord as follows.
PURPORT
The Vedainta- or Brahma-satra, written by Srila Vyasadeva, is a book studied by
all advanced spiritual students, especially by the sannyasis of all religious com-
munities (sampradayas). The sannyasis must read Vedanta-satra to establish their
final conclusions concerning Vedic knowledge. Here, of course, the Vedanta men-
tioned is the commentary of Sankardcarya, known as Sariraka-bhasya. Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya intended to convert Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who was a
Vaisnava sannyasi, into a Mayavadi sannyasi. He therefore made this arrangement
to instruct Him in Vedanta-satra according to the Sariraka commentary of
Sankaracarya. All the sannyasis of the Sarikara-sampradaya enjoy seriously study-
ing the Vedanta-satra with the Sariraka-bhasya commentary. It is said, vedanta-
vakyesu sada ramantah: “One should always enjoy the studies of the Vedanta-
5003.
TEXT 121
বেছাস্ত-শ্ববণ,-_এই ATR धर्म |
निन्रखव्र কর তুমি বেদান্ত শ্রবণ ॥ ১২১॥
vedanta-sravana, — ei sannyasira dharma
nirantara kara tumi vedanta sravana
SYNONYMS
vedanta-sravana—hearing of the Vedanta philosophy; ei—this; sannyasira—of
a person in the renounced order; dharma—factual occupation; nirantara—inces-


--- Page 260 ---
258 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
santly; kara—do; tumi—You; vedanta—of Vedanta philosophy; sravana—hear-
ing.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya said: ‘Hearing the Vedanta philosophy is a sannyasi’s main
business. Therefore without hesitation You should study Vedanta philosophy,
hearing it without cessation from a superior person.”
TEXT 122
প্রভু কহে, _“মোরে তুমি কর Taz |
সেই সে কর্তব্য, তুমি যেই মোরে কহ ॥”১২২ ॥
prabhu kahe, — ‘more tumi kara anugraha
sei se kartavya, tumi yei more kaha’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; more—unto Me; tumi—you; kara—show;
anugraha—mercy; sei se—that; kartavya—duty; tumi—you; yei—whatever;
more —unto Me; kaha—say.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya replied: “You are very merciful to Me, and therefore | think it
is My duty to obey your order.”
TEXT 123
সাত দিন পর্যন্ত এঁছে করেন aT |
ভাল-মন্দ নাহি কহে, বসি” মাত্র শুনে ॥ ১২৩ ॥
sata dina paryanta aiche karena sravane
bhala-manda nahi kahe, vasi’ matra sune
SYNONYMS
sata dina—seven days; paryanta—up to; aiche—in this way; karena—does;
Sravane —hearing; bhala—right; manda—wrong; nahi—not; kahe —says; vasi’'—
sitting; matra—only; sune—hears.
TRANSLATION
Thus for seven days continuously, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu listened to the
Vedanta philosophy expounded by Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya. However,


--- Page 261 ---
Text 125] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 259
Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not say anything and did not indicate whether it
was right or wrong. He simply sat there and listened to the Bhattacarya.
TEXT 124
অষ্টম-দিবসে SCT পুছে সার্বভৌম |
সাত দিন কর তুমি বেদান্ত শ্রবণ ॥ ১২৪ ॥
astama-divase (3/)/765 puche sarvabhauma
sata dina kara tumi vedanta sravana
SYNONYMS
astama-divase—on the eighth day; tarre—unto Him; puche—inquires; sar-
vabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; sata dina—seven days; kara—do; tumi—
You; vedanta—the Vedanta philosophy; sravana—hearing.
TRANSLATION
On the eighth day, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said to Caitanya Mahaprabhu:
४०४ have been listening to the Vedanta philosophy from me continuously for
seven days.
TEXT 125
ভালমন্দ নাহি কহ, রহ মৌন ধরি”।
বুঝ, কি না বুঝ, दे] বুঝিতে না পারি ॥ ১২৫ ॥
bhala-manda nahi kaha, raha mauna dhari’
bujha, ki na bujha, —iha bujhite na pari
SYNONYMS
bhala-manda—right or wrong; nahi kaha—not speak; raha—keep; mauna—
silence; dhari’—holding; bujha—understand; ki—or; na—not; bujha—under-
stand; iha—this; bujhite—to understand; na—not; pari—I am able.
TRANSLATION
“You have simply been listening, fixed in Your silence. Since You do not say
whether You think it is right or wrong, | cannot know whether You are actually
understanding Vedanta philosophy or not.”


--- Page 262 ---
258 इषे Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
santly; kara—do; tumi—You; vedanta—of Vedanta philosophy; sravana—hear-
ing.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya said: ‘Hearing the Vedanta philosophy is a sannyasi’s main
business. Therefore without hesitation You should study Vedanta philosophy,
hearing it without cessation from a superior person.”
TEXT 122
SG TCT, — CLA তুমি কর অনুঞাহ |
সেই সে কর্তব্য, তুমি যেই মোরে কহ ॥১২২ ॥
prabhu kahe, — ‘more tumi kara anugraha
sei se kartavya, tumi yei more kaha’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —the Lord replied; more—unto Me; tumi—you; kara—show;
anugraha—mercy; sei se—that; kartavya—duty; tumi—you; yei—whatever;
more —unto Me; kaha—say.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya replied: You are very merciful to Me, and therefore ! think it
is My duty to obey your order.”
TEXT 123
সাত দিন পর্যন্ত এছে করেন শ্রবণে |
ভাল-মন্দ নাহি কহে, বসি” মাত্র শুনে ॥ ১২৩ ॥
sata dina paryanta aiche karena sravane
bhala-manda nahi kahe, vasi’ matra sune
SYNONYMS
sata dina—seven days; paryanta—up to; aiche—in this way; karena—does;
Sravane—hearing; bhala—right; manda—wrong; nahi—not; kahe —says; vasi’—
sitting; matra—only; sune—hears.
TRANSLATION
Thus for seven days continuously, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu listened to the
Vedanta philosophy expounded by Siarvabhauma Bhatticirya. However,


--- Page 263 ---
Text 125] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 259
Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not say anything and did not indicate whether it
was right or wrong. He simply sat there and listened to the Bhattacarya.
TEXT 124
অষ্টম-দিবসে তারে পুছে সার্বভৌম |
সাত দিন কর তুমি (वक्त ख শ্রবণ ॥ ১২৪ ॥
astama-divase tanre puche sarvabhauma
sata dina kara tumi vedanta sravana
SYNONYMS
astama-divase—on the eighth day; tanre—unto Him; puche—inquires; sar-
vabhauma —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; sata dina—seven days; kara—do; tumi—
You; vedanta—the Vedanta philosophy; sravana—hearing.
TRANSLATION
On the eighth day, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said to Caitanya Mahaprabhu:
‘You have been listening to the Vedanta philosophy from me continuously for
seven days.
TEXT 125
ভালমন্দ নাহি কহ, রহ মৌন ধরি” ।
বুঝ, কি न। বুঝ ইহ বুঝিতে न। পারি ॥ ১২৫ ॥
bhala-manda nahi kaha, raha mauna dhari’
bujha, ki na bujha, —iha bujhite na pari
SYNONYMS
bhala-manda—right or wrong; nahi kaha—not speak; raha—keep; mauna—
silence; dhari’—holding; bujha—understand; ki—or; na—not; bujha—under-
stand; iha—this; bujhite—to understand; na—not; pari—| am able.
TRANSLATION
५१०४ have simply been listening, fixed in Your silence. Since You do not say
whether You think it is right or wrong, | cannot know whether You are actually
understanding Vedanta philosophy or not.”


--- Page 264 ---
260 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 126
শ্রভু কহে - “মুর্খ আমি, न। डि অধ্যয়ন।
তোমার আজ্ঞাতে মাত্র করিয়ে শ্রবণ ॥ ১২৬ ॥
prabhu kahe —“midrkha ami, nahi adhyayana
tomara ajhate matra kariye sravana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —the Lord replied; mirkha ami—I| am a fool; nahi—there is not;
adhyayana—study; tomdra—your; djAdte —by the order; matra—only; kariye—I
do; sravana—hearing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied: “I am a fool, and consequently | do not
study Vedanta-satra. | am just trying to hear it from you because you have or-
dered Me.
TEXT 127
সনম্ল্যাসীর ধর্ম লাগি” শ্রবণ মাত্র ঝরি।
তুমি যেই অর্থ কর, বুঝিতে না পারি ॥” ১২৭ ॥
sannyasira dharma lagi’ Sravana matra kari
tumi yei artha kara, bujhite na pari”
SYNONYMS
sannyasira—of one in the renounced order of life; dharma—the occupation;
lagi’—for the matter of; sravapa—hearing; matra—only; kari—I do; tumi—you;
yei—whatever; artha—meaning; kara—present; bujhite—to understand; na—
not; pari—1 am able.
TRANSLATION
“Only for the sake of executing the duties of the renounced order of san-
nyasa do | listen. Unfortunately, 1 cannot in the least understand the meaning
you are presenting.’
PURPORT
ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu presented Himself as if He were a sannyasi in name
only or, in other words, a number-one fool. Mayavadi sannyasis in India are very


--- Page 265 ---
Text 129] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 261
accustomed to declaring themselves jagad-gurus, teachers of the world, although
they have no information of the outside world and are limited in their experience
to a small town or village, or perhaps to the country of India. Nor do such san-
nyasis have sufficient education. Unfortunately, at the present moment there are
many foolish sannyasis, both in India and elsewhere, who simply read and study
Vedic literature without understanding the purports. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was having His discussion with the Chand Kazi, the Mohammedan magistrate of
Navadvipa, He recited a verse from Vedic literature to the effect that the order of
sannyasa is prohibited in this age of Kali. Only those who are very serious and
who follow the regulative principles and study Vedic literature should accept san-
nyasa. अ Caitanya Mahaprabhu approved of a sannyasi’s reading Vedanta-satra,
or Brahma-satra, but He did not approve the S$ariraka commentary of
Sankaracarya. Indeed, He said elsewhere, mayavadi-bhasya $unile haya sarva-
nasa: “If one hears the Sariraka-bhasya of $Sankaracarya, he is doomed!” Thus a
sannyasi, a transcendentalist, must read Vedanta-satra regularly, but he should not
read the Sariraka-bhasya. This is the conclusion of इनं Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The
real commentary on Vedanta-satra is Srimad-Bhagavatam. Artho ‘yarn brahma-
satranam: $rimad-Bhagavatam is the original commentary on Vedanta-satra writ-
ten by the author himself, Srila Vyasadeva.
TEXT 128
ভট্টাচার্য কহে,-__ না वुकि, হেন জ্ঞান যার |
বুঝিবার লাগি” (नङ्‌ পুছে পুর্বার ॥ ১২৮ ॥
bhattacarya kahe,— na bujhi’, hena jana yara
bujhibara lagi’ seha puche punarbara
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya kahe —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied; na bujhi’—not under-
standing; hena—this; jAana—the knowledge; yara—of someone; bujhibara
lagi’—just to understand; seha—he also; puche—inquires; punah-bara—again.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied: “1 accept that You do not understand, yet
even one who does not understand inquires about the subject matter.
TEXT 129
তুমি শুনি” শুনি” রহ মৌন মাত্র ধরি” ।
হৃদয়ে কি আছে তোমার, বুঝিতে ন৷ পারি ॥ ১২৯ ॥


--- Page 266 ---
262 ওরা Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
tumi Suni’ suni’ raha mauna matra dhari’
hrdaye ki ache tomara, bujhite na pari
SYNONYMS
tumi—You; suni’—hearing; Suni‘—hearing; raha—keep; mauna—silence;
matra—only; dhari’—holding; hrdaye—in the heart; ki—what; ache—there is;
tomdra—Your; bujhite—to understand; nd—not; pdri—am able.
TRANSLATION
“You are hearing again and again, yet You keep silent. | cannot understand
what is actually within Your mind.”
TEXT 130
व्यद कट्‌, -“मूटलन्न অর্থ বুঝিয়ে নির্মল |
তোমার ব্যাখ্যা শুনি” मन হয় © বিকল ॥ ১৩০ ॥
prabhu kahe,— “satrera artha bujhiye nirmala
tomara vyakhya suni’ mana haya ta’ vikala
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; satrera artha—the meaning of the satra; bu-
jhiye—! can understand; nirmala—very clearly; tomara—your; vyakhya—ex-
planation; suni’—hearing; mana—mind; haya—becomes; ta’—indeed; vikala—
disturbed.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then revealed His mind, saying: “I can under-
stand the meaning of each siitra very clearly, but your explanations have
simply agitated My mind.
PURPORT
The factual meaning of the verses of the Vedanta-satra is as clear as sunshine.
The Mayavadi philosophers simply try to cover the sunshine with the clouds of in-
terpretations imagined by Sankaracarya and his followers.
TEXT 131
সূত্রের অর্থ ভাষ্য কহে প্রকাশিয়া।
তুমি, ভাষ্য কহ- সূত্রের অর্থ আচ্ছাদিয়া ॥ ১৩১ ॥


--- Page 267 ---
Text 132] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 263
satrera artha bhasya kahe prakasiya
tumi, bhasya kaha——satrera artha acchadiya
SYNONYMS
satrera artha—meanings of the satras; bhasya—the purport; kahe—one
speaks; prakasiya—clearly manifesting; tumi—you; bhasya kaha—make a com-
ment; satrera—of the verses; artha—the meanings; acchadiya—covering.
TRANSLATION
‘The meaning of the verses in the Vedanta-sitra contain clear purports in
themselves, but other purports you presented simply covered the meaning of
the satra like a cloud.
PURPORT
Please refer to Adi-lila, Seventh Chapter, verses 106-146, for an explanation of
this verse.
TEXT 132
সূত্রের মুখ্য অর্থ না করহ AIA |
कश्रनाटर्थ তুমি তাহ। কর আচ্ছাদন ॥ ১৩২ ॥
satrera mukhya artha na karaha vyakhyana
kalpanarthe tumi taha kara acchadana
SYNONYMS
satrera—of the verses; mukhya—direct; artha—of meanings; na—not;
karaha—you do; vyakhyana—explanation; kalpana-arthe —because of imagina-
tive meaning; tumi—you; taha—of that; kara—do; acchadana—covering.
TRANSLATION
‘You do not explain the direct meaning of the Brahma-sitras. Indeed, it ap-
pears that your business is to cover the real meaning.’
PURPORT
This is typical of all Mayavadis or atheists who interpret the meaning of Vedic
literature in their own imaginative way. The real purpose of such foolish people is
to impose the impersonalist conclusion on all Vedic literature. The Mayavadi
atheists also interpret Bhagavad-gita. In every verse of Srimad Bhagavad-gita it is
clearly stated that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In every verse,


--- Page 268 ---
264 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
Vyasadeva says, 517 bhagavan uvaca, “076 Supreme Personality of Godhead said,’
or “the Blessed Lord said” it is clearly stated that the Blessed Lord is the Supreme
Person, but Mayavadi atheists still try to prove that the Absolute Truth is imper-
sonal. In order to present their false, imaginary meanings, they must adopt so
much word jugglery and grammatical interpretation that they finally become
ludicrous. Therefore ना Caitanya Mahaprabhu remarked that no one should hear
the Mayavadi commentaries or purports to any Vedic literature.
TEXT 133
উপনিষদ্-শব্দে যেই মুখ্য অর্থ হয়।
সেই অর্থ মুখ্য, _ব্যাসসূত্রে সব কয় ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
upanisad-sabde yei mukhya artha haya
sei artha mukhya,——vyasa-satre saba kaya
SYNONYMS
upanisad—of the Vedas; sabde—by the words; yei—whatever; mukhya—
direct; artha—meaning; haya—is; sei—that; artha—meaning; mukhya—chief;
vydsa-satre —in the Vedanta-satra; saba—all; kaya—describes.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: ‘‘Vedanta-sitra is the summary of all the
Upanisads; therefore whatever direct meaning is there in the Upanisads is also
recorded in the Vedanta-siutra or Vyasa-suatra.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati has explained the word “upanisad” in his
Anubhasya. Please refer to Adi-lila, Second Chapter, fifth verse, and Adi-lila, Sev-
enth Chapter, verses 106 and 108, for his explanation.
TEXT 134
মুখ্যার্থ ছাড়িয়৷ কর গৌণার্থ mal |
“অভিখা”-বৃত্তি ছাড়ি” কর শব্দের লক্ষণ ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
mukhyartha chadiya kara gaunartha kalpana
‘abhidha’-vrtti chadi’ kara sabdera laksana
SYNONYMS
mukhya-artha—direct meaning; chadiya—giving up; kara—you do; gauna-
artha—indirect meaning; kalpana—imagining; abhidha-vrtti—the meaning that is


--- Page 269 ---
Text 135] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma 81131130313 265
understood immediately; chadi’—giving up; kara—you do; sabdera—of the
words; laksana—interpretation.
TRANSLATION

‘For each verse the direct meaning must be accepted without interpreta-
tion. However, you simply abandon the direct meaning and proceed with your
imaginative interpretation.

TEXT 135
প্রমাণের মধ্যে &PFS প্রমাণ - सोन |
শ্রুতি যে মুখ্যার্থ কহে, সেই সে প্রমাণ ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
pramanera madhye Sruti pramana——pradhana
Sruti ye mukhyartha kahe, sei se pramana
SYNONYMS

pramanera—of the evidences; madhye —in the midst; Sruti—the Vedic version;
pramana—evidence; pradhana—chief; sruti—the Vedic version; ye—whatever;
muk hya-artha—chief meaning; kahe—says; sei se—that indeed; pramana—evi-
dence.

TRANSLATION

“Although there is other evidence, the evidence given in the Vedic version
must be taken as foremost. Vedic versions understood directly are first-class
evidence.”

PURPORT

Works that should be consulted are Srila Jiva Gosvami's Tattva-sandarbha
(10-11), Srila Baladeva Vidyabhasana's commentary on that, and the following
verses of the Brahma-satra: $astra-yonitvat (Vs. 1.1.3), tarkapratisthanat
(Vs. 2.1.11) and $rutes tu $abda-malatvat (Vs. 2.1.27) as commented upon by ऽव
Ramanujacarya, Sri Madhvacarya, Sri Nimbarkacarya and Srila Baladeva
Vidyabhasana. In his book Sarva-sarivadini, Srila Jiva Gosvami has noted that al-
though there are ten kinds of evidence —direct perception, the Vedic version,
historical reference, hypothesis, and so on—and although they are all generally
accepted as evidence, the person presenting a hypothesis, reading the Vedic ver-
sion, perceiving or interpreting by his experience is certain to be imperfect in four
ways. That is, he is subject to commit mistakes, to become illusioned, to cheat
and to have imperfect senses. Although the evidence may be correct, the person
himself is in danger of being misled due to his material defects. Apart from the
direct presentation, there is a chance that an interpretation may not be perfect.


--- Page 270 ---
266 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
Therefore the conclusion is that only a direct presentation can be considered evi-
dence. An interpretation cannot be accepted as evidence, but may be considered
proof of evidence.
In Bhagavad-gita, at the very beginning it is stated:
dhrtarastra uvaca
dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre
samaveta yuyutsavah
mamakah pandavas caiva
kim akurvata sanjaya
The statements of Bhagavad-gita are themselves proof that there is a place of
religious pilgrimage named Kuruksetra where the Pandavas and Kurus met to
fight. After meeting there, what did they do? This was Dhrtarastra’s inquiry to
Safijaya. Although these statements are very clear, atheists try to interpret dif-
ferent meanings of the words dharma-ksetra and kuru-ksetra. Therefore Srila Jiva
Gosvami has warned us not to depend on any kind of interpretation. It is better to
take the verses as they are, without interpretation.
TEXT 136
জীবের অস্থি-বিষ্ঠা তুই - শঙ্ব-গোময় |
শ্রুতি-বাকেযে সেই দুই মহা-পবিত্র হয় ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
jivera asthi-vistha 00/----$53/)/003-80/779)%3
Sruti-vakye sei dui maha-pavitra haya
SYNONYMS
jivera—of the living entity; asthi—the bone; vistha—stool; dui—two;
Sankha—conchshell; go-maya—cow dung; sruti-vakye—in the words of the
Vedic version; sei—that; dui—two; maha—greatly; pavitra—pure; haya—are.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: ‘“Conchshells and cow dung are nothing
but the bones and the stool of some living entities, but according to the Vedic
version they are both considered very pure.
PURPORT
According to Vedic principles, bones and dung are generally considered very
impure. If one touches a bone or stool, he must take a bath immediately. That is
the Vedic injunction. Yet the Vedas also enjoin that a conchshell, although the


--- Page 271 ---
Text 137] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 267
bone of an animal, and cow dung, although the stool of an animal, are very
sanctified. Even though such statements appear contradictory, we still accept the
fact that conchshells and cow dung are pure and sanctified on the basis of the
Vedic version.
TEXT 137
স্বতঃপ্রমাণ বেদ সত্য যেই कञ्च |
“লক্ষণ” করিলে স্বতঃগ্রামাণ্য-হানি হুয় ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
svatah-pramana veda satya yei kaya
‘laksana’ karile svatah-pramanya-hani haya
SYNONYMS
svatah-pramana—self-evidence; veda—Vedic literature; satya—truth; yei—
whatever; kaya—say; laksana—interpretation; karile—by making; svatah-pra-
manya—self-evidential proof; hani—lost; haya—becomes.
TRANSLATION
“The Vedic statements are self-evident. Whatever is stated there must be
accepted. If we interpret according to our own imagination, the authority of
the Vedas is immediately lost.”
PURPORT
Out of four main types of evidence —direct perception, hypothesis, historical
reference and the Vedas —Vedic evidence is accepted as the foremost. If we want
to interpret the Vedic version, we must imagine an interpretation according to
what we want to do. First of all, we set forth such an interpretation as a sugges-
tion or hypothesis. As such, it is not actually true, and the self-evident proof is lost.
Srila Madhvacarya, commenting on the aphorism drsyate tu (Vedanta-
satra 2.1.6), quotes the Bhavisya Purana as follows:
rg-yajuh-samatharvas ca
bharatam parica-ratrakam
mdla-ramayanam caiva
veda ity eva sabditah
puranani ca yaniha
vaispavani vido viduh
svatah-pramanyam etesarm
natra (10010 vicaryate


--- Page 272 ---
268 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
The Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda, Mahabharata, Paficaratra and
original Ramayana are all considered Vedic literature. The Puranas (such as the
Brahma-vaivarta Purana, Naradiya Purana, Vispu Purana and Bhagavata Purapa) are
especially meant for Vaisnavas and are also Vedic literature. As such, whatever is
stated within the Puranas, the Mahabharata and Ramayana is self-evident. There is
no need for interpretation. Bhagavad-gita is also within the Mahabharata;
therefore all the statements of Bhagavad-gita are self-evident. There is no need for
interpretation, and if we do interpret, the entire authority of Vedic literature is
lost.
TEXT 138
ব্যাস-সূত্রের অর্থ যৈছে সূর্যের কিরণ |
স্বকলক্পিত ভাষ্য-মেখে করে আচ্ছাদন ॥ ১৩৮ I
৮১৭5৪-50065/3 artha— yaiche saryera kirana
sva-kalpita bhasya-meghe kare acchadana
SYNONYMS
vyasa-satrera—of the Vedanta-satra by Vyasadeva; artha—the meanings;
yaiche —just as; saryera—of the sun; kirapna—shining rays; sva-kalpita—imagina-
tive; bhasya—of the commentary; meghe—by the cloud; kare—does; ac-
chadana—covering.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: “The Brahma-sitra, compiled by Srila
Vyasadeva, is as radiant as the sun. One who tries to interpret its meaning
simply covers that sunshine with a cloud.
TEXT 139
C-SRC কহে ব্রহ্ম-নিকরূপণ |
(मदे लक्क- বৃহুদ্তস্ত, ঈশ্বর-লঞ্কণ ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
veda-purane kahe brahma-nirapana
sei brahma——brhad-vastu, i$vara-laksana
SYNONYMS
veda-purdne—in the Vedas and the Puranas; kahe—it is stated; brahma-
nirdpana—ascertaining the Supreme; sei brahma—that Supreme; brhat-vastu—
the greatest; isvara-laksana—means the Supreme Personality.


--- Page 273 ---
Text 140] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 269
TRANSLATION
“All Vedic literature and other literature that strictly follows the Vedic prin-
ciples ascertain that the Supreme Brahman is the Absolute Truth, the greatest
of all, and a feature of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The greatest of everything is ri Krsna. Lord Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita, vedais
ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: “By all the Vedas, | am to be known!” (Bg. 15.15) In
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that the Absolute Truth is understood in three
phases —namely, Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate). Thus the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is the last word in understanding the Absolute Truth, Brah-
man.
TEXT 140
সবৈশ্বর্যপরিপূর্ণ স্বয়ং रने वान्‌ |
তারে নিরাকার করি” Fag ব্যাখ্যান ॥ ১৪০ ॥
sarvaisvarya-paripdrna svayam bhagavan
tanre nirakara kari’ karaha vyakhyana
SYNONYMS
sarva-aisvarya-pariparma—full with all opulences; svayam—personally; bha-
gavan —the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tarire—Him; nirakara—impersonal;
kari’—making; karaha—you make; vyakhyana—explanation.
TRANSLATION
‘Actually, the Supreme Absolute Truth is a person, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, full with all opulences. You are trying to explain Him as imper-
sonal and formless.
PURPORT
Brahman means brhattva, the greatest of all. The greatest of all is ri Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He possesses all potencies and opulence in full;
therefore the Absolute Truth, the greatest of all, is the Supreme Personality of
Codhead. Whether one says “Brahman” or “the Supreme Personality of God-
head,” the fact is the same, for they are identical. In Bhagavad-gita, Arjuna ac-
cepted Krsna as param brahma parari dhama. Although the living entities or mate-
rial nature are sometimes described as Brahman, Pararh Brahma—the Supreme,


--- Page 274 ---
270 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
the greatest of all Brahmans—is still Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He is full with all opulences, and as such He possesses all riches, all strength, all
reputation, all knowledge, all beauty and all renunciation. He is eternally a person
and eternally supreme. If one tries to explain the Supreme impersonally, one dis-
torts the real meaning of Brahman.
TEXT 141
“নিবিশেষ ভারে কহে যেই खडिनेन |
“প্রাকৃত' নিষেধি করে "सव्यो क्रङ' স্থাপন ॥ ১৪১ ॥
‘nirvisesa’ tanre kahe yei sruti-gana
‘prakrta’ nisedhi kare ‘aprakrta’ sthapana
SYNONYMS
nirvisesa—impersonal; tanre—Him; kahe—say; yei—whatever; sruti-gana—
the Vedas; prakrta—mundane; nisedhi—forbidding; kare —does; aprakrta—tran-
scendental; sthapana—confirmation.
TRANSLATION
“Wherever there is an impersonal description in the Vedas, the Vedas mean
to establish that everything belonging to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is transcendental and free of mundane characteristics.”
PURPORT
There are many impersonal statements about the Supreme Personality of God-
head. As stated in the Svetasvatara Upanisad:
apani-pado javano grahita
pasyaty acaksuh sa srpoty akarnah
sa vetti vedyam na ca tasyasti vetta
tam ahur agryam purusarn mahantam
(Svet. Up. 3.19)
Although the Supreme Lord is described as having no hands and legs, He none-
theless accepts all sacrificial offerings. He has no eyes, yet He sees everything. He
has no ears, yet He hears everything. When it is stated that the Supreme Lord has
no hands and legs, one should not think that He is impersonal. Rather, He has no
mundane hands or legs like ours. “He has no eyes, yet He sees!” This means that
He does not have mundane, limited eyes like ours. Rather, He has such eyes that
He can see past, present and future, everywhere, in every corner of the universe


--- Page 275 ---
Text 143] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 271
and in every corner of the heart of every living entity. Thus the impersonal de-
scriptions in the Vedas intend to deny mundane characteristics in the Supreme
Lord. They do not intend to establish the Supreme Lord as impersonal.
TEXT 142
যা যা কশ্রুতির্জল্পতি নিবিশেষং
সা সাভিধসত্তে সবিশেষমেব ।
বিচারযোগে সতি হস্ত তাসাং
প্রায়ো বলীয়ঃ সবিশেষমেব॥ ১৪২ ॥
ya ya Srutir jalpati nirvisesarn
sa sabhidhatte savisesam eva
vicara-yoge sati hanta tasarm
prayo ballyah savisesam eva
SYNONYMS
ya ya—whatever; $rutih—the Vedic hymns; jalpati—describe; nirvisesam —im-
personal truth; sa—that; sa—that; abhidhatte —directly describes (like a dictio-
nary meaning); sa-visesam—personality; eva—certainly; vicara-yoge—when ac-
cepted by intelligence; sati—being; hanta—alas; tasam—of all the Vedic mantras;
prayah—mostly; baliyah—more powerful; sa-visesam —personal variety; eva—
certainly.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: ^ ‘Whatever Vedic mantras describe
the Absolute Truth impersonally only prove in the end that the Absolute Truth
is a person. The Supreme Lord is understood in two features— impersonal and
personal. If one considers the Supreme Personality of Godhead in both
features, he can actually understand the Absolute Truth. He knows that the
personal understanding is stronger beause we see that everything is full of
variety. No one can see anything that is not full of variety.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from the Sr Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (6.67), by Kavi-Kar-
napura.
TEXT 143
AW হৈতে ऊट বিশ্ব, ACHES জীবয়।
সেই ew পুলরপি হয়ে যায় লয় ॥ ১৪৩ ॥


--- Page 276 ---
272 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
brahma haite janme ৮15৮3, brahmete jivaya
sei brahme punarapi haye yaya laya
SYNONYMS
brahma haite—from the Supreme Brahman; janme —emanates; visva—the
whole cosmic manifestation; brahmete—in the Absolute Truth; jivaya—exists;
sei—that; brahme—in the Absolute Truth; punarapi—again; haye—being;
ydya—goes; laya—to annihilation.
TRANSLATION
‘Everything in the cosmic manifestation emanates from the Absolute Truth.
It remains in the Absolute Truth, and after annihilation it again enters the Ab-
solute Truth.
PURPORT
In the Taittiriya Upanisad, it is said, yato va imani bhatani jayante: “The entire
material cosmic manifestation is born of the Supreme Brahman!” The Brahma-sdatra
also begins with the verse janmady asya yatah: “The Absolute Truth is that from
whom everything emanates!” (85. 1.1.2) That Absolute Truth is Krsna. In
Bhagavad-gita, Krsna says, aharn sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate: “|
am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me.”
(Bg. 10.8) Therefore Krsna is the original Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Again, Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita, maya tatam idarh sarvar jagad
avyakta-martina: “By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is per-
vaded!” (Bg. 9.4) And as confirmed in Brahma-sarnhita, goloka eva nivasaty
akhilatma-bhatah: “Although the Lord always stays in His abode, 09103
Vindavana, He is still all-pervading.” (Bs. 5.37) His all-pervasive feature is under-
stood to be impersonal because one does not find the form of the Lord in that all-
pervasiveness. Actually, everything is resting on the rays of His bodily effulgence.
The Brahma-sambhita also states:
yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-
kotisv asesa-vasudhadi-vibhati-bhinnam
“Due to the rays of the Lord's bodily effulgence, millions of universes are created,
just as planets are created from the sun.” (Bs. 5.40)
TEXT 144
'অপাদান ‘Th, “'অধিকরণ-কারক তিন |
ভগবানের সবিশেষে এই তিন চিহ্ন ॥ ১৪৪ ॥


--- Page 277 ---
Text 144] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 273
‘apadana,’ ‘karana,’ ‘adhikarana’-karaka tina
bhagavanera savisese ei tina cihna
SYNONYMS
apadana—ablative; karapa—instrumental; adhikarapa—locative; karaka—
cases; tina—three; bhagavanera—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sa-
visesa—in the personality; ei—these; tina—three; cihna—symptoms.
TRANSLATION
“The personal features of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
categorized in three cases—namely, ablative, instrumental and locative.”
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura states in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya that according to
the injunction of the Upanisads (“the Supreme Absolute Truth is He from whom
everything emanates”), it is understood that the whole cosmic manifestation
emanated from Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth. The creation subsists by
the energy of the Supreme Brahman and, after annihilation, merges into the
Supreme Brahman. From this we can understand that the Absolute Truth can be
categorized in three cases —ablative, instrumental and locative. According to
these three cases, the Absolute Truth is positively personified. In this connection,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati quotes the Aitareya Upanisad (1.1.1):
atma va idam eka evagra asin
nanyat kificanam 1531
sa iksata lokan nu srja iti.
Similarly, in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (4.9) it is stated:
chandarnsi yajiiah kratavo vratani
bhatarm bhavyar yac ca veda vadanti
yasman mayi srjate visvam etat
tasmirns canyo mayaya sanniruddhah
And in the Taittiriya Upanisad (3.1.7):
yato va imani bhdatani jayante,
yena jatani jivanti, yat prayanty abhisamvisanti,
tad vijijidsasva, tad brahma.


--- Page 278 ---
274 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
This was the answer given by father Varuna when questioned by his son Varuni
Bhrgu about the Absolute Truth. In this mantra, the word yatah, the Absolute
Truth from which the cosmic manifestation has emanated, is in the ablative case;
that Brahman by which this universal creation is maintained is in the instrumental
case (yena); and that Brahman into which the whole cosmic manifestation merges
is in the locative case (yat or yasmin). It is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam:

idam hi visvarh bhagavan ivetaro

yato jagat-sthana-nirodha-sambhavah
“The entire universal creation is contained in the gigantic form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Everything emanates from Him, everything rests in His
energy, and after annihilation everything merges into His person.” (Bhag. 1.5.20)
TEXTS 145-146

ভগবান্‌ IE হৈতে যবে কৈল मन |

প্রাক্কত-শক্তিতে তবে কৈল বিলোকন ॥ ১৪৫ ॥

জে কালে নাহি জন্মে প্রাকৃত” মনোনয়ন |

অতএব “অপ্রাকৃত” TACHA নেত্র-মন ॥ ১৪৬ ॥

bhagavan bahu haite yabe kaila mana

prakrta-saktite tabe kaila vilokana

se kale nahi janme ‘prakrta’ mano-nayana

ataeva ‘aprakrta’ brahmera netra-mana

SYNONYMS
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bahu—many; haite —to be-
come; yabe—when; kaila—made; mana—His mind; prakrta—material; saktite —
on the energy; tabe—at that time; kaila—did; vilokana—glancing; se kale—at
that time; nahi—not; janme —in creation; prakrta—mundane; manah-nayana—
mind and eyes; ataeva—therefore; aprakrta—transcendental; brahmera—of the
Absolute Truth; netra-mana—eyes and mind.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: “When the Supreme Personality of

Godhead wished to become many, He glanced over the material energy.
Before the creation there were no mundane eyes or mind; therefore the tran-
scendental nature of the Absolute Truth’s mind and eyes is confirmed.


--- Page 279 ---
Text 147] The Liberation of Sirvabhauma Bhatticarya 275
PURPORT
In the Chandogya Upanisad (6.2.3), it is said, tad aiksata bahu syar prajayeya.
This verse confirms the fact that when the Supreme Personality of Godhead wish-
es to become many, the cosmic manifestation arises simply by His glancing over
material energy. It may be noted that the Supreme Lord glanced over the material
nature before the creation of this cosmic manifestation. Before the creation there
were no material minds or material eyes; therefore the mind by which the
Supreme Personality of Godhead desired to create is transcendental, and the eyes
with which He glanced over material nature are also transcendental. Thus the
Lord's mind, eyes and other senses are all transcendental.
TEXT 147
ত্রহ্ম-শব্দে কহে পুর্ণ স্বয়ং ভগবান্‌ |
স্বয়ং SHIH কৃষ্,-_শাজন্তের প্রমাণ ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
brahma-sabde kahe [20103 svayarn bhagavan
svayarn bhagavan krsna, — sastrera pramana
SYNONYMS
brahma-$abde —by the word “Brahman’’; kahe—it is said; parna—complete;
svayam—personally; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam—
personally; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krsna—Lord Krsna;
$astrera pramana—the verdict of all Vedic literature.
TRANSLATION
“The word ‘Brahman’ indicates the complete Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is Sri Krsna. That is the verdict of all Vedic literature.
PURPORT
This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), where the Lord says, vedais ca
sarvair aham eva vedyah. The ultimate object in all Vedic literature is Krsna. Every-
one is searching for Him. This is also confirmed elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita:
bahanam janmanam ante
jAdnavan mar prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto
Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is
very rare!” (Bg. 7.19)


--- Page 280 ---
276 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
When one has actually become wise through the study of Vedic literature, he
surrenders unto Vasudeva, Bhagavan Sri Krsna. This is also confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.7-8):
vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah
janayaty asu vairagyarn
jAanarm ca yad ahaitukam
dharmah svanusthitah purisar
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratirih
$rama eva hi kevalam
Understanding Vasudeva is real knowledge. By engaging in the devotional service
of Vasudeva, Krsna, one acquires perfect knowledge and Vedic understanding.
Thus one becomes detached from the material world. This is the perfection of
human life. Although one may perfectly follow religious rituals and ceremonies,
he is simply wasting his time (srama eva hi kevalam) if he does not attain this per-
fection.

Before the creation of the cosmic manifestation, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead possessed His totally transcendental mind and eyes. That Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is Krsna. A person may think that there is no direct statement
about Krsna in the Upanisads, but the fact is that the Vedic mantras cannot be
understood by people with mundane senses. As stated in the Padma Purana, atah
$ri krsna namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih: a person with mundane senses
cannot fully understand the name, qualities, form and pastimes of Sri Krsna. The
Puranas are therefore meant to explain and supplement Vedic knowledge. The
great sages present the Puranas in order to make the Vedic mantras understand-
able for common men (stri-sadra-dvija-bandhianam). Considering that women,
$adras and dvija-bandhus (unworthy sons of the twice-born) cannot understand
the Vedic hymns directly, Srila Vyasadeva compiled Mahabharata. Actually the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is vedesu durlabham (untraceable in the Vedas),
but when the Vedas are properly understood or when Vedic knowledge is
received from devotees, one can understand that all Vedic knowledge leads to Sri
Krsna.

The Brahma-satra (1.1.3) confirms this fact also: sastra-yonitvat. Commenting
upon this Brahma-satra code ($astra-yonitvat), Sri Madhvacarya says: “The Rg
Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda, Mahabharata, Paiicaratra and the
original Valmiki Ramayana are all Vedic literature. Any literature following the con-
clusive statements of this Vedic literature is also to be considered Vedic literature.
That literature which does not conform to Vedic literature is simply misleading.”


--- Page 281 ---
Text 149] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 277
Therefore when reading Vedic literature, we must take the path traversed by
great acaryas: mahajano yena gatah sa panthah. Unless one follows the path
traversed by great acaryas, he cannot understand the real purport of the Vedas.
TEXT 148
বেদের নিগুঢ় অর্ণ gam न] হয় ।
পুব্নাণ-বাক্যে সেই অর্থ করয় নিশ্চয় ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
vedera nigadha artha bujhana na haya
purana-vakye sei artha karaya niscaya
SYNONYMS
vedera—of the Vedic literature; nigtidha—confidential; artha—meaning; bu-
jhana—understanding; na—not; haya—is; purana-vakye—by the words of the
Puranas; sei—that; artha—meaning; karaya—makes; niscaya—certain.
TRANSLATION
‘The confidential meaning of the Vedas is not easily understood by com-
mon men; therefore that meaning is supplemented by the words of the
Puranas.
TEXT 149
অহো ভাগ্যমহো ভাগ্যং নম্দগোপত্রজৌকসাম্‌ |
যন্মিত্রং পরমানন্দৎ পূর্ণং ব্রহ্ম সনাতনম্‌ ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
aho bhagyam aho bhagyam
nanda-gopa-vrajaukasam
yan-mitram paramanandar
(26111217) brahma sanatanam
SYNONYMS
aho—what great; bhagyam—fortune; aho—what great; bhagyam—fortune;
nanda—of Maharaja Nanda; gopa—of other cowherd men; vraja-okasam—of the
inhabitants of Vrajabhami; yat—of whom; mitram—friend; parama-anandam—
the supreme bliss; pdrpam—complete; brahma—the Absolute Truth;
sanatanam—eternal.
TRANSLATION
^ ‘How greatly fortunate are Nanda Maharaja, the cowherd men and all the
inhabitants of Vrajabhiimi! There is no limit to their fortune because the Ab-


--- Page 282 ---
278 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
solute Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal Supreme Brah-
man, has become their friend.
PURPORT
This is a quotation from $rimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.32) spoken by Lord Brahma.
TEXT 150
“অপাণি-পাদ”-শ্রদতি ave 'প্রাকৃত” পাণি-চরণ |
পুনঃ কহে, শীঘ্র চলে, করে AL গ্রহণ ॥ deo ॥
‘apani-pada’-sruti varje ‘prakrta’ pani-carana
punah kahe, Sighra cale, kare sarva grahana
SYNONYMS
apani-pada-sruti—the Sruti-mantra beginning apani-padah; varje—rejects;
prakrta—material; pani-carana—hands and legs; punah—again; kahe—says;
Sighra cale —walks very fast; kare —does; sarva—of everything; grahana—accept-
ing.
TRANSLATION
“The Vedic ‘apani-pada’ mantra rejects material hands and legs, yet it states
that the Lord goes very fast and accepts everything offered to Him.
TEXT 151
অতএব শ্রুতি কহে, लक्र--नविट्मस |
“মুখ্য” ছাড়ি” 'লক্ষণা”তে মানে fafa ॥ ses ॥
ataeva sruti kahe, brahma——savisesa
‘mukhya’ chadi’ ‘laksana’te mane nirvisesa
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; $ruti—Vedic mantras; kahe—say; brahma—the Absolute
Truth; sa-visesa—personal; mukhya—direct meaning; chadi’—giving up; lak-
sana’te—by interpretation; mane —accept; nirvisesa—impersonal.
TRANSLATION
“All these mantras confirm that the Absolute Truth is personal, but the
Mayavadis, throwing away the direct meaning, interpret the Absolute Truth as
impersonal.


--- Page 283 ---
Text 152] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 279
PURPORT
According to the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.19):
apani-pado javano grahita
pasyaty acaksuh sa srnoty akarnah
sa vetti vedyarh na ca tasyasti vetta
tam ahur agryarn purusarh mahantam
This Vedic mantra clearly states, (2८/1८/5817 mahantam. The word purusa means
“person.” That person is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita by Arjuna when he addresses
Krsna, purusam sasvatam: “You are the original person.” (Bg. 10.12) This purusam
mahantam is $1 Krsna. His hands and legs are not mundane, but are completely
transcendental. However, when He comes, fools take Him to be an ordinary per-
son (avajananti marh madha manusirh tanum asritam). One who has no Vedic
knowledge, who has not studied the Vedas from the bona fide spiritual master,
does not know Krsna. Therefore he is a madha. Such fools take Krsna to be an or-
dinary person (param bhavam ajanantah). They do not actually know what Krsna
is. Manusyanar sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye. It is not possible to understand
Krsna simply by studying the Vedas perfectly. One must have the mercy of a
devotee (yat padam). Unless one is favored by a devotee, he cannot understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Arjuna also confirms this in Bhagavad-gita:
“My Lord, it is very difficult to understand Your personality.” The less intelligent
class of men cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead without
being favored by His devotee. Therefore Bhagavad-gita contains another injunc-
tion (Bg. 4.34):
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jAianarn
jAaninas tattva-darsinah
One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master and surrender to him. Only then
can one understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a person.
TEXT 152
বউ়ৈস্বর্যপুর্থানন্দ-বিঞ্রহ যাহার ।
হেন-ভগবানে তুমি কহ নিরাকার ? ১৫২ ॥
sad-aisvarya-purnananda-vigraha yanhara
hena-bhagavane tumi kaha nirakara?


--- Page 284 ---
280 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
sat-aisvarya-parna—with six opulences in full; ananda—blissful; vigraha—
form; yanhara—whose; hena-bhagavane—unto that Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tumi—you; kaha—said; nirakara—without any form.
TRANSLATION
‘Are you describing as formless that Supreme Personality of Godhead
whose transcendental form is complete with six transcendental opulences?
PURPORT
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead is formless, how can He be said to walk
very fast and accept everything offered to Him? Rejecting the direct meaning of
the Vedic mantras, the Mayavadi philosophers interpret them and try to establish
the Absolute Truth as formless. Actually, the Supreme Lord has an eternal, per-
sonal form, full of all opulence. The Mayavadi philosophers try to interpret the Ab-
solute Truth as being without potency. However, in the Svetasvatara Upanisadit is
clearly said, १ Saktir vividhaiva $rayate: “The Absolute Truth has multi-
potencies!” (Svet. Up. 6.8)
TEXT 153
স্বাভাবিক छिन শক্তি যেই ত্রঙ্ে হয়।
*নিঃশক্তিব” করি” Sea করহ নিশ্চয় ? ১৫৩ ॥
svabhavika tina sakti yei brahme haya
‘nihsaktika’ kari’ tanre karaha niscaya?
SYNONYMS
svabhavika—by nature; tina—three; sakti—potencies; yei—which; brahme—
in the Absolute Truth; haya—there are; nihsaktika—without potency; kari’'—
making; tanre—Him; karaha—you do; niscaya—ascertainment.
TRANSLATION
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead has three primary potencies. Are
you trying to ascertain that He has no potencies?
PURPORT
Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu now quotes four verses from the Visnu Purana
(6.7.61-63 and 1.12.69) to explain the different potencies of the Lord.


--- Page 285 ---
Text 155) The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 281
TEXT 154
fagife: न्रा (थां ক্ষেত্রজ্ঞাথ্যা তথাপরা।
অবদ্যাকর্মসংজ্ঞান্য। তৃতীয়া শক্তিরিষ্যতে ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
visnu-saktih para prokta
ksetra-jnakhya tatha para
avidya-karma-sarhjianya
trtiya saktir isyate
SYNONYMS
visnu-saktih—the internal potency of Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; para—spiritual; prokta—said; ksetra-jiia—the living entities; akhya—
known as; tatha—also; para—spiritual; avidya—nescience, or godlessness; kar-
ma—and fruitive activities; sarhjid—known as; anyd—another; trtfya—third;
Saktih—potency; isyate—is accepted as.
TRANSLATION
^ ‘The internal potency of the Supreme Lord, Visnu, is spiritual, as verified
by the 6251725. There is another spiritual potency, known as ksetra-jiia, or the
living entity. The third potency, which is known as nescience, makes the living
entity godless and fills him with fruitive activity.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita, in Sri Krsna’s discourse on the ksetra and the ksetra-ja, it is
clearly stated that the ksetra-jia is the living entity who knows his field of ac-
tivities. The living entities in the material world are forgetful of their eternal rela-
tionship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This forgetfulness is called
avidya, or nescience. The avidya-sakti, the avidya potency of the material world,
provokes fruitive activity. Although this avidya-sakti (material energy, or ne-
science) is also an energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is especially
intended to keep the living entities in a state of forgetfulness. This is due to
their rebellious attitude toward the Lord. Thus although the living entities are
constitutionally spiritual, they come under the influence of the potency of
nescience. How this happens is described in the following verse.
TEXT 155
सुधर] ক্ষেত্রজ্ঞশক্তিঃ न) ८वष्टिङ। gor সর্বগা।
সংসারতাপানথখিলানবাপ্পোত্যত্র ATS ॥ ১৫৫ ॥


--- Page 286 ---
282 इतं Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
yaya ksetra-jia-saktih sa
vestita nrpa sarva-ga
sarhsara-tapan akhilan
avapnoty atra santatan
SYNONYMS
yayd—by which; ksetra-jiia-saktih —the living entities, known as the ksetra-jia
potency; sa—that potency; vestita—covered; nrpa—O King; sarva-ga—capable
of going anywhere in the spiritual or material worlds; samsara-tapan—miseries
due to the cydle of repeated birth and death; akhilan—all kinds of; avapnoti —ob-
tains; atra—in this material world; santatan—arising from suffering or enjoying
various kinds of reactions to fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
“‘O King, the ksetra-jiia-Sakti is the living entity. Although he has the
facility to live in either the material or spiritual world, he suffers the threefold
miseries of material existence because he is influenced by the avidya
[nescience] potency, which covers his constitutional position.
TEXT 156
তয়া তিরো হিতস্থাচ্চ “fe: ক্ষেত্রদ্ঞসংজ্ঞিত। |
সর্বভূতেষু ভুপাল তারতম্যেন বর্ততে ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
taya tirohitatvac ca
Saktih ksetra-jAa-samjnita
sarva-bhatesu bha-pala
taratamyena vartate
SYNONYMS
taya—by her; tirah-hitatvat—from being freed from the influence; ca—also;
Saktih—the potency; ksetra-jiia—ksetra-jiia; samjiitai—known by the name; sar-
va-bhatesu—in different types of bodies; bha-pala—O King; taratamyena—in
different degrees; vartate —exists.
TRANSLATION
^ ‘This living entity, covered by the influence of nescience, exists in 016
ferent forms in the material condition. O King, he is thus proportionately
freed from the influence of material energy, to greater or lesser degrees’


--- Page 287 ---
Text 157) The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 283
PURPORT
The material energy acts on the living entity in different degrees, according to
how he acquires the association of the three modes of material nature. There are
8,400,000 species of life, some inferior, some superior and some mediocre. The
gradations of the bodies are calculated according to the covering of material en-
ergy. In the lower categories —including aquatics, trees, plants, insects, birds and
so forth— spiritual consciousness is almost nonexistent. In the mediocre cate-
gory—the human form of life—spiritual consciousness is comparatively
awakened. In the superior life forms, spiritual consciousness is fully awakened.
Then the living entity understands his real position and tries to escape the in-
fluence of material energy by developing Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 157
হলাদিনী AFD मदिर সত্বয্যেক। সর্বসংশ্রয়ে ।
হলাদতাপকরাী यिय) স্বয়ি নো গুণ-বজিতে ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
hladini sandhini samvit
tvayy eka sarva-sarnsraye
hlada-tapa-kari misra
tvayi no guna-varjite
SYNONYMS
hladini—the pleasure potency; sandhini—the eternity potency; samvit—the
knowledge potency; tvayi—in You; eki—one spiritual (cit) potency; sarva-
samsraye—the shelter of everything; hlada—pleasure; tapa-kari—causing dis-
pleasure; misra—mixed; tvayi—in You; no—not; guna-varjite—devoid of all ma-
terial qualities.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. This
means that He originally has three potencies—the pleasure potency, the
potency of eternality and the potency of knowledge. Together these are called
the cit potency, and they are present in full in the Supreme Lord. For the living
entities, who are part and parcel of the Lord, the pleasure potency in the ma-
terial world is sometimes displeasing and sometimes mixed. This is not the
case with the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He is not under
the influence of the material energy or its modes.
PURPORT
This is a quotation from the Visnu Purana (1.12.69).


--- Page 288 ---
284 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 158
সচ্চিদানম্দময় হয় ঈশ্বর-স্বক্মূপ |
তিন অংশে চিচ্ছক্তি' হয় তিন क्रं ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
sac-cid-ananda-maya haya isvara-svarapa
tina amse cic-chakti haya tina rapa
SYNONYMS
sat-cit-ananda-maya—full of eternity, knowledge and bliss; haya—is; isvara—
of the Supreme Lord; svardpa—the transcendental form; tina arhse—in three
parts; cit-sakti—the spiritual potency; haya—becomes; tina—three; rapa—
forms.
TRANSLATION
‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His original form is full of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. The spiritual potency in these three portions [sat, cit
and dnandal assumes three different forms.
PURPORT
According to the verdict of all Vedic literature, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the living entity and the illusory energy (this material world) constitute the
subject matter of knowledge. Everyone should try to understand the relationship
between them. First of all, one should try to understand the nature of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. From the sastras we understand that the nature
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the sum total of eternity, bliss and
knowledge. As stated in verse 154 (visnu-saktih para prokta), the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is the reservoir of all potencies, and His potencies are all
spiritual.
TEXT 159
আলনম্দাংশে 'হুলাদিনী”, সদংশে “সন্ধিনী”।
চিদংশে “সম্ধিগ১, যারে জ্ঞান করি মানি ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
anandarnse ‘hladini,” sad-amse ‘sandhini’
cid-amse ‘samvit/, yare jAana kari mani
SYNONYMS
ananda-amse—in the part of bliss; hladini—the pleasure potency; sat-amse —
in the part of eternity; sandhini—the sandhini potency; cit-arhse —in the part of


--- Page 289 ---
Text 160] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacirya 285
knowledge; samvit—the samvit potency; yare—which; jAiana—as knowledge;
kari mani—we accept.
TRANSLATION
“The three portions of the spiritual potency are called hladini [the bliss
portion], sandhini [the eternity portion] and samvit [the knowledge portion].
We accept knowledge of these as full knowledge of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
To acquire knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one must take
shelter of the samvit potency of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 160
'এন্তরঙ্গা  চিচ্ছক্তি, তটস্থ।_জীবশক্তি |
বহিরজা- মায়১-_ তিনে করে ATS ॥ ১৬০ ॥
antaranga — cic-chakti, tatastha—jiva-sakti
bahirariga — maya, —tine kare prema-bhakti
SYNONYMS
antaraniga—the internal potency; cit-sakti—the spiritual potency; tatastha—
the marginal potency; jiva-sakti—the living entities; bahirariga—the external
potency; maya—the illusory energy; tine—all three of them; kare—do; prema-
bhakti —devotional service in love.
TRANSLATION
“The spiritual potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead also appears
in three phases —internal, marginal and external. These are all engaged in His
devotional service in love.
PURPORT
The spiritual potency of the Lord is manifested in three phases —the internal or
spiritual potency, the marginal potency, which is the living entities, and the exter-
nal potency, known as mdya-sakti. We must understand that in each of these
three phases the original spiritual potencies of pleasure, eternity and knowledge
remain intact. When the potencies of spiritual pleasure and knowledge are both
bestowed upon the conditioned souls, the conditioned souls can escape the
clutches of the external potency, maya, which acts as a cover obscuring one’s


--- Page 290 ---
286 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
spiritual identity. When freed, the living entity awakens to Krsna consciousness
and engages in devotional service with love and affection.
TEXT 161
स वि এঁশ্বর্য _ প্রভুর চিচ্ছক্তি-বিলাস |
হেন শক্তি নাহি মান,--পরম সাহস ॥ ১৬১ ॥
sad-vidha aisvarya——prabhuracic-chakti-vilasa
hena Sakti nahi mana, —parama sahasa
SYNONYMS
sat-vidha—six kinds; aisvarya—of opulences; prabhura—of the Lord; cit-sakti-
vilasa—enjoyment in the spiritual potency; hena sakti—such sublime potencies;
nahi—not; mana—you accept; paramasahasa—great impudence.
TRANSLATION
“In His spiritual potency, the Supreme Lord enjoys six kinds of opulence.
You do not accept this spiritual potency, and this is due to your great impu-
dence.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is full with six opulences. All of these
potencies are on the transcendental platform. To understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead as impersonal and devoid of potency is to go completely
against Vedic information.
TEXT 162
মায়াধীশ” মায়াবশ” _ঈশ্বরে-জীবে ভেদ |
হেন-জীবে ঈশ্বর-সহ কহ ত” অভ্েদ ॥ ১৬২ ॥
‘mayadhisa’ ‘maya-vasa’—isvare-jive bheda
hena-jive isvara-saha kaha ta’ abheda
SYNONYMS
maya-adhisa—the Lord of energy; maya-vasa—subjected to the influence of
maya; isvare—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jive —in the living entities;
bheda—the difference; hena-jive—such living entities; isvara-saha—with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaha—you say; ta’—indeed; abheda—one and
the same.


--- Page 291 ---
Text 163] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 287
TRANSLATION
“The Lord is the master of the potencies, and the living entity is the servant
of them. That is the difference between the Lord and the living entity.
However, you declare that the Lord and the living entities are one and the
same.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is by nature the master of all potencies.
By nature, the living entities, being infinitesimal, are always under the influence of
the Lord's potencies. According to the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.1-2):
dva suparna sayuja sakhaya
samanam vrksam parisa-svajate
tayor anyah pippalarh svadv atty
anasnann anyo ‘bhicakasiti
samane vrkse puruso nimagno
‘nisaya socati muhyamanah
justam yada pasyaty anyam isam
asya mahimanam eti vita-sokah
The Mundaka Upanisad completely distinguishes the Lord from the living entities.
The living entity is subjected to the reactions of fruitive activity, whereas the Lord
simply witnesses such activity and bestows the results. According to the living en-
tity’s desires, he is wandering from one body to another and from one planet to
another, under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramatma.
However, when the living entity comes to his senses by the mercy of the Lord, he
is awarded devotional service. Thus he is saved from the clutches of maya. At
such a time he can see his etemal friend, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and become free from all lamentation and hankering. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (18.54), where the Lord says, brahma-bhdtah prasannatma na socati
na kanksati: “One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything!” Thus it is
definitely proved that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of all
potencies and that the living entities are always subjected to these potencies.
That is the difference between mayadhisa and maya-vasa.
TEXT 163
সগীতাশান্ত্রে জীবরূপ “শক্তি” করি” মানে ।
হেন জীবে “ভেদ” কর ঈশ্বরের সনে ॥ ১৬৩ ॥


--- Page 292 ---
288 ওঃ Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
gita-sastre jiva-rapa ‘Sakti’ kari’ mane
hena jive ‘bheda’ kara isvarera sane
SYNONYMS
gita-sastre—in Bhagavad-gita; jiva-rapa—the identity of the living entity; sak-
ti—potency; kari’—making; mane —accepts; hena—such; jive—living entity;
bheda—different; kara—you make; iSvarera—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; sane —with.
TRANSLATION
‘In Bhagavad-gita the living entity is established as the marginal potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yet you say that the living entity is com-
pletely different from the Lord.
PURPORT
The Brahma-satra states that according to the principle of sakti-saktimator
abhedah, the living entity is simultaneously one with and different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Qualitatively the living entity and the Supreme
Lord are one, but in quantity they are different. According to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s philosophy (acintya-bhedabheda-tattva), the living entity and the
Supreme Lord are accepted as one and different at the same time.
TEXT 164
তূমিরাপোইনলো वां गूः খং মনো বুদ্ধিরেব চ।
অহঙ্কার ইতীয়ং মে ভিন্ন প্রকৃতিরষ্টধা ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
bhamir apo ‘nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyarm me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
SYNONYMS
bhamih—earth; apah—water; analah—fire; vayuh—air; kham—ether;
manah—mind; buddhih—intelligence; eva—certainly; ca—and; ahankarah—
false ego; iti—thus; iyam —this; me—My; bhinna—separated; prakrtih—energy;
asta-dha —eightfold.
TRANSLATION
^^ ‘Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego are My
eightfold separated energies.


--- Page 293 ---
Text 166] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 289
TEXT 165
অপরেয়মিতস্বন্যাং প্রক্কৃতিং विकि মে পরাম্‌ ।
জীবভূতাং মহাবাহো যয়েদৎ ধার্যতে জগৎ ॥ ১৬৫ ॥
apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me param
jiva-bhatarm maha-baho
yayedam dharyate jagat
SYNONYMS
apara—inferior; iyam—this; itah—from this; tu—but; anydm—another;
prakrtim—nature;  viddhi—know; me—My; param—transcendental; jiva-
bhatam—existing as the living entities; maha-baho—O mighty-armed one;
yaya—by which; idam —this; dharyate—is sustained; jagat—material world.
TRANSLATION
^ ‘Besides these inferior energies, which are material, there is another en-
ergy, a spiritual energy, and this is the living being, O mighty-armed one. The
entire material world is sustained by the living entities.
PURPORT
Verses 164 and 165 are quotations from Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5).
TEXT 166
ঈশ্বরের প্লীবিগ্রহ সচ্চিদানন্দাকার ।
সে-বিঞ্রহে কহ AFL বিকার ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
iSvarera sri-vigraha sac-cid-anandakara
se-vigrahe kaha sattva-gunera vikara
SYNONYMS
isvarera—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sri-vigraha—the form; sat-
cit-ananda-akara—complete in eternity, cognizance and bliss; se-vigrahe—about
that form of the Lord; kaha—you say; sattva-gunera—of the quality of material
goodness; vikara—transformation.
TRANSLATION
“The transcendental form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is com-
plete in eternity, cognizance and bliss. However, you describe this transcen-
dental form as a product of material goodness.


--- Page 294 ---
290 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 167
জ্রীবিগ্রহ যে न। मोटन, সেই AHIR |
অধৃশ্য TY, সেই হয় যমদণ্ডী ॥ ১৬৭ ॥
$ri-vigraha ye na mane, sei ta’ pasandi
adrsya asprsya, sei haya yama-dandi
SYNONYMS

$ri-vigraha—the form of the Lord; ye—anyone who; na—not; mane —accepts;
sei—he; ta’—indeed; pasandi—agnostic; adrsya—not to be seen; aspr§ya—un-
touchable; sei—he; haya—is; yama-dandi—subject to be punished by Yamaraja.

TRANSLATION

‘‘One who does not accept the transcendental form of the Lord is certainly
an agnostic. Such a person should be neither seen nor touched. Indeed, he is
subject to be punished by Yamaraja.

PURPORT

According to the Vedic instructions, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
His eternal, transcendental form, which is always blissful and full of knowledge.
Impersonalists think that “material” refers to the forms within our experience and
that “spiritual” refers to an absence of form. However, one should know that
beyond this material nature is another nature, which is spiritual. Just as there are
material forms in this material world, there are spiritual forms in the spiritual world.
This is confirmed by all Vedic literature. The spiritual forms in the transcendental
world have nothing to do with the negative conception of formlessness. The con-
clusion is that a person is an agnostic when he does not agree to worship the tran-
scendental form of the Lord.

Actually, at the present moment all systems of religion deny the worship of the
form of the Lord due to ignorance of His transcendental form. The first-class ma-
terialists (the Mayavadis) imagine five specific forms of the Lord, but when they
try to equate the worship of such imaginary forms with bhakti, they are im-
mediately condemned. Lord $ri Krsna confirms this in Bhagavad-gita (7.15), where
He says, na mam duskrtino madhah prapadyante naradhamah. Bereft of real
knowledge due to agnosticism, the Mayavadi philosophers should not even be
seen by the devotees of the Lord, nor touched, because those philosophers are
liable to be punished by Yamardja, the superintendent demigod who judges the
activities of sinful men. The Mayavadi agnostics wander within this universe in dif-
ferent species of life due to theft nondevotional activities. Such living entities are
subjected to the punishments of Yamaraja. Only the devotees, who are always
engaged in the service of the Lord, are exempt from the jurisdiction of Yamaraja.


--- Page 295 ---
Text 168] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 291
TEXT 168
বেদ না ोनिग्न বৌদ্ধ হয় ত' नाडिक |
বেদাশ্রয় নাস্তিক্য-বাদ বৌদ্ধকে অধিক ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
veda na maniya bauddha haya ta’ nastika
vedasraya nastikya-vada bauddhake adhika
SYNONYMS

veda—the Vedic literature; na—not; maniya —accepting; bauddha—the Bud-
dhists; haya—are; ta’—indeed; nastika—agnostics; veda-asraya—taking shelter
of Vedic civilization; nastikya-vada—agnosticism; bauddhake —even Buddhists;
adhika—surpassing.

TRANSLATION

“The Buddhists do not recognize the authority of the Vedas; therefore they
are considered agnostics. However, those who have taken shelter of the Vedic
scriptures yet preach agnosticism in accordance with the Mayavada philoso-
phy are certainly more dangerous than the Buddhists.

PURPORT

Although the Buddhists are directly opposed to Vaisnava philosophy, it can
easily be understood that the Sarkarites are more dangerous because they accept
the authority of the Vedas yet act contrary to Vedic instruction. Vedasraya
nastikya-vada means “agnosticism under the shelter of Vedic culture” and refers
to the monistic philosophy of the Mayavadis. Lord Buddha abandoned the au-
thority of the Vedic literature and therefore rejected the ritualistic ceremonies and
sacrifices recommended in the Vedas. His nirvana philosophy means stopping all
material activities. Lord Buddha did not recognize the presence of transcendental
forms and spiritual activities beyond the material world. He simply described void-
ism beyond this material existence. The Mayavadi philosophers offer lip service to
Vedic authority but try to escape the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. They concoct
some idea of a transcendental position and call themselves Narayana, or God.
However, God's position is completely different from their concoction. Such
Mayavadi philosophers consider themselves above the influence of karma-kanda
(fruitive activities and their reactions). For them, the spiritual world is equated
with the Buddhist voidism. There is very little difference between impersonalism
and voidism. Voidism can be directly understood, but the impersonalism enunci-
ated by Mayavadi philosophers is not very easily understandable. Of course,
Mayavadi philosophers accept a spiritual existence, but they do not know about
the spiritual world and spiritual beings. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.2.32):


--- Page 296 ---
292 इत Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa vimukta-manirnas
tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
aruhya krcchrena param padarh tatah
patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-arighrayah
The intelligence of the Mayavadis is not purified; therefore even though they
practice austerities for self-realization, they cannot remain within the impersonal
brahmajyoti. Consequently, they fall down again into this material world.

The Mayavadis’ conception of spiritual existence is almost identical to the
negation of material existence. The Mayavadis believe that there is nothing posi-
tive in spiritual life. As a result, they cannot understand devotional service or the
worship of the Supreme Person, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha The Mayavadi philoso-
phers consider Deity worship in devotional service to be pratibimba-vada, or the
worship of a form that is the reflection of a false material form. Thus the Lord's
transcendental form, which is eternally blissful and full of knowledge, is unknown
to Mayavadi philosophers. Although the term Bhagavan is explicitly described in
$rimad-Bhagavatam, they cannot understand it. Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan
iti sabdyate: “The Absolute Truth is called Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.”
(Bhag. 1.2.11) The Mayavadis try to understand Brahman only, or, at the most,
Paramatma. However, they are uriable to understand Bhagavan. Therefore the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, says: mayayapahrta-jiianah. Because of
the Mayavadi philosophers’ temperament, real knowledge is taken from them. Be-
cause they cannot receive the mercy of the Lord, they will always be bewildered
by His transcendental form. Impersonal philosophy destroys the three phases of
knowledge —jiana, jieya and jAata. As soon as one speaks of knowledge, there
must be a person who is the knower, the knowledge itself and the object of
knowledge. Mayavada philosophy combines these three categories; therefore the
Mayavadis cannot understand how the spiritual potencies of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead act. Because of their poor fund of knowledge, they cannot
understand the distinction in the spiritual world between knowledge, the knower
and the object of knowledge. Because of this, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considers
the Mayavadi philosophers more dangerous than the Buddhists.

TEXT 169
জীবের নিস্তার লাগি” সুত্র কৈল ব্যাস |
মায়াবাদি-ভাষ্ শুনিলে হয় সর্বনাশ ॥ sus
jivera nistara lagi’ satra kaila vyasa
mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-nasa


--- Page 297 ---
Text 170] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 293
SYNONYMS

jivera—of the living entities; nistara—deliverance; lagi’—for the matter of;
satra—Vedanta-satra; kaila—made; vyasa—Srila Vyasadeva; mayavadi—of the
impersonalists; bhasya—commentary; sunile—if hearing; haya—becomes; sarva-
nasa—all destruction.

TRANSLATION

“Srila Vyasadeva presented the Vedanta philosophy for the deliverance of
conditioned souls, but if one hears the commentary of Sankaricarya, every-
thing is spoiled.

PURPORT

Factually, the devotional service of the Lord is described in Vedanta-satra, but
the Mayavadi philosophers, the Sarkarites, prepared a commentary known as
Sariraka-bhasya, in which the transcendental form of the Lord is denied. The
Mayavadi philosophers think that the living entity is identical with the Supreme
Soul, Brahman. Their commentaries on Vedanta-satra are completely opposed to
the principle of devotional service. Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore warns us to
avoid these commentaries. If one indulges in hearing the $ankarite Sariraka-
bhasya, he will certainly be bereft of all real knowledge.

The ambitious Mayavadi philosophers desire to merge into the existence of the
Lord, and this may be accepted as sayujya-mukti. However, this form of mukti
means denying one’s individual existence. In other words, it is a kind of spiritual
suicide. This is absolutely opposed to the philosophy of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga
offers immortality to the individual conditioned soul. If one follows the Mayavadi
philosophy, he misses his opportunity to become immortal after giving up the ma-
terial body. The immortality of the individual person is the highest perfectional
stage a living entity can attain.

TEXT 170
“পরিণাম-বাদ”_ব্যাস-সূত্রের সম্মত |
অচিন্ত্যশক্তি ঈশ্বর জগন্জ্রপে পরিণত ॥ ১৭০ ॥

‘parinama-vada’——vyasa-sdtrera sammata
acintya-sakti iSvara jagad-rape parinata
SYNONYMS

parinama-vada—the theory of transformation; vyasa-satrera—of the Vedanta-

satra; sammata—purpose; acintya-sakti —inconceivable power; i$vara—the


--- Page 298 ---
294 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
Supreme Personality of Godhead; jagat-ripe—in the form of the cosmic
manifestation; parinata—transformed.
TRANSLATION
“The Vedanta-sutra aims at establishing that the cosmic manifestation has
come into being by the transformation of the inconceivable potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
For a further explanation of parindma-vada, refer to Adi-lila, Seventh Chapter,
verses 121-133.
TEXT 171
মণি ददद অবিক্বতে SACI হেমভার |
FANE হয় FAT, তবু অবিকার ॥ ১৭১ ॥
mani yaiche avikrte prasabe hema-bhara
jagad-rapa haya i$vara, tabu avikara
SYNONYMS
mani—the touchstone; yaiche—just as; avikrte —without being transformed;
prasabe—produces; hema-bhara—volumes of gold; jagat-nipa—the cosmic
manifestation; haya—becomes; isvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tabu —still; avikara—unchanged.
TRANSLATION
“The touchstone, after touching iron, produces volumes of gold without
being changed. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests
Himself as the cosmic manifestation by His inconceivable potency, yet He
remains unchanged in His eternal, transcendental form.
PURPORT
According to the commentary of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, the
purpose of the janmady asya verse in the Vedanta-satra is to establish that the
cosmic manifestation is the result of the transformation of the potencies of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is the master of innumerable
eternal energies, which are unlimited. Sometimes these energies are manifested,
and sometimes they are not. In any case, all energies are under His control;
therefore He is the original energetic, the abode of all energies. A common brain
in the conditioned state cannot conceive of how these inconceivable energies


--- Page 299 ---
Text 171] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 295
abide in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, how He exists in His innumerable
forms as the master of both spiritual and material energies, how He is the master
of both manifest and potential powers and how contradictory potencies can
abide in Him. As long as the living entity is within this material world, in the condi-
tion of illusion, he cannot understand the activities of the inconceivable energies
of the Lord. Thus the Lord's energies, though factual, are simply beyond the
power of the common brain to understand.

When the atheistic philosophers or the Mayavadis, being unable to understand
the inconceivable energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine an
impersonal void, their imagination is only the counterpart of materialistic thinking.
Within the material world, there is nothing inconceivable. High-thinking philoso-
phers and scientists can tackle the material energy, but not being able to under-
stand the spiritual energy, they can simply imagine an inactive state, such as the
impersonal Brahman. This is simply the negative side of material life. By such im-
perfect knowledge, the Mayavadi philosophers conclude that the cosmic
manifestation is a transformation of the Supreme. Thus they must necessarily also
accept the theory of the illusion of the Supreme (vivarta-vada). However, if we ac-
cept the inconceivable potencies of the Lord, we can understand how the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can appear within this material world without
being touched or contaminated by the three modes of material nature.

From the sastras we learn that there is a stone or jewel called a touchstone that
can transform iron into gold. Although the touchstone tums iron into gold many
times, it remains in its original condition. If such a material stone can maintain its
inconceivable energy after producing volumes of gold, certainly the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead can remain in His original sac-cid-ananda form after creating
the cosmic world. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), He acts only through His
different energies. Mayadhyaksena prakrtih: Krsna directs the material energy, and
that potency works in this material world. This is also confirmed in Brahma-
sarmhita (5.44):

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani vibharti durga
icchanurapam api yasya ca cestate sa
govindam adi-purusar tam aha bhajami
The durga-sakti (material energy) acts under the direction of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and the universal creation, maintenance and destruction are
being carried out by the durga-sakti. Krsna’s direction is in the background. The
conclusion is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains as He is, even
though directing His energy, which makes the diverse cosmic manifestation work
so wonderfully.


--- Page 300 ---
296 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [{Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 172
ব্যাস-_ভ্ান্ত বলি” সেই সূত্রে দোষ দিয়া ।
“বিবর্তবাদ” স্থাপিয়াছে Twa क्रि ॥ ১৭২ ॥
vydsa—bhranta bali’ sei 50052 dosa diya
‘vivarta-vada’ sthapiyache kalpana kariya
SYNONYMS
vyasa—Srila Vyasadeva; bhranta—mistaken; bali’—saying; sei—that; 50८८-7
Vedanta-satra; dosa—fault; diya—accusing; vivarta-vada—the theory of illusion;
sthapiyache—has established; kalpana—imagination; kariya—doing.
TRANSLATION
“Sankaricirya’s theory states that the Absolute Truth is transformed. By ac-
cepting this theory, the Mayavadi philosophers denigrate Srila Vyasadeva by
accusing him of error. They thus find fault in the Vedanta-satra and interpret it
to try to establish the theory of illusion.
PURPORT
The first verse of the Brahma-sdatra is athato brahma jijidsa: “We must now in-
quire into the Absolute Truth.” The second verse immediately answers, janmady
asya yatah: “The Absolute Truth is the original source of everything!” Janmady
asya yatah does not suggest that the original person has been transformed. Rather,
it clearly indicates that He produces this cosmic manifestation through His incon-
ceivable energy. This is also clearly explained in Bhagavad-gita, where Krsna says,
mattah sarvam pravartate: “From Me, everything emanates!” (Bg. 10.8) This is also
confirmed in the Taittiriya Upanisad: yato va imani bhatani jayante: “The
Supreme Absolute Truth is that from which everything is born!” (Tait. Up. 3.1.1)
Similarly, in the Mundaka Upanisad (1.1.7), it is stated, yathorpa-nabhih srjate grh-
nate ca: “[The Lord creates and destroys the cosmic manifestation] as a spider cre-
ates a web and draws it back within itself!” All of these satras indicate the transfor-
mation of the Lord's energy. It is not that the Lord undergoes direct transforma-
tion, which is called parinama-vada. However, being very anxious to protect Srila
Vyasadeva from criticism, Sankaracarya became a pseudo gentleman and put for-
ward his theory of illusion (vivarta-vada). Sankaracarya concocted this meaning of
parinama-vada, and by word jugglery he endeavored very hard to establish
parinama-vada as vivarta-vada.
TEXT 173
জীবের দেহে আত্মবুদ্ধি - সেই মিথ্যা হয়।
জগৎ যে মিথ্যা নহে, নম্বরমাত্র হয় ॥ ১৭৩ ॥


--- Page 301 ---
Text 173} The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 297
jivera dehe atma-buddhi—sei mithya haya
jagat ye mithya nahe, nasvara-matra haya
SYNONYMS

jivera—of the living entities; dehe—in the body; atma-buddhi—considering as
the self; sei—that; mithya—untruth; haya—is; jagat—the cosmic manifestation;
ye—that; mithya—untruth; nahe—not; nasvara-matra—only temporary; haya—
is.

TRANSLATION

“The theory of illusion can be applied only when the living entity identifies
himself with the body. As far as the cosmic manifestation is concerned, it can-
not be called false, although it is certainly temporary.

PURPORT

The living entity is the eternal servant of Krsna. Being part and parcel of the
Lord, he is constitutionally pure, but due to his contact with material energy, he
identifies himself with either the gross or the subtle material body. Such identifica-
tion is certainly false and constitutes the genuine platform of the theory of illu-
sion. The living entity is eternal; he can never be subjected to the limits of time, as
are his gross and subtle bodies. The cosmic manifestation is never false, but it is
subject to change by the influence of the time factor. For a living entity to accept
this cosmic manifestation as the field for his sense enjoyment is certainly illusory.
This material world is the manifestation of the material energy of the Lord. This is
explained by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (7.4):

bhamir apo ‘nalo vayuh
kharih mano buddhir eva ca
aharikara itiyamh me
bhinna prakrtir astadha

The material world is the inferior energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
but it is not a fact that the Supreme Lord has been transformed into this material
world. The Mayavadi philosophers, devoid of true understanding, have confused
the theory of illusion and the theory of the cosmic manifestation by word jugglery.
The theory of illusion can be applied to a person who identifies himself with the
body. The living entity is the superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and the ma-
terial world is the inferior energy. Both, however, are prakrti (energy). Although
the energies are simultaneously one with the Lord and different from Him, the
Lord never loses His personal form due to the transformation of His different
energies.


--- Page 302 ---
298 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
TEXT 174
“প্রণব” যে মহাবাক্য- ঈশ্বরের মূর্তি ।
প্রণব হৈতে সর্ববেদ, জগৎ-উপত্তি ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
‘pranava’ ye maha-vakya——isvarera marti
pranava haite sarva-veda, jagat-utpatti
SYNONYMS
pranava—omkara; ye—that which; maha-vakya—transcendental vibration;
i$varera—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; marti—the form; pranava—
orhkara; haite—from; sarva-veda—all Vedic literature; jagat—of the material
world; utpatti—production.
TRANSLATION
“The transcendental vibration orkara is the sound form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. All Vedic knowledge and this cosmic manifestation
are produced from this sound representation of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Ornkara 15 the representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in sound.
This form of His holy name is accepted as the transcendental vibration (maha-
vakya) by virtue of which the temporary material manifestation has come into
being. If one takes shelter of the sound representation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (orhkara), he can realize his constitutional identity and engage in
devotional service even though in conditional life.
TEXT 175
“তন্বমসি”- জীব-হেতু প্রাদেশিক বাক্য |
প্রণব না মানি” Sica কহে মহাবাক্য ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
‘tat tvam asi’—jiva-hetu pradesika vakya
pranava na mani’ tire kahe maha-vakya
SYNONYMS
tat tvam asi—you are the same; jiva-hetu —for the enlightenment of the condi-
tioned soul; pradesika—subsidiary; vakya—vibration; pranava—the orkara in-
carnation; na—not; mani’—accepting; tare—that; kahe—says; maha-vakya—
transcendental vibration.


--- Page 303 ---
Text 176] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 299
TRANSLATION
“The subsidiary vibration tat tvam asi [‘“you are the same’’] is meant for the
understanding of the living entity, but the principal vibration is ornkara. Not
caring for orhkara, Sankaracarya has stressed the vibration tat tvam asi.’
PURPORT
Tat tvam asi is accepted as the primary vibration by one who does not accept
pranava, the transcendental sound incarnation of the holy name of the Lord, as
the chief principle in Vedic literature. By word jugglery, Sarkaracarya tried to
create an illusory presentation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His rela-
tionship with the living entities and the cosmic manifestation. Tat tvam asi is a
warning to the living entity not to mistake the body for the self. Therefore tat
tvam asi is especially meant for the conditioned soul. The chanting of orikara or
the Hare Krsna mantra is meant for the liberated soul. $rila Rupa Gosvami has said,
ayi mukta-kulair upasyamanam (Namastaka 1). Thus the holy name of the Lord is
chanted by the liberated souls. Similarly, Pariksit Maharaja says, nivrtta-tarsair
upagiyamanat (Bhag. 10.1.4). The holy name of the Lord can be chanted by those
who have fully satisfied their material desires or who are fully situated on the tran-
scendental platform and devoid of material desire. The name of the Lord can be
chanted by one who is completely freed from material contamination
(anyabhilasita-sanyarm jAana-karmady-anavrtam). Sankaracarya has indirectly
minimized the value of the principal Vedic mantra (ornhkara) by accepting a subor-
dinate vibration (tat tvam asi) as the most important Vedic mantra.
TEXT 176
এইমতে WS छट नङ দোষ দিল |
ভট্টাচার্য পূর্বপক্ষ অপার করিল ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
ei-mate kalpita bhasye sata dosa 013
bhattacarya parva-paksa apara karila
SYNONYMS
ei-mate—in this way; kalpita—imagined; bhasye—in the commentary; sata—
hundreds; dosa—of faults; dila—gave; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
parva-paksa—opposing elements; apara—unlimitedly; karila—manifested.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu criticized Sankaracarya’s Sariraka-bhasya as
imaginary, and He pointed out hundreds of faults in it. To defend


--- Page 304 ---
300 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila Ch. 6
Sankaricirya, however, Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya presented unlimited op-
position.
TEXT 177
विश), ছল, নিগ্রহাদি অনেক উঠাইল |
जव খণ্চি প্রভু নিজ-মত সে স্থাপিল ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
vitanda, chala, nigrahadi aneka uthaila
saba khandi’ prabhu nija-mata se sthapila
SYNONYMS
vitanda—counter-arguments; chala—imaginary interpretations; nigraha-adi—
repulses to the opposite party; aneka—various; uthaila—raised; saba—all; khan-
di’—refuting; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nija-mata—His own convic-
tion; se—that; sthapila—established.
TRANSLATION
The Bhatticarya presented various types of false arguments with pseudo-
logic and tried to defeat his opponent in many ways. However, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu refuted all these arguments and established His own conviction.
PURPORT
The word vitanda indicates that a debater, not touching the main point or
establishing his own point, simply tries to refute the other person's argument.
When one does not touch the direct meaning but tries to divert attention by
misinterpretation, he engages in chala. The word nigraha also means always trying
to refute the arguments of the other party.
TEXT 178
SH — Aww’, ভক্তি “অভ্ডিথেয়” হুয়।
প্রেমা-_ প্রয়োজন, বেদে তিনবস্ত कश्च ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
bhagavan — ‘sambandha’, bhakti—‘abhidheya’ haya
prema —— ‘prayojana’, vede tina-vastu kaya
SYNONYMS
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sambandha—relationship;
bhakti—devotional service; abhidheya—transcendental activities; haya—is;
prema —love of Godhead; prayojana—the ultimate goal of life; vede —the Vedas;
tina-vastu —three subject matters; kaya—describe.


--- Page 305 ---
Text 179] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 301
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: “The Supreme Personality of God-
head is the central point of all relationships, acting in devotional service to
Him is one’s real occupation, and the attainment of love of Godhead is the
ultimate goal of life. These three subject matters are described in Vedic
literature.
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gita also confirms this statement (Bg. 15.15). Vedais ca sarvair aham
eva vedyah: the actual purpose in reading the Vedas is to learn how to become a
devotee of the Supreme Lord. The Lord Himself advises, man-mana bhava mad-
bhakto mad-yaji mar namaskuru (Bg. 9.34). Therefore, after studying the Vedas,
one must then execute devotional service by thinking always of the Supreme Lord
(man-mana), becoming His devotee, worshiping Him and always offering Him
obeisances. This is called visnu-aradhana, and it is the supreme occupational duty
of all human beings. It is properly discharged in the varnasrama-dharma system,
which divides society into brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha, sannyasa, and
brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and sadra. This is the whole scheme of Vedic civiliza-
tion. However, this institution is very difficult to establish in this age; therefore Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu advises that we not worry about the Vedic system of var-
nasrama-dharma. Rather, we should take directly to the chanting of the Hare Krsna
mantra and simply hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead from pure
devotees. This is the process recommended by $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and this
is the purpose for studying the Vedas.
TEXT 179
আর থে যে-কিছু কহে, সকলই TW |
স্বতঃপ্রমাণ বেদ-বাকেয কল্পেন লক্ষণ।॥ ১৭৯ ॥
ara ye ye-kichu kahe, sakala-i kalpana
svatah-pramana veda-vakye kalpena laksana
SYNONYMS
ara—except this; ye ye—whatever; kichu—something; kahe —says; sakala-i—
all; kalpana—imagination; svatah-pramana—self-evident; veda-vakye—in the
Vedic version; kalpena—he imagines; laksana—an interpretation.
TRANSLATION
‘If one tries to explain the Vedic literature in a different way, he is indulging
in imagination. Any interpretation of the self-evident Vedic version is simply
imaginary.


--- Page 306 ---
302 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6

PURPORT
When a conditioned soul is purified, he is called a devotee. A devotee has his rela-
tionship only with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and his only occupa-
tional duty is to execute devotional service to satisfy the Lord. This service is ren-
dered through the Lord's representative, the spiritual master: yasya deve para
bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau. When the devotee executes devotional service
properly, he attains the highest perfection of life —love of Godhead: sa vai puri-
sam paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje. The ultimate goal of understanding the
Vedas is to be elevated to the platform of rendering loving service to the Lord. The
Mayavadi philosophers, however, consider the central point of relationship to be
the impersonal Brahman, the function of the living entity to be the acquisition of
knowledge of Brahman, resulting in detachment from material activity, and the
ultimate goal of life to be liberation, or merging into the existence of the Supreme.
All of this, however, is simply due to the imagination of the conditioned soul. It
simply opposes him to material activities. One should always remember that all
Vedic literatures are self-evident. No one is allowed to interpret the Vedic verses.
If one does so, he indulges in imagination, and that has no value.

TEXT 180

আচার্যের দোষ নাহি, ঈশ্বর-আজ্! হেল |
অতএব FHF করি” নাস্তিক-শাস্ত্র কৈল ॥ ১৮০ ॥
acaryera dosa nahi, 1$৮3/3-303 haila
ataeva kalpana kari’ nastika-sastra kaila
SYNONYMS
acaryera—of Sankaracarya; dosa—fault; nahi— there is not; fsvara-gjfa—the
order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; haila—there was; ataeva—
therefore; kalpana—imagination; kari’—making; nastika—atheistic; sastra—scrip-
tures; kaila—prepared.
TRANSLATION
“Actually there is no fault on the part of Sankaracirya. He simply carried out

the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He had to imagine some
kind of interpretation, and therefore he presented a kind of Vedic literature
that is full of atheism.

TEXT 181

স্বাগমৈঃ কল্লিতৈম্বঞ্চ জনান্‌ মদ্বিমুখান্‌ TF ৷
মাঞ্চ গোপয় যেন < স্ষ্টিরেষোত্তরোত্তরা ॥ ১৮১ ॥


--- Page 307 ---
Text 182] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 303
svagamaih kalpitais tvam ca
janan mad-vimukhan kuru
man ca gopaya yena syat
srstir esottarottara
SYNONYMS
sva-agamaih—with your own theses; kalpitaih—imagined; tvam—you; ca—
also; janan—the people in general; mat-vimukhan —averse to Me and addicted
to fruitive activities and speculative knowledge; kuru—make; mam—Me, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—and; gopaya—just cover; yena—by
which; syat—there may be; srstih—material advancement; esa—this; uttarot-
tara—more and more.
TRANSLATION
“Addressing Lord Siva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead said, ‘Please
make the general populace averse to Me by imagining your own interpretation
of the Vedas. Also, cover Me in such a way that people will take more interest
in advancing material civilization just to propagate a population bereft of
spiritual knowledge.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from the Padma Purana, Uttara-khanda (62.31).
TEXT 182
মায়াবাদমসচ্ছাম্ত্রং প্রচ্ছন্ন; বৌদ্ধমুচ্যতে |
মযয়ৈব বিহিতং দেবি কলোরব্রাহ্মণমূতিন| ॥ ১৮২ ॥
mayavadam asac-chastran
pracchannam bauddham ucyate
mayaiva vihitarh devi
kalau brahmana-martina
SYNONYMS
mayavadam—the philosophy of Mayavada; asat-sastram—false scriptures;
pracchannam —covered; bauddham —Buddhism; ucyate—it is said; maya—by
me; eva—only; vihitam—executed; devi—O goddess of the material world;
kalau —in the age of Kali; brahmana-martina—having the body of a brahmana.
TRANSLATION
“Lord Siva informed the goddess Durga, the superintendent of the material
world, ‘In the age of Kali, | take the form of a brahmana and explain the Vedas
through false scriptures in an atheistic way, similar to Buddhist philosophy.’ ^


--- Page 308 ---
304 ওঃ Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 6
PURPORT
The word brahmana-martina in this verse refers to the founder of Mayavada
philosophy, Sankaracarya, who was born in the Malabara district of southern
India. Mayavada philosophy states that the Supreme Lord, the living entities and
the cosmic manifestation are all transformations of illusory energy. To support this
atheistic theory, the Mayavadis cite false scriptures, which make people bereft of
transcendental knowledge and addicted to fruitive activities and mental specula-
tion.
This verse is a quotation from the Padma Purana, Uttara-khanda (25.7).
TEXT 183
শুনি” ভট্টাচার্য হৈল পরম বিস্মিত ।
মুখে না নিঃসরে বাণী, হইলা BES ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
Suni’ bhattacarya haila parama vismita
mukhe na nihsare vani, ha-ila stambhita
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing;  bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; haila—became;
parama—very much; vismita—astonished; mukhe—in the mouth; na—not;
nihsare—vibrates; vani—words; ha-ila—became; stambhita—stunned.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya became very astonished upon hearing this. He
became stunned and said nothing.
TEXT 184
2G কহে,- ভট্টাচার্য, न) কর বিস্ময় |
ভগবানে ভক্তি _পরম-পুকুুষার্থ হুয় ॥ ১৮৪ |
prabhu kahe, —bhattacarya, na kara vismaya
bhagavane bhakti——parama-purusartha haya
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord said; bhattacarya—My dear Bhattacarya; na—not;
kara—do; vismaya—astonishment; bhagavane—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bhakti—devotional service; parama—the Supreme; purusa-artha—
human interest; haya—is.


--- Page 309 ---
Text 186] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 305
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then told him: “Do not be astonished. Ac-
tually, devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
highest perfection of human activity.
TEXT 185
“আত্মারাম” পর্যন্ত করে ঈশ্বর ভজন |
जट खण ভগবানের গুণগণ ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
‘atmarama’ paryanta kare isvara bhajana
aiche acintya bhagavanera guna-gana
SYNONYMS
atma-rama—self-satisfied; paryanta—up to; kare—do; isvara bhajana—devo-
tional service to the Lord; aiche—such; acintya—inconceivable; bhagavanera—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guna-gana—transcendental qualities.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Even the self-satisfied sages perform devotional service to the Supreme
Lord. Such are the transcendental qualities of the Lord. They are full of incon-
ceivable spiritual potency.
TEXT 186
खस्ाव्रामान्छ মুনয়ো নিগ্রন্থা অপ্যুরুক্রমে |
কুবস্ত্যহৈতুকীং ভক্তিমিখস্ভৃতগুণে৷ হরিঃ ॥ ১৮৬ ॥
atmaramas ca munayo
nirgrantha apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukirh bhaktim
ittham-bhdata-guno harih
SYNONYMS
atma-ramah—persons who take pleasure in being transcendentally situated in
the service of the Lord; ca—also; munayah—great saintly persons who have
completely rejected material aspirations, fruitive activities, and so forth;
nirgranthah —without interest in any material desire; api—certainly; urukrame —
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, whose activities are wonderful;
kurvanti—do; ahaitukim —causeless, or without material desires; bhak tim —devo-


--- Page 310 ---
306 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
tional service; ittham-bhata—so wonderful as to attract the attention of the self-
satisfied; gunah —who has transcendental qualities; harih—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Those who are self-satisfied and unattracted by external material desires
are also attracted to the loving service of $ri Krsna, whose qualities are tran-
scendental and whose activities are wonderful. Hari, the Personality of God-
head, is called Krsna because He has such transcendentally attractive
features.”
PURPORT
This is the famous atmarama verse (Bhag. 1.7.10).
TEXT 187
শুনি' ভট্টাচার্য কহে,_“শুন, মহাশয় ।
এই প্লোকের অর্থ শুনিতে वार হয় ॥” ১৮৭ ॥
Suni’ bhattacarya kahe,— Suna, mahasaya
ei slokera artha sunite vaAcha haya’
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing this; bhattacarya kahe —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said; suna—
please hear; maha-asaya—my dear sir; ei slokera—of this verse; artha—the
meaning; sunite—to hear; vaficha—a desire; haya—there is.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the 31103131013 verse, Sirvabhauma Bhatticirya addressed Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu: “My dear sir, please explain this verse. | have a great
desire to hear Your explanation of it.”
TEXT 188
প্রভু কহে,- (इमि कि অর্থ कन्न, তাহ। আগে खनिः |
পাছে আমি করিব wef, যেব৷ কিছু জানি ॥ ५८४. ॥
prabhu kahe, — ‘tumi ki artha kara, taha age suni’
pache ami kariba artha, yeba kichu jani’


--- Page 311 ---
Text 190] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 307
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —the Lord said; tumi—you; ki—what; artha—meaning; kara—do;
taha—that; age—first of all; suni’—hearing; pache—after that; ami—I; kariba—
shall do; artha—meaning; yeba—whatever; kichu—something; jani—| know.
TRANSLATION
The Lord replied: ‘First let Me hear your explanation. After that, I shall try
to explain what little | know.”
TEXT 189
শুলি' ভট্টাচার্য (शक করিল ব্যাখ্যান।
ভর্কশাত্র-মত উঠায় বিবিধ বিধান ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
Suni’ bhattacarya sloka karila vyakhyana
tarka-$astra-mata uthaya vividha vidhana
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing this; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; sloka—of the
verse; karila—did; vyakhyana—explanation; tarka-sastra—scriptures dealing with
logic; mata—according to; uthaya—raises; vividha—various; vidhana—premises.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya then began to explain the atmarama verse, and,
according to the principles of logic, he raised various premises.
TEXT 190
নববিধ অর্থ टेकल শান্ত্রমত Awl ।
শুনি প্রভু কহে কিছু ঈষৎ হাসিয়া! ॥ ১৯০ ॥
nava-vidha artha kaila sastra-mata lana
Suni’ prabhu kahe kichu isat hasiya
SYNONYMS
nava-vidha—nine kinds; artha—meanings; kaila—did; $astra-mata—the prin-
ciples of authorized scriptures; laiia—taking; suni’—after hearing that; prabhu—
Lord Caitanya; kahe—began to speak; kichu—something; isat—slightly; hasiya—
smiling.


--- Page 312 ---
308 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
The Bhatticirya explained the itmarama verse in nine different ways on the
basis of scripture. After hearing his explanation, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
smiling a little, began to speak.
PURPORT
The atmarama verse was discussed at Naimisaranya at a meeting of many great
sages, headed by Saunaka Rsi. They questioned Srila Sita Gosvami, who presided
at the meeting, about why Srila Sukadeva Gosvami, a paramahamsa already in the
transcendental position, was attracted to a discussion of the qualities of Krsna In
other words, they wanted to know why 5 Sukadeva Gosvami engaged in the
study of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 191
“खार्यः, जानि -ूमि সাক্ষাৎ বৃহস্পতি |
गशोछवरो थ| कञ्चिटङ এঁছে কারে! নাহি শক্তি ॥ ১৯১॥
‘bhattacarya’, jani—tumi saksat brhaspati
$astra-vyakhya karite aiche karo nahi sakti
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—My dear Bhattacarya; jani—| know; tumi—you; saksat—directly;
brhaspati—the learned priest of the demigods named Brhaspati; sastra-vyakhya—
explanation of the scriptures; karite—to do; aiche —such; karo—of anyone else;
nahi—there is not; sakti—power.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: “My dear Bhatticarya, you are exactly like
Brhaspati, the priest of the heavenly kingdom. Indeed, no one within this
world has the power to explain the scriptures in such a way.
TEXT 192
কিন্তু ভুমি অর্থ কৈলে পাণ্ডিত্য-প্রতিভায্স ৷
ইহা বই শ্লোকের আছে আরো অভিপ্রায় ॥ ১৯২ ॥
kintu tumi artha kaile panditya-pratibhaya
iha va-i slokera ache aro abhipraya


--- Page 313 ---
Text 194] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 309
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; tumi—you; artha—meaning; kaile—have shown; panditya—
scholarly; pratibhaya—with prowess; iha va-i—besides this; slokera—of the
verse; ache—there is; aro—another; abhipraya—purport.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Bhatticarya, you have certainly explained this verse by the
prowess of your vast learning, but you should know that, besides this schol-
arly explanation, there is another purport to this verse.”
TEXT 193
ভট্টাচার্যের প্রার্থনাতে প্রভু वाथा] टेकन |
তার नव অর্থ-মথ্যে এক ন৷ टेल ॥ ১৯৩ ॥
bhattacaryera prarthanate prabhu vyakhya kaila
tanra nava artha-madhye eka na chunila
SYNONYMS
bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya; prarthanate—on the request;
prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vyakhyi—explanation; kaila—made;
tanra—his; nava artha—of the nine different types of explanations; madhye—in
the midst; eka—one; na—not; chunila—touched.
TRANSLATION
Upon the request of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
began to explain the verse, without touching upon the nine explanations
given by the Bhattacarya.
TEXT 194
আত্মারামাশ্চ-ল্লোকে “একাদশ” পদ হুয়।
পৃথক্‌ পৃথক্‌ কৈল পদের অর্থ নিশ্চয় ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
atmaramas ca-sloke ‘ekadasa’ pada haya
prthak prthak kaila padera artha niscaya
SYNONYMS
atmaramas ca—known as such; sloke —in the verse; ekadasa—eleven; pada—
words; haya—there are; prthak prthak —separately one after another; kaila—
made; padera—of the words; artha—the meaning; niscaya—certainty.


--- Page 314 ---
310 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
There are eleven words in the atmarama verse, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu explained each word, one after the other.
PURPORT
The words in the atmarama verse are atmaramah, ca, munayah, nirgranthah, api,
urukrame, kurvanti, ahaitukim, bhaktim, ittham-bhata-gunah and harih.
TEXT 195
ভত্তৎপদ-প্রাধান্থ্যে 'আত্মারাম' मिलो श |
অষ্টাদশ অর্থ কৈল অভিপ্রায় लयश्‌ ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
tat-tat-pada-pradhanye ‘atmarama’ milana
astadasa artha kaila abhipraya lana
SYNONYMS
tat-tat-pada—all those items; pradhanye —principally; atmarama—the word at-
marama; milana—causing to meet; astadasa—eighteen H artha—meanings H
kaila—did; abhipraya—purpose; lafia—accepting.
TRANSLATION
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu took each word specifically and combined it
with the word ‘“atmarama’’ He thus explained the word ‘“atmarama’’ in eigh-
teen different ways.
TEXT 196
Sai, তীর শক্তি, Sta গুণগণ |
অচিন্ত্য প্রভাব ভিনের না যায় কথন ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
bhagavan, tanra sakti, (37773 guna-gana
acintya prabhava tinera na yaya kathana
SYNONYMS
bhagavan —the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tarira sakti—His potencies;
tanra guna-gana—His transcendental qualities;  acintya—inconceivable;
prabhava—the influence; tinera—of the three; na—not; yaya—possible;
kathana—to speak.


--- Page 315 ---
Text 198] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 311
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, His
different potencies and His transcendental qualities all have inconceivable
prowess. It is not possible to explain them fully.
TEXT 197
TY যত সাধ্য-সাধন করি' আচ্ছাদন |
এই তিনে হরে সিদ্ধ-সাধকের মন ॥ ১৯৭ ॥
anya yata sadhya-sadhana kari’ acchadana
ei tine hare siddha-sadhakera mana
SYNONYMS
anya—other; yata—all; sadhya-sadhana—objectives and transcendental prac-
tices; kari’—doing; dcchadana—covering; ei tine—these three; hare—take away;
siddha—successful; sadhakera—of the student engaged in spiritual activities;
mana —the mind.
TRANSLATION
“These three items attract the mind of a perfect student engaged in
spiritual activities and overcome all other processes of spiritual activity.”
PURPORT
Spiritual activities other than bhakti-yoga are divided into three categories —
speculative activity conducted by the jAdana-sampradaya (learned scholars), frui-
tive activity conducted by the general populace according to Vedic regulations,
and the activities of transcendentalists not engaged in devotional service. There
are many different branches of these categories, but the Supreme Personality of
Codhead, by His inconceivable potencies and transcendental qualities, attracts
the mind of the student engaged in the activities of karma, jAiana, yoga, and so
forth. The Supreme Lord is full of inconceivable potencies, which are related to His
person, His energies and His transcendental qualities. All of these are very attrac-
tive to the serious student. Consequently the Lord is known as Krsna, the all-
attractive one.
TEXT 198
সনমকাদি-শুকদেব তাহাতে প্রমাণ |
এইমত नानां অর্থ করেন ব্যাখ্যান ॥ ১৯৮ ॥


--- Page 316 ---
312 इ Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
sanakadi-sukadeva tahate pramana
ei-mata nana artha karena vyakhyana
SYNONYMS
sanaka-adi—the four sanas; $ukadeva—and Sukadeva Gosvami; tahate—in
that; pramana—the evidence; ei-mata—in this way; nana—varieties; artha—
meaning; karena—does; vyakhyana—explanation.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained the meaning of the verse by giving evi-
dence concerning Sukadeva Gosvami and the four rsis Sanaka, Sanat-kumara,
Sanatana and Sanandana. Thus the Lord gave various meanings and explana-
tions.
PURPORT
That Krsna is all-attractive is verified by the activities of the four rsis and
Sukadeva Gosvami. All of them were liberated persons, yet they were attracted
by the qualities and pastimes of the Lord. It is therefore said: mukta api lilaya
vigrahari krtva bhagavantarn bhajante. (Cc. Madhya 24.112) Even liberated per-
sons are attracted by the pastimes of Lord Krsna and thus engage in devotional
service. From the very beginning of their lives, Sukadeva Gosvami and the four
Kumaras, known as catuhsana, were liberated and self-realized on the Brahman
platform. Nonetheless, they were attracted by the qualities of Krsna, and they
engaged in His service. The four Kumaras were attracted by the aroma of the
flowers offered at the lotus feet of Krsna, and in this way they became devotees.
Sukadeva Gosvami heard Srimad-Bhagavatam by the mercy of his father,
Vyasadeva, and he was consequently attracted to Krsna and became a great
devotee. The conclusion is that the transcendental bliss experienced in the ser-
vice of the Lord must be superior to brahmananda, the bliss derived from realizing
the impersonal Brahman.
TEXT 199
শুনি' ভট্ট।চার্যের মনে হৈল চমৎকার |
প্রভুকে কৃষ্ণ জানি” করে আপনা ধিক্কার ॥ ১৯৯ ॥
Suni’ bhattacaryera mane haila camatkara
prabhuke krsna jani’ kare apana dhikkara
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing this; bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; mane —in the
mind; haila—there was; camatkara—wonder; prabhuke—Lord 5 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; krsna—Lord Krsna; jani’—accepting as; kare —does; apana—him-
self; dhikkara—condemnation.


--- Page 317 ---
Text 201] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 313
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s explanation of the atmarama verse,
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was struck with wonder. He then understood Lord
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be Krsna in person, and he thus condemned him-
self in the following words.
TEXT 200
Ral ® সাক্ষাৎ কৃষ্ণ, _ মুর wl कोनिश्च] |
মহা-অপরাধ देकर शोर्विं হইয়। ॥২০০ ॥
‘inho ta’ saksat krspa, —muni na janiya
maha-aparadha kainu garvita ha-iya’
SYNONYMS
1000-6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ta’—indeed; saksat—directly; krspa—Lord
Krsna; muni—I|; ni—not; janiya—knowing; maha-aparadha—a great offense;
kainu—did; garvita—proud; ha-iya—being.
TRANSLATION
‘“/Caitanya Mahaprabhu is certainly Lord Krsna Himself. Because 1 could not
understand Him and was very proud of my own learning, | have committed
many offenses.’
TEXT 201
Swern করি” লৈল প্রভুর শরণ |
কৃপ। করিব।রে তবে AGA হৈল मन ॥ ২০১ ॥
atma-ninda kari’ laila prabhura sarana
krpa karibare tabe prabhura haila mana
SYNONYMS
atma-ninda—self-indictment; kari’—doing; laila—took; prabhura—of the
Lord; sarana—shelter; krpa—mercy; karibare —to do; tabe—then; prabhura—of
the Lord; haila—it was; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
When Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya denounced himself as an offender and took
shelter of the Lord, the Lord desired to show him mercy.


--- Page 318 ---
314 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 202
নিজ-রূপ প্রভু Sica করাইল wef |
চতুভুজ-রূপ প্রভু হইল। তখন ॥ २०२ ॥
nija-rapa prabhu tanre karaila darsana
catur-bhuja-rdpa prabhu haila takhana
SYNONYMS
nija-rdpa—personal form; prabhu —the Lord; tarre —unto him; kardila—made;
darsana—seeing; catuh-bhuja—four-handed; ripa—form; prabhu—the Lord; ha-
ila—became; takhana—at that time.
TRANSLATION
To show him mercy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu allowed him to see His Visnu
form. Thus He immediately assumed four hands.
TEXT 203
দেখাইল ভারে আগে চতুদভুজ-রূপ ।
পাছে শ্যাম-বংশীনমুখ স্বকীয় FHA ॥ ২০৩ ॥
dekhaila tanre age catur-bhuja-rapa
pache Syama-varhsi-mukha svakiya svaripa
SYNONYMS
dekhaila—showed; tanre—unto him; age—at first; catur-bhuja-rapa—the
form with four hands; pache—afterwards; syama—blackish; vamsi-mukha—with
a flute to the mouth; svakiya—personal; svarapa—form.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu first showed him the four-handed form and then
appeared before him in His original form of Krsna, with a blackish complexion
and a flute to His lips.
TEXT 204
দেখি” লার্বভৌম দণ্ডবৎ করি” AE |
পুনঃ উঠি” खडि করে দুই কর भूष ॥ ২০৪ ॥


--- Page 319 ---
Text 206] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 315
dekhi’ sarvabhauma dandavat kari’ padi’
punah uthi’ stuti kare dui kara yudi’
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing that; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; dangavat—
obeisances; kari’—doing; padi’—falling flat; punah—again; uthi’—standing up;
stuti—prayer; kare —does; dui—two; kara—hands; yudi’—folding.
TRANSLATION
When Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya saw the form of Lord Krsna manifested in
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he immediately fell down flat to offer Him obeisances.
Then he stood up and with folded hands began to offer prayers.
TEXT 205
SGA FAT SA স্ফুরিল সব তত্ব ।
নাম-প্রেমদান-আদি বর্ণেন মহত্ব ॥ २०८ ॥
prabhura krpdya tanra sphurila saba tattva
nama-prema-dana-adi varnena mahattva
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; krpaya—by the mercy; tanra—to him; sphurila—
manifested; saba—all; tattva—truths; nama—the holy name; prema-dana—dis-
tribution of love of Godhead; adi—and so on; varnena—describes; mahattva—
the importance.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of the Lord, all truths were revealed to Sarvabhauma Bhat-
ticarya, and he could understand the importance of chanting the holy name
and distributing love of Godhead everywhere.
TEXT 206
শত Celi কৈল এক দণ্ড ना যাইতে |
বৃহস্পতি তৈছে শ্লোক না৷ পারে করিতে ॥ ২০৬ ॥
Sata Sloka kaila eka 03093 na yaite
brhaspati taiche sloka na pare karite


--- Page 320 ---
316 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
sata—one hundred; sloka—verses; kaila—composed; eka—one; dangda—a
duration of twenty-four minutes; na—not; yaite —passing; brhaspati —Brhaspati,
the priest of the heavenly planets; taiche —such; sloka—verses; na—not; pare—
able; karite—to compose.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacirya composed one hundred verses in a very short
time. Indeed, not even Brhaspati, the priest of the heavenly planets, could
compose verses as quickly.
PURPORT
The name of the book of one hundred beautiful verses composed by Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya is Susloka-sataka.
TEXT 207
শুনি” छट्थे প্রভু ভারে কৈল আলিঙ্গন |
ভট্টাচার্য প্রেমাবেশে হৈল অচেতন ॥ ২০৭ |
Suni’ sukhe prabhu tanre kaila alingana
bhattacarya premavese haila acetana
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; sukhe—in happiness; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tarire—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kaila—did; alingana—embracing; bhat-
tacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prema-avese—in the ecstasy of love of God;
haila—became; acetana—unconscious.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the one hundred verses, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu happily
embraced Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya, who was immediately overwhelmed in
ecstatic love of Godhead and fell unconscious.
TEXT 208
Es, স্তম্ভ, পুলক, CAF, কম্প থরহরি ।
নাচে, গায়, কাম্দে, পড়ে প্রন্ু-পদ ধরি” ॥ ২০৮ ॥
asru, stambha, pulaka, 5৮০03, kampa tharahari
nace, gaya, kande, pade prabhu-pada dhari’


--- Page 321 ---
Text 210] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 317
SYNONYMS
asru —tears; stambha—a stunned condition; pulaka—standing of hair; sveda—
perspiration; kampa—trembling; tharahari—with great shaking; nace —dances;
gaya—sings; kande—cries; pade—falls down; prabhu-pada—the lotus feet of
the Lord; dhari’—catching.
TRANSLATION
Out of ecstatic love of God, the Bhatticarya shed tears, and his body was
stunned. He exhibited an ecstatic mood, and he perspired, shook and
trembled. He sometimes danced, sometimes chanted, sometimes cried and
sometimes fell down to touch the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 209
দেখি” গোপীনাথাচার্য হরবিদ্-মন |
ভট্টাচার্যের নৃত্য দেখি” হাসে প্রভুর গণ ॥ ২০৯ ॥
dekhi’ gopinathacarya harasita-mana
bhattacaryera nrtya dekhi’ hase prabhura gana
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing this; gopinatha-acarya—Gopinatha Acarya; harasita-mana—a
pleased mind; bhattacayera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; nrtya—dancing;
dekhi’—seeing; hase —laughs; prabhura gana—the associates of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
While Sarvabhauma Bhattaciarya was in this ecstasy, Gopinatha Acarya was
very pleased. The associates of Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu all laughed to see the
Bhattacarya dance so.
TEXT 210
গোপীনাথাচার্য কহে মহাপ্রভুর প্রতি |
“সেই ভট্টাচার্যের প্রভু কৈলে এই গতি ॥ ২১০ ॥
gopinathacarya kahe mahaprabhura prati
‘sei bhattacaryera prabhu kaile ei gati’
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-acarya—of the name Gopinatha Acarya; kahe—said; maha-
prabhura—$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prati—to; sei bhattacaryera—of that Bhat-
tacarya; prabhu—my Lord; kaile—You have made; ei gati—such a situation.


--- Page 322 ---
318 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Gopinitha Acarya told Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu: “Sir, You have brought
all this upon Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’”
TEXT 211
প্রভু কহে, “তুমি ভক্ত, তোমার সঙ্গ হৈতে |
জগল্লাথ ই"হারে कन] কৈল ভালমতে ॥” ২১১ ॥
prabhu kahe, — ‘tumi bhakta, tomara sarnga haite
jagannatha inhare krpa kaila bhala-mate’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord said; tumi bhakta—you are a devotee; tomara sanga
haite —on account of your association; jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; inhare—
unto him; krpa—mercy; kaila—showed; bhala-mate—very well.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied: “You are a devotee. Because of your
association, Lord Jagannatha has shown him mercy.”
TEXT 212
তবে ভট্টাচার্থে প্রভু WaT कत्रिन ।
স্থির zen! ভট্টাচার্য यच्छ खडि কৈল ॥ ২১২ ॥
tabe bhattacarye prabhu susthira karila
sthira hana bhattacarya bahu stuti kaila
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; bhatticarye—unto Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prabhu—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; su-sthira—pacification; karila—did; sthira hafia—being
pacified; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; bahu—many; stuti—prayers;
kaila—offered.
TRANSLATION
After this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu pacified the Bhattaciarya, and when he
was quieted, he offered many prayers to the Lord.


--- Page 323 ---
Text 215] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 319
TEXT 213
“জগৎ निरो त्रिटन তুমি, সেহ অন্পকার্য ৷
আমা উদ্ধারিলে তুমি,--এ শক্তি আশ্চর্য ॥ ২১৩ ॥
‘jagat nistarile tumi,—seha alpa-karya
ama uddharile tumi,—e Sakti ascarya
SYNONYMS
jagat—the whole world; nistarile—have delivered; tumi—You; seha—that;
alpa-karya—minor activity; ama—me; uddharile—have delivered; tumi—You;
e—this; sakti—power; ascarya—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said: “My dear Sir, You have delivered the entire
world, but that is not a very great task. However, You have also delivered me,
and that is certainly the work of very wonderful powers.
TEXT 214
তর্কশোস্তে জড় আমি, যৈছে (लोड गि ।
আমা TART তুমি, প্রতাপ ए ॥ ২১৪ ॥
tarka-sastre /303 ami, yaiche lauha-pinda
ama dravaile tumi, pratapa pracanda’
SYNONYMS
tarka-sastre—due to logical scriptures; jagda—dull; ami—!; yaiche —just like;
lauha-pinda—an iron bar; ama—me; dravaile—melted; tumi—You; pratapa—
power; pracangda—very great.
TRANSLATION
“1 had become dull-headed due to reading too many books on logic. Con-
sequently | had become like an iron bar. Nonetheless, You have melted me,
and therefore Your influence is very great.’
TEXT 215
সুতি শুনি মহাপ্রভু निज বাস৷ আইলা ৷
ভট্টাচার্য আচার্য-দ্বারে ভিক্ষা sage ॥ ২১৫ ॥


--- Page 324 ---
320 ও Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
stuti suni’ mahaprabhu nija vasa aila
bhattacarya acarya-dvare bhiksa karaila
SYNONYMS
stuti $uni’—after hearing the prayers; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
nija—own; vasd—to the residence; dild—retumed; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya; 4&carya-dvare—through Gopinatha Acarya; bhiksd—luncheon;
karaila—induced to take.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the prayers offered by Sirvabhauma Bhatticarya, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu returned to His residence, and the Bhatticarya, through
Gopinitha Acdrya, induced the Lord to accept lunch there.
TEXT 216
আর দিন প্রভু গেলা জগল্নাথ-দরশনে ।
দর্শন করিল৷ জগল্নাথ-শয্যোখানে ॥ ২১৬ ॥
ara dina prabhu gela jagannatha-darasane
darsana karila jagannatha-sayyotthane
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gela—went;
jagannatha-darasane—to see Jagannatha in the temple; darsana karila—saw;
jagannatha-sayya-utthane —the Lord's rising from bed early in the moming.
TRANSLATION
Early the following morning, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to see Lord
Jagannatha in the temple, and He saw the Lord rise from His bed.
TEXT 217
পূজারী আনিয়া गोल।-शजांणोन्न क्तिनि |
প্রসাদান্ন-মালা পাঞ প্রভু ङ्ब देरल। ॥ ২১৭ ॥
pajari aniya mala-prasadanna dila
prasadanna-mala pana prabhu harsa haila


--- Page 325 ---
Text 219] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 321
SYNONYMS
pajari—the priest; aniya—bringing; mala—garlands; prasada-anna—remnants
of food; dila—offered; prasada-anna—the prasada; mala—and garlands; pana —
getting; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; harsa—pleased; haila—became.
TRANSLATION
The priest there presented Him with garlands and prasada that had been
offered to Lord Jagannatha. This pleased Caitanya Mahaprabhu very much.
TEXT 218
সেই প্রসাদান্-মাল। অঞ্চলে वाकिन्न |
ভট্টাচার্যের ঘরে আইলা ত্বরাযুক্ত Zeal ॥ ২১৮ ॥
sei prasadanna-mala aricale bandhiya
bhattacaryera ghare ila tvarayukta hana
SYNONYMS
sei prasada-anna—those remnants of food; mala—and garlands; aficale—in
the end of His cloth; bandhiya—binding; bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; ghare—to the house; aila—went; tvara-yukta—hasty; haina—being.
TRANSLATION
Carefully tying the prasida and garlands in a cloth, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
hastened to the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TEXT 219
অরুণোদয়-কালে হৈল প্রভুর আগমন |
সেইকালে ভট্টাচার্যের হৈল জাগরণ ॥ ২১৯ ॥
arunodaya-kale haila prabhura agamana
sei-kale bhattacaryera haila jagarana
SYNONYMS
aruna-udaya—before sunrise; kale—at the time; haila—there was; prabhura—
of Lord ঠা Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 4gamana—the coming; sei-kale—at that time;
bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; haila—there was; jagarana—arising
from bed.


--- Page 326 ---
322 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
He arrived at the Bhattacarya’s house a little before sunrise, just when the
Bhattacarya was arising from bed.
TEXT 220
‘Fao ‘FFB কহি” ভট্টাচার্য জাগিল। |
কৃষ্ণনাম শুনি” প্রভুর আনন্দ वाङ्लि। ॥ २२० ॥
‘krsna’ *krsna’ sphuta kahi’ bhattacarya jagila
krsna-nama suni’ prabhura ananda badila
SYNONYMS
krsna krsna—chanting the name of Krsna; sphuta—distinctly; kahi’—saying;
bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; jagila—got up from the bed; krsna-
nama—the holy name of Lord Krsna; suni’—hearing; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ananda—pleasure; badila—increased.
TRANSLATION
As Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya arose from bed, he distinctly chanted, ‘Krsna,
Krsna.” Lord Caitanya was very pleased to hear him chant the holy name of
Krsna.
TEXT 221
বাহিরে প্রভুর তেঁহে। পাইল দরশন |
আস্তে-ব্যস্তে আসি” বক্লৈ চরণ FWA ॥ ২২১ ॥
bahire prabhura tenho paila darasana
aste-vyaste asi’ kaila carana vandana
SYNONYMS
bahire —outside the house; prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tenho —he; paila—got; darasana—sight; aste-vyaste—with great hurry; asi’‘—
coming there; kaila—did; carana vandana—worshiping the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
The Bhatticarya noticed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu outside, and with great
haste he went to Him and offered prayers unto His lotus feet.


--- Page 327 ---
Text 224] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 323
TEXT 222
বসিতে আসন দিয় goes वजिन। ।
প্রসাদাল্ন খুলি” প্রভু তার হাতে দিলা ॥ २२२ ॥
vasite asana diya dunheta vasila
prasadanna khuli’ prabhu tanra hate dila
SYNONYMS
vasite—to sit; dsana—carpet; diya—offering; dunheta—both of them; vasila—
sat down; prasida-anna—the prasada; khuli’—opening; prabhu—S$ti Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tarira—his; hate—in the hand; dila—offered.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya offered a carpet for the Lord to sit upon, and koth of them
sat there. Then $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu opened the prasida and placed it in
the hands of the Bhattacarya.
TEXT 223
প্রসাদান্ন পাঞ। ভট্ট।চার্যের আনন্দ হৈল |
আন, THT, দম্তধাবন TBP न কৈল ॥ ২২৩ ॥
prasadanna pana bhattacaryera ananda haila
snana, sandhya, danta-dhavana yadyapi na kaila
SYNONYMS
prasada-anna—the remnants of food; pana—getting; bhattacaryera—of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; ananda—pleasure; haila—there was; snana—bathing;
sandhya—morning duties; danta-dhavana—washing the teeth; yadyapi—al-
though; na—not; kaila—finished.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the Bhatticarya had not even washed his mouth, nor had he
taken his bath nor finished his morning duties. Nonetheless, he was very
pleased to receive the prasada of Lord Jagannatha.
TEXT 224
চৈতন্ক-প্রসাদে মনের जव জাড্য (नन |
এই প্লোক পড়ি” खन्न ভক্ষণ করিল ॥ ২২৪ ॥


--- Page 328 ---
324 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
caitanya-prasade manera saba jadlya gela
ei sloka padi’ anna bhaksana karila
SYNONYMS
caitanya-prasade —by the mercy of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; manera—of
the mind; saba—all; jadya—dullness; gela—went away; ei Sloka—these verses;
padi’ —reciting; anna—remnants of food; bhaksana—eating; karila—did.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the dullness in the mind of
Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya was eradicated. After reciting the following two
verses, he ate the prasada offered to him.
TEXT 225
खक Ag fae বাপি নীতৎ বা দূরদেশতঃ ।
প্রাপ্তিমাত্রেণ ভোক্তব্যং নাত্র কালবিচারণা ॥ ২২৫ ॥
Suskarn paryusitanm vapi
nitarn va dara-desatah
prapti-matrena bhoktavyari
natra kala-vicarana
SYNONYMS
Suskam—dry; paryusitam—stale; va—or; api—although; nitam—brought;
va—or; ddra-desatah—from a distant country; prapti-matrena—only with the
receiving; bhoktavyam —to be eaten; na—not; atra—in this; kala-vicarana—con-
sideration of time or place.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya said: ‘ ‘One should eat the maha-prasada of the Lord im-
mediately upon receiving it, even though it is dried up, stale or brought from
a distant country. One should consider neither time nor place.
TEXT 226
न দেশনিয়মস্তত্র ন কালনিয়মস্তথ! |
প্রাপমন্নং छर শিষ্টৈর্ভোক্তব্যং হরিরব্রবীৎ ॥ ২২৬ ॥
na desa-niyamas tatra
na kala-niyamas tatha


--- Page 329 ---
Text 228] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 325
praptam annari drutam Sistair
bhoktavyari harir abravit
SYNONYMS
na—not; desa—of the country; niyamah—regulation; tatra—in that; na—not;
kala—of time; niyamah—regulation; tathi—so also; praptam—received; an-
nam—prasada; drutam—hastily; Sistaih—by gentlemen; bhoktavyam—to be
eaten; harih—the Lord; abravit—has said.
TRANSLATION
* ‘The prasada of Lord Krsna is to be eaten by gentlemen as soon as it is
received; there should be no hesitation. There are no regulative principles
concerning time and place. This is the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.” ^
PURPORT
These verses are quoted from the Padma Purana.
TEXT 227
দেখি” আনন্দিত হৈল মহাপ্রভুর मन |
প্রেমাবিষ্ট হঞা৷ প্রভু কৈল৷ আলিঙ্গন ॥ ২২৭ ॥
dekhi’ anandita haila mahaprabhura mana
premavista hana prabhu kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing this; dnandita—very much pleased; haila—was; maha-
prabhura—of 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mana—the mind; prema-avista—ab-
sorbed in the ecstasy of love of God; hafid—becoming; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kaila—did; alingana—embracing.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased to see this. He became ecstatic
in love of Godhead and embraced Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TEXT 228
তুইজনে ধরি” দু'হে করেন न्न |
প্রভু-ভূত্য তুঁহা স্পর্শে, ধৌহার ফুলে মন ॥ ২২৮ ॥


--- Page 330 ---
326 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
dui-jane dhari’ dunhe karena nartana
prabhu-bhrtya dunha sparse, donhara phule mana
SYNONYMS
dui-jane—both of them; dhari’—embracing; dunhe—both; karena—do; nar-
tana—dancing; prabhu-bhrtya—the master and the servant; dunha—both;
sparse—by touching each other; donhara—of both of them; phule —were ex-
cited; mana—minds.
TRANSLATION
The Lord and the servant embraced one another and began to dance.
Simply by touching each other, they became ecstatic.
TEXT 229
(शम-कन्े- रूः TT सानटन्त्‌ ভাসিলা।
(थमा विष्टे ₹ঞ। প্রভু কহিতে लागिल। ॥ ২২৯ ॥
sveda-kampa-asru dunhe anande bhasila
premavista hana prabhu kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
sveda—perspiration; kampa—trembling; asru—tears; durihe —both of them;
anande—in transcendental bliss; bhasila—floated; prema-avista—absorbed in
ecstatic love of Godhead; hafia—being; prabhu—the Lord; kahite—to speak;
lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
As they danced and embraced, spiritual symptoms manifested in their
bodies. They perspired, trembled and shed tears, and the Lord began to speak
in His ecstasy.
TEXT 230
“আজি fap অনায়াসে জিনিনদু लिङ्वन ।
আজি মু করিন্দু বৈকুণঞ্ঠ আরোহণ ॥ ২৩০ ॥
“aji muni andyase jininu tribhuvana
aji mudi karinu vaikuntha arohana


--- Page 331 ---
Text 231] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 327
SYNONYMS

gji—today; 7171-1; anayase—very easily; jininu—conquered; tri-bhuvana—
the three worlds; &ji—today; muni—I; karinu—did; vaikuntha—to the spiritual
world; arohana—ascending.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: “Today | have conquered the three worlds

very easily. Today | have ascended to the spiritual world.”
PURPORT

The goal of human perfection is stated here in brief. One has to surpass all the
planetary systems of the material universe, pierce through the covering of the uni-
verse and reach the spiritual world known as Vaikunthaloka. The Vaikunthalokas
are variegated spiritual planets situated in the Lord’s impersonal bodily effulgence,
known as the brahmajyoti. One may aspire to elevate himself to a heavenly
planet within the material world, such as the moon, the sun or Venus, but if one is
spiritually advanced in Krsna consciousness, he does not wish to remain within
the material universe, even in a higher planetary system. Rather, he prefers to
penetrate the covering of the universe and attain the spiritual world. He can then
be situated in one of the Vaikuntha planets there. However, the devotees under
the guidance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu aspire to reach the topmost spiritual
planet, known as Goloka Vrndavana, the residence of Lord न Krsna and His eter-
nal associates.

TEXT 231
আজি মোর পুর্ণ হৈল সর্ব অভিলাষ |
সার্ব্ভৌমের হৈল মহাপ্রসাদ্ে বিশ্বাস ॥ ২৬১ ॥
aji mora [00103 haila sarva abhilasa
sarvabhaumera haila maha-prasade visvasa
SYNONYMS

gji—today; mora—My; parpa—satisfied;  haila—became; sarva—all;
abhilasa—desires; sarvabhaumera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; haila—there
was; maha-prasade—in the remnants of the Lord's food; visvasa—faith.

TRANSLATION

Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: ‘I think that today all My desires have
been fulfilled because | see that Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya has acquired faith
in the maha-prasada of Lord Jagannatha.


--- Page 332 ---
328 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 232
আজি তুমি নিষ্কপটে হৈল। Fram |
কৃষ্ণ অ(জি নিষ্কপটে তোমা হৈল সদয় ॥ ২৩২ ॥
3// tumi niskapate haila krspasraya
krsna aji niskapate toma haila sadaya
SYNONYMS
aji—today; tumi—you; niskapate—without a doubt; hailai—have become;
krsna-asraya—under the shelter of Lord Krsna; krsma—Lord Krsna; &ji—today;
niskapate —without reservation; toma—unto you; haila—has become; sa-daya—
very merciful.
TRANSLATION
“Indeed, today you have undoubtedly taken shelter of the lotus feet of
Krsna, and Krsna, without reservation, has become very merciful toward you.
TEXT 233
আজি সে খণ্ডিল তোমার দেহাদি-বন্ধন।
আজি তুমি ছিন্ন কৈলে মায়ার वक्षन ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
3// se khandila tomara dehadi-bandhana
2/1 tumi chinna kaile mayara bandhana
SYNONYMS
dji—today; se—that; khandila—dismantled; tomara—your; deha-adi-
bandhana—material bondage due to the bodily concept of life; &ji—today;
tumi—you; chinna—cut to pieces; kaile—did; mayara—of illusory energy;
bandhana—the shackles.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Bhatticarya, today you have been released from material bondage
in the bodily conception of life; you have cut to pieces the shackles of the il-
lusory energy.
TEXT 234
আজি কুষ্ণপ্রাপ্তি-যোগ্য হৈল তোমার जन |
বেদ-ধর্ম FFE’ কৈলে প্রসাদ ভক্ষণ ॥” ২৩৪ ॥


--- Page 333 ---
Text 235] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 329
211 krspa-prapti-yogya haila tomara mana
veda-dharma langhi’ kaile prasada bhaksana”
SYNONYMS
aji—today; krsna-prapti—for attainment of the lotus feet of Krsna; yogya—fit;
haila—has become; tomara—your; mana—mind; veda—of the four Vedas; dhar-
ma—the principles; larighi’—surpassing; kaile—you have done; prasada—the
remnants of food offered to Krsna; bhaksana—eating.
TRANSLATION
“Today your mind has become fit to take shelter of the lotus feet of Krsna
because, surpassing the Vedic regulative principles, you have eaten the rem-
nants of food offered to the Lord.
TEXT 235
যেষাং স এষ ভগবান্‌ RATATAT
সর্বাত্মনাশ্রিতপদে। যদি নির্ব্যলীকম্‌ |
তে দুস্তরামতিতরস্তি চ দেবমায়াং
নৈষাৎ মমাহমি তিধীঃ শ্বশ্গালভক্ষেযে ॥ ২৩৭
১ও$3/ sa esa bhagavan dayayed anantah
sarvatmanasrita-pado yadi nirvyalikam
te dustaram atitaranti ca deva-mayam
naisar mamaham iti dhih $va-srgala-bhaksye
SYNONYMS
yesam—unto those who are fully surrendered souls; sah —He; esah—this;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dayayet—may show mercy;
anantah —the unlimited; sarva-atmana—fully, without reservation; asrita-padah —
those who have taken shelter of the Lord; yadi—if; nirvyalikam—without
duplicity; te—such persons; dustaram—insurmountable; atitaranti—surpass;
ca—also; deva-mayam—the illusory material energy; na—not; esam—this;
mama aham—*"my” and “I”; iti—such; dhih—intelligence; sva-srgala-bhaksye —in
the body, which is to be eaten by dogs and jackals.
TRANSLATION
““‘When a person without reservation takes shelter of the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the unlimited, merciful Lord bestows His
causeless mercy upon him. Thus one can pass over the insurmountable ocean


--- Page 334 ---
330 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
of nescience. Those whose intelligence is fixed in the bodily conception, who
think, “1 am this body,” are fit food for dogs and jackals. The Supreme Lord
never bestows His mercy upon such people.” ^“

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord never bestows His benediction upon those fixed in the

bodily conception. As Bhagavad-gita clearly states:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekarin saranarm vraja
ahah tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. | shall deliver you
from all sinful reaction. Do not fear” (Bg. 18.66)

In this verse that Caitanya Mahaprabhu has quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam
(2.7.42), the meaning of ऽ Krsna's statement is explained. Krsna bestowed His
causeless mercy upon Arjuna just to get him out of the bodily conception. This
was done at the very beginning of the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 2.13), where Krsna says, dehino ‘smin yatha dehe kaumarar yauvanam jara.
In this body, there is an owner, and one should not consider the body to be the
self. This is the first instruction to be assimilated by a devotee. If one is under the
bodily conception, he is unable to realize his true identity and engage in the lov-
ing devotional service of the Lord. Unless one comes to the transcendental posi-
tion, he cannot expect the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord, nor can he cross
over the vast ocean of material nescience. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(7.14): mam eva ye prapadyante mayam eta taranti te. Without surrendering
unto the lotus feet of Krsna, one cannot expect release from the clutches of maya,
the illusory energy. According to $Srimad-Bhagavatam, Mayavadi sannyasis who
falsely think of themselves as liberated from the clutches of maya are called
vimukta-maninah. Actually, they are not liberated, but they think that they have
become liberated and have become Narayana Himself. Although they have ap-
parently realized that they are not the material body but spirit soul, they none-
theless neglect the duty of the spirit soul, which is to render service to the
Supreme Soul. Therefore their intelligence remains unsanctified. Unless one’s in-
telligence is sanctified, he cannot apply it to understanding devotional service.
Devotional service begins when the mind, intelligence and ego are completely
purified. Mayavadi sannyasis do not purify their intelligence, mind and ego, and
consequently they cannot engage in the service of the Lord nor expect the cause-
less mercy of the Lord. Although they rise to a very high position by executing
severe austerities and penances, they still hover in the material world without the


--- Page 335 ---
Text 226] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 331
benediction of the lotus feet of the Lord. Sometimes they rise to the Brahman
effulgence, but because their minds are not completely purified, they must return
to material existence.

The karmis are fully under the bodily conception of life, and the jAanis, al-
though theoretically understanding that they are not the body, also have no infor-
mation about the lotus feet of the Lord because they overly stress impersonalism.
Consequently both karmis and janis are unfit for receiving the mercy of the Lord
and becoming devotees. Narottama dasa Thakura therefore says, jiana-kanda
karma-kanda, kevala visera bhanda: those who have taken to the process of kar-
ma-kanda (fruitive activity) and jiana-kanda (speculation on the science of tran-
scendence) have simply eaten from poisoned pots. They are condemned to
remain in material existence life after life until they take shelter of the lotus feet of
Krsna. This is confirmed in Srimad Bhagavad-gita:

62/10/2417) janmanam ante
jAdanavan marin prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto
Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is
very rare!” (Bg. 7.19)
TEXT 236
এত কহি' মহাপ্রভু AIBA নিজ-স্থানে |
সেই হৈতে ভট্টাচার্যের খণ্ডিল অভিমানে ॥ ২৩৬ ॥
eta 10371 mahaprabhu 3//3 nija-sthane
sei haite bhattacaryera khandila abhimane
SYNONYMS

eta kahi’—speaking in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
aila—returned; nija-sthane—to His own residence; sei haite—from that time;
bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; khandila—was dismantled;
abhimane —false pride.

TRANSLATION

After speaking to Siarvabhauma Bhatticarya in this way, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu returned to His residence. From that day on, the Bhattacarya was
free because his false pride had been dismantled.


--- Page 336 ---
332 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 237
চৈতদ্য-চরণ বিনে নাহি জানে साम |
ভক্তি विद्ध শাস্ত্রের আর না করে ব্যাখ্যান ॥ ২৩৭ ॥
caitanya-carana vine nahi jane ana
bhakti vinu $astrera ara na kare vyakhyana
SYNONYMS
caitanya-carana—the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya; vine—except; nahi—not;
jane —knows; ana—other; bhakti—devotional service; vinu—except; sastrera—
of the scripture; dra—any other; na—not; kare—does; vyakhyana—explanation.
TRANSLATION
From that day on, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya did not know anything but the
lotus feet of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and from that day he could explain
the revealed scriptures only in accordance with the process of devotional ser-
vice.
TEXT 238
গোপীনাথাচার্থ তীর বৈষ্ণবত। দেখিয়া ।
“হরি” =f বলি” ন।চে হাতে তালি দিয়া ॥ ২৩৮ ॥
gopinathacarya tarra vaispavata dekhiya
‘hari’ 10211“ bali’ nace hate tali diya
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-acarya—Copinatha Acarya, the brother-in-law of Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya; tanra—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; vaispavata—firm faith in
Vaisnavism; dekhiya—seeing; hari hari—the holy name of the Lord; bali’—say-
ing; nace—dances; hate tali diya—clapping his two hands.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was firmly fixed in the cult of Vaisnav-
ism, Gopinatha Acirya, his brother-in-law, began to dance, clap his hands and
chant, “Hari! Hari!”’
TEXT 239
আর দিন ভট্ট।চার্য আইলা দর্শনে |
জগন্নাথ না দেখি” আইলা প্রনুস্থানে ॥ ২৩৯॥


--- Page 337 ---
Text 241] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 333
ara dina bhattacarya aila darsane
jagannatha na dekhi’ aila prabhu-sthane
SYNONYMS
ara dina—the next day; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; aila—came;
darsane —to see Lord Jagannatha; jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; na dekhi’—with-
out seeing; &ili—came; prabhu-sthane—to the place of Lord ও Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The next day, the Bhattacarya went to visit the temple of Lord Jagannatha,
but before he reached the temple, he went to see Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 240
দণ্ডবছ করি” কৈল वषट विथ डि |
देक क्रिः কহে निक পূর্বর্মতি ॥ २8० ॥
dandavat kari’ (८2112 bahu-vidha stuti
dainya kari’ kahe nija parva-durmati
SYNONYMS
dandavat kari’—after offering obeisances by falling flat on the ground; kaila—
he did; bahu-vidha—various types of; stuti—prayers; dainya kari’—in great
humbleness; kahe—describes; nija—his personal; parva-durmati—previous bad
disposition.
TRANSLATION
When he met Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Bhatticarya fell down flat to
offer Him respects. After offering various prayers to Him, he spoke of his pre-
vious bad disposition with great humility.
TEXT 241
ভক্তিসাধন-শ্রেষ্ঠ শুনিতে হৈল मम |
প্রভু উপদেশ কৈল নাম-সংকীর্তন ॥ ২৪১ ॥
bhakti-sadhana-srestha sunite haila mana
prabhu upadesa kaila nama-sarikirtana


--- Page 338 ---
334 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
bhakti-sddhana—in the execution of devotional service; srestha—the most im-
portant item; Sunite—to hear; haila—it was; mana—the mind; prabhu—Lord Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; upadesa—advice; kaila—gave; nama-sankirtana—chant-
ing of the holy name of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Then the Bhattacarya asked Caitanya Mahaprabhu: “Which item is most
important in the execution of devotional service?” The Lord replied that the
most important item was the chanting of the holy name of the Lord.
PURPORT
There are nine items to be executed in devotional service. These are enumer-
ated in the following verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.32):
Sravaparn kirtanam ৮5000
smaranam pada-sevanam
arcanam vandanam dasyam
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
Hearing the glories of the Lord, chanting, remembering, serving the lotus feet of
the Lord, offering worship in the temple, offering prayers, becoming a servant of
the Lord, becoming the Lord's friend, and sarvatma-nivedana, offering oneself fully
at the lotus feet of the Lord —these are the nine devotional processes. In The Nec-
tar of Devotion, these are expanded into sixty-four items. When Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya asked the Lord which item was most important, $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu immediately answered that the most important item is the chanting
of the holy names of the Lord —Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. He then quoted the following
verse from the Brhan-naradiya Purana (Thirty-eighth Chapter, verse 126) to con-
firm His statement.
TEXT 242
হরেনাম হরেনাম হরেনামৈব (कवनम्‌ |
ক্লৌ নাস্ত্যেব নাস্ত্যেব নাস্ত্যেব গতিরন্যথা ॥ ২৪২ ॥
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha


--- Page 339 ---
Text 242] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 335
SYNONYMS

hareh nama—the holy name of the Lord Hari; hareh nama—the holy name of
the Lord Hari; hareh nama—the holy name of the Lord; eva—certainly;
kevalam —only; kalau —in this age of Kali; na asti—there is not; eva—certainly; na
asti—there is not; eva—certainly; na asti—there is not; eva—certainly; gatih—
means; anyatha—other.

TRANSLATION

^“ ‘In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of deliverance is the
chanting of the holy names of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” ^“

PURPORT

Because the people of this age are so fallen, they can simply chant the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra. In this way they can rid themselves of the bodily conception
of life and become eligible to engage in the Lord's devotional service. One cannot
engage in the devotional service of the Lord without being purified of all con-
tamination. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:

yesarh tv anta-gatar papam
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful ac-
tions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion
engage themselves in My service with determination.” (Bg. 7.28) Sometimes
people are surprised to see young men and women take so seriously to the Krsna
consciousness movement. By giving up sinful activity —illicit sex, meat eating, in-
toxication and gambling—and strictly following the injunctions given by the
spiritual master, they have become purified of all contamination. They can
therefore fully engage in the devotional service of the Lord.

In this age of Kali, hari-kirtanais very, very important. The importance of chant-
ing the holy name of the Lord is stated in the following verses from Srimad-
Bhagavatam:

kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
asti hy eko mahan gunah
kirtanad eva krsnasya
mukta-sanigah param vrajet


--- Page 340 ---
336 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
krte yad dhyayato visnum
tretayam yajato makhaih
dvapare paricarydyam
kalau tad dhari-kirtanat
“The most important factor in this age of Kali, which is an ocean of faults, is that
one can be free from all contamination and become eligible to enter the kingdom
of God simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. The self-realization that was
achieved in the Satya millennium by meditation, in the Treta millennium by the
performance of different sacrifices, and in the Dvapara millennium by worship of
Lord Krsna can be achieved in the age of Kali simply by chanting the holy names,
Hare Krsna!” (Bhag. 12.3.51-52)
TEXT 243
এই প্লোকের অর্থ শুনাইল করিয়৷ বিস্তার ।
শুনি ভট্টাচার্য-মনে হৈল চমৎকার ॥ ২৪৩ ॥
ei slokera artha sunaila kariya vistara
Suni’ bhattacarya-mane haila camatkara
SYNONYMS
ei slokera—of this verse; artha—the meaning; sunaila—made hear; kariya—
doing; vistdra—extensive description; suni’—hearing; bhattacarya—of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; mane—in the mind; haila—there was; camatkara—
wonder.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very elaborately explained the harer nama verse
of the Brhan-naradiya Purana, and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was struck with
wonder to hear His explanation.
TEXT 244
গোপীনাধাচার্য বলে, “আমি পূর্বে যে কহিল।
শুন, ভট্ট।চার্য, তোমার দেই ত' হইল I” ২৪৪ ॥
gopinathacarya 8916, — ‘ami parve ye kahila
Suna, bhattacarya, tomara sei ta’ ha-ila’
SYNONYMS
gopinatha-acarya—of the name 0০901178073 Acarya; bale—says; 2001-1;
parve —previously; ye—what; kahila—said; suna—hear; bhattacarya—my dear
Bhattacarya; tomara—your; sei—that; ta’—indeed; ha-ila—has happened.


--- Page 341 ---
Text 246] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya 337
TRANSLATION
Gopinitha Acirya reminded Sirvabhauma Bhatticirya: “My dear Bhat-
tacarya, what | foretold to you has now taken place.”
PURPORT
Previously Gopinatha Acarya had informed Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya that
when he would be blessed by the Lord, he would thoroughly understand the
transcendental process of devotional service. This prediction was now fulfilled.
The Bhattacarya was fully converted to the cult of Vaisnavism, and he was follow-
ing the principles automatically, without being pressured. In Bhagavad-gita (2.40)
it is therefore said, svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat: simply by
performing a little devotional service, one can escape the greatest danger. Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya had been in the greatest danger because he had adhered
to Mayavada philosophy. Somehow or other he came into contact with Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and became a perfect devotee. In this way he was saved
from the great falldown of impersonalism.
TEXT 245
ভট্ট।চার্য কহে ভারে कत्नि' নমস্কারে |
তোমার সম্বদ্ধে প্রভু কৃপা বকৈল মোরে ॥ ২৪৫ ॥
bhattacarya kahe tanre kari’ namaskare
tomara sambandhe prabhu krpa kaila more
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya kahe —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied; tarre —unto Gopinatha
Acarya; kari’—doing; namaskare —obeisances; tomdra sambandhe —on account
of your relationship; prabhu—$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpi—mercy; kaila—
showed; more—unto me.
TRANSLATION
Offering his obeisances to Gopinitha Acirya, the Bhatticirya said:
‘‘Because | am related to you and you are a devotee, by your mercy the Lord
has shown mercy to me.
TEXT 246
তুমি-_মহাতভাগবত, আমি -_তর্ক-অস্ধে |
প্রভু FH কৈল মোরে তোমার সম্বন্ধে ॥ ২৪৬ ॥
tumi——mahabhagavata, ami—tarka-andhe
prabhu krpa kaila more tomara sambandhe


--- Page 342 ---
338 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; maha-bhagavata—a first-class devotee; 2701-1; tarka-andhe—in
the darkness of logical arguments; prabhu—the Lord; krpa—mercy; kaila—
showed; more—unto me; tomara—your; sambandhe—by the relationship.
TRANSLATION
“You are a first-class devotee, whereas | am in the darkness of logical argu-
ments. Because of your relationship with the Lord, the Lord has bestowed His
benediction upon me.”
TEXT 247
বিনয় শুনি” তুষ্ট্যে প্রভু কৈল আলিঙ্গন |
কহিল,- যাঞ। করহ ঈশ্বর দরশন ॥ ২৪৭ ॥
vinaya suni’ tustye prabhu kaila alingana
kahila,— yana karaha isvara darasana
SYNONYMS
vinaya suni’—upon hearing this humbleness of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
tustye—in satisfaction; prabhu—the Lord; kaila—did; alingana—embracing;
kahila—said; yana—going; karaha—do; isvara darasana—visiting the temple of
Lord Jagannatha.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased with this humble statement.
After embracing the Bhattacarya, He said: ‘Now go see Lord Jagannatha in the
temple.”
TEXT 248
জগদানম্দ দামোদর, তুই সঙ্গে लयभ |
ঘরে আইল ভট্টাচায atl CAT ॥ ২৪৮ ॥
jagadananda damodara, — dui sarige lana
ghare aila bhattacarya jagannatha dekhiya
SYNONYMS
jagadananda—of the name )Jagadananda; damodara—of the name Damodara;
dui—two persons; sarige—with him; lafa—taking; ghare—to his home; aila—
returned; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha;
dekhiya—seeing in the temple.


--- Page 343 ---
Text 2501 The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 339
TRANSLATION
After visiting the temple of Lord Jagannatha, Sarvabhauma Bhattaciarya
returned home with Jagadananda and Damodara.
TEXT 249
উত্তম উত্তম প্রসাদ বছত আনিলা |
নিজবিপ্র-হাতে তুই জন৷ সঙ্গে দিলা ॥ ২০৯ ॥
uttama uttama prasada bahuta anila
nija-vipra-hate dui jana sange dila
SYNONYMS
uttama uttama—very first-class; prasada—remnants of food offered to Jagan-
natha; bahuta—in great quantity; anilai—brought; nija-vipra—of his own
brahmana servant; hate—in the hand; dui—two; janda—persons; sarige—with
him; dila—gave.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya brought large quantities of excellent food remnants
blessed by Lord Jagannatha. All this prasida was given to his own braihmana
servant, along with Jagadananda and Damodara.
TEXT 250
নিজ কৃত দুই (चक BE তালপাতে |
“প্রভুকে = বলি” দিল জগদানজন্দ-হাতে ॥ ২৫০ ॥
nija krta dui sloka likhiya tala-pate
‘prabhuke diha’ bali’ dila jagadananda-hate
SYNONYMS
nija—by him; krta—composed; dui—two; sloka—verses; likhiya—writing;
tala-pate—on a leaf of a palm tree; prabhuke diha—give to Lord ৩1 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bali’—saying this; dila—gave it; jagadananda-hate —in the hands of
Jagadananda.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya then composed two verses on the leaf of a palm
tree. Giving the palm leaf to Jagadananda Prabhu, he requested him to deliver
it to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 344 ---
340 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 251
व्यद्ध-न्डाटन SIRE দু'হে প্রসাদ-পত্রী नयग |
IFW দত্ত পত্রী নিল তার হাতে পাঞ। ॥ ২৫১ ॥
prabhu-sthane 3//3 dunhe prasada-patri laa
mukunda datta patri nila tara hate pana
SYNONYMS
prabhu-sthine—to the place where গা Caitanya Mahaprabhu was residing;
aila—went back; dunhe—both Jagadananda and Damodara; prasida—the rem-
nants of food; patri—the leaf of a palm tree; laiida—taking; mukunda datta—of
the name Mukunda Datta; patri—the leaf of a palm tree; nila—took; tara—of
Jagadananda; hate —in the hand; pana—receiving.
TRANSLATION
Jagadinanda and Damodara then returned to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
bringing Him both the prasida and the palm leaf on which the verses were
composed. But Mukunda Datta took the palm leaf from the hands of Jagada-
nanda before he could deliver it to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 252
দুই শ্লোক বাহির-ভিতে ffm রাখিল।
তবে FARIA পত্রী প্রভুকে লঞ।৷ দিল ॥ ২৫২ ॥
dui sloka bahira-bhite likhiya rakhila
tabe jagadananda patri prabhuke 120व dila
SYNONYMS
dui—two; sloka—verses; bahira—outside; bhite—on the wall; likhiya—writ-
ing; rakhila—kept; tabe —thereafter; jagadananda—J)agadananda Prabhu; patri—
the palm leaf; prabhuke—to the Lord; laiida—taking; dila—delivered.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda Datta then copied the two verses on the wall outside the room.
After this, Jagadananda took the palm leaf from Mukunda Datta and delivered
it to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 345 ---
Text 254] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 341

TEXT 253

প্রভু শ্লোক পড়ি” পত্র ছিণ্ডিয়৷া ফেলিল ।
ভিত্ত্যে দেখি” ভক্ত সব শ্লোক কণ্ঠে কৈল ॥ ২৫৩ ॥
prabhu $loka padi’ patra chindiya phelila
bhittye dekhi’ bhakta saba sloka kanthe kaila
SYNONYMS
prabhu—the Lord; $loka—verses; padi’—reading; patra—the palm leaf; chin-
diya —tearing to pieces; phelila—threw; bhittye—on the outside wall; dekhi’—
seeing; bhakta—the devotees; saba—all; sloka—verses; kanpthe—within the
neck; kaila—kept.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu read the two verses, He immediately
tore up the palm leaf. However, all the devotees read these verses on the out-
side wall, and they all kept them within their hearts. The verses read as
follows.

TEXT 254
বৈরাগ্য-বিদ্যা-নিজ-ভক্তিযোগ-শিক্ষার্থমেকঃ পুরুষঃ পুরাণঃ।
শ্রীরুষ্ণচৈতন্যশরীরধারী কপাস্বুধিযস্তমহংপ্রপছ্যে ॥ ২৫৪ ॥

vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga-
Siksartham ekah purusah puranah
$ri-krspa-caitanya-sarira-dhari
krpambudhir yas tam aham prapadye
SYNONYMS
vairagya—detachment from everything that does not help develop Krsna con-
sciousness; vidya—knowledge; nija—own; bhakti-yoga—devotional service;
Siksa-artham —just to instruct; ekah —the single person; purusah—the Supreme
Person; puranah—very old, or eternal; S$ri-krsna-caitanya—of Lord ऽ Krsna
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sarira-dhari—accepting the body; krpa-ambudhih—the
ocean of transcendental mercy; yah—who; tam—unto Him; aham—I; pra-
padye—surrender.
TRANSLATION
‘Let me take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, $ri Krsna, who
has descended in the form of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to teach us real


--- Page 346 ---
342 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
knowledge, His devotional service and detachment from whatever does not
foster Krsna consciousness. He has descended because He is an ocean of tran-
scendental mercy. Let me surrender unto His lotus feet.
PURPORT
This verse and the following verse are included in the Caitanya-candrodaya-
nataka (6.74), by ঠা Kavi-karnapura.
TEXT 255
কালাল্পষ্টং ভক্তিযোগং fase चः
প্রাছুঙ্কতুৎ কুষ্ণচৈতন্যনামা |
আবিভূতন্তম্য পাদারবিন্দে
গাঢ়ৎ গাঢ়ৎ লীয়তাং চিত্তভৃঙ্গঃ ॥ ২৫৫ ॥
kalan nastarh bhakti-yogam nijarh yah
praduskarturn krspa-caitanya-nama
avirbhatas tasya padaravinde
gadharih gadhari liyatar citta-bhringah
SYNONYMS
kalat—from misuse of material propensities and attachment to fruitive activities
and speculative knowledge over the course of time; nastam—destroyed; bhakti-
yogam —the science of devotional service; nijam—which is applicable to Him
only; yah—one who; praduskartum—to revive; krspa-caitanya-nama—named
Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu; avirbhatah—who has appeared; tasya—His;
pada-aravinde—in the lotus feet; gadham gadham—very deeply; liyatam—let
it be merged; citta-bhrngah —my consciousness, like a honeybee.
TRANSLATION
“Let my consciousness, which is like a honeybee, take shelter of the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has just now appeared as Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu to teach the ancient system of devotional service
to Himself. This system had almost been lost due to the influence of time.”
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata


--- Page 347 ---
Text 256] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 343
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of
Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time | descend Myself!”
(Bg. 4.7)

This is also the case with Caitanya Mahaprabhu's appearance. ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu appeared in this world as a disguised incarnation of Krsna, but His
appearance is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Mahabharata and other Vedic
scriptures. He appeared to teach the fallen souls in this material world, for in this
age of Kali almost everyone has become attached to fruitive and ritualistic ac-
tivities and mental speculation. Consequently there was a great need to revive
the system of devotional service. The Lord Himself personally came down dis-
guised as a devotee so that the fallen populace might take advantage of the Lord's
example.

At the conclusion of Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsna advised complete surrender
unto Him, promising all protection to His devotee. Unfortunately, people are so
fallen that they cannot accept the instructions of Lord Krsna; therefore Krsna
returned with the same mission, but He executed it in a different way. As Lord Sn
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He ordered us to surrender unto Him-
self, but as Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He taught us how to surrender to Krsna.
Therefore He is praised by the Gosvamis: namo maha-vadanyaya krsna-prema-
pradaye te. Lord ऽन Krsna is certainly the Personality of Godhead, but He is not as
magnanimous as ঠা Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord Krsna simply gave orders for one
to become His devotee (man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah), but ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu actually taught the process of Krsna consciousness. If one wants to
become a devotee of Krsna, he must first take shelter of the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, following in the footsteps of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
and other exalted devotees.

TEXT 256
এই দুই শ্লোক - ভক্তকণ্চে রত্নহার |
সার্বভৌমের क छ খোষে ঢক্কাবাত্যকার ॥ ২৫৬ ॥
ei dui $sloka——bhakta-kanthe ratna-hara
sarvabhaumera kirti ghose dhakka-vadyakara
SYNONYMS

ei dui sloka—these two verses; bhakta-kanthe —on the necks of the devotees;
ratna-hara—pearl necklaces; sarvabhaumera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
kirti—reputation; ghose—declare; dhakka—of a drum; vadya—of the sound;
akara—in the form.


--- Page 348 ---
344 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
These two verses composed by Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya will always
declare his name and fame as loudly as a pounding drum because they have
become pearl necklaces around the necks of all devotees.
TEXT 257
সার্বভৌম হৈলা প্রভুর ভক্ত একতান |
মহাপ্রভুর সেবা-বিনা নাহি জ্ঞানে আন ॥ ২৫৭ ॥
sarvabhauma haila prabhura bhakta ekatana
mahaprabhura seva-vina nahi jane ana
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; haila—became; prabhura—of the
Lord; bhakta—a devotee; ekatana—without deviation; maha-prabhura—of Lord
ण Caitanya Mahaprabhu; seva—service; vina—except; nahi—not; jine—
knows; dna—anything else.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya became an unalloyed devotee of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; he did not know anything but the service of the Lord.
TEXT 258
“জীকুষ্চৈতন্ত৷ শচীসূত গুণধাম”।
এই ধ্যান, এই জপ, লয় এই নাম ॥ २०४ ॥
‘sri-krsna-caitanya saci-sata guna-dhama’
ei dhyana, ei japa, laya ei nama
SYNONYMS
$ri-krspa-caitanya—Lord $11 Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu; saci-sita—the son of
mother Sac; guna-dhama—the reservoir of all good qualities; ei—this; dhyana—
meditation; ei—this; japa—chanting; laya—he takes; ei—this; nama—holy
name.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya always chanted the holy name of $ri Krsna Caitanya, son of
mother §ग्ल and reservoir of all good qualities. Indeed, chanting the holy
names became his meditation.


--- Page 349 ---
Text 261] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 345
TEXT 259
একদিন সার্বভৌম প্রভু-আগে আইলা |
নমস্কার করি” শ্লোক পড়িতে লাগিলা ॥ ২৫৯ ॥
eka-dina sarvabhauma prabhu-age aila
namaskara kari’ sloka padite lagila
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prabhu-age —in
front of Lord ঠা Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dila—came; namaskara kari’—after offer-
ing obeisances; $loka—a verse; padite lagila—began to recite.
TRANSLATION
One day Sarvabhauma Bhattiacarya came before Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and,
offering obeisances, began to recite a verse.
TEXT 260
ভাগবতের “खन्तखट कन्न (दीक পড়িলা |
শ্লোক-শেষে দুই অক্ষর-পাঠ कित्र डेन ॥ ২৬০ ॥
bhagavatera ‘brahma-stave’ra sloka padila
$loka-sese dui aksara-patha phiraila
SYNONYMS
bhagavatera—from Srimad-Bhagavatam; brahma-stavera—of the prayers of
Lord Brahma; sloka—a verse; padila—recited; $loka-sese —at the end of the
verse; dui aksara—of two syllables; patha—the reading; phiraila—changed.
TRANSLATION
He began to quote one of Lord Brahma’s prayers from $Srimad-Bhagavatam,
but he changed two syllables at the end of the verse.
TEXT 261
তত্তেহলুকম্পাং স্থসমীক্ষমাণে। ङक) न এবাস্মকৃতং বিপাকম্‌।
হৃদ্বাথবপুডিবিদধন্নমন্ত্রে জীবেত ८य। ভক্তিপদে म দায়ভাক্‌॥


--- Page 350 ---
346 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
tat te ‘nukamparn susamiksamano
bhudjana evatma-krtari vipakam
hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jiveta yo bhakti-pade sa daya-bhak
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; te—Your; anukampam—compassion; su-samiksamanah—hop-
ing for; bhufjanah—enduring; eva—certainly; atma-krtam—done by himself;
vipakam—fruitive results; hrt—with the heart; vak—words; vapurbhih—and
body; vidadhan—offering; namah —obeisances; te—unto You; jiveta—may live;
yah—anyone who; bhakti-pade —in devotional service; sah—he; daya-bhak—a
bona fide candidate.
TRANSLATION
[The verse read:] “One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all
kinds of adverse conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engages
always in Your devotional service with his mind, words and body, and who al-
ways offers obeisances unto You is certainly a bona fide candidate for becom-
ing Your unalloyed devotee.”
PURPORT
When reading this verse from S$rimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.8), Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya changed the original reading from mukti-pade to bhakti-pade. Mukti
means liberation and merging into the impersonal Brahman effulgence. Bhakti
means rendering transcendental service unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Because of having developed pure devotional service, the Bhattacarya did
not like the word mukti-pade, which refers to the impersonal Brahman feature of
the Lord. However, he was not authorized to change a word in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will explain. Although the Bhattacarya
changed the word in his devotional ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not ap-
prove of it.
TEXT 262
শ্রভু কহে, “মুক্তিপদে”- ইহা পাঠ হয়।
“ভক্তিপদে” কেনে পড়, কি তোমার আশয় ॥ ২৬২ ॥
prabhu kahe, 77000-0906---103 patha haya
‘bhakti-pade’ kene pada, ki tomara asaya
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —the Lord said; mukti-pade—the word “mukti-pade”; iha—this;
patha—the reading; haya—is; bhakti-pade — “bhakti-pade”; kene —why; pada—
you read; ki—what; tomara—your; dsaya—intention.


--- Page 351 ---
Text 263] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 347
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately pointed out: “In that verse the word
is ‘mukti-pade,’ but you have changed it to ‘bhakti-pade.’ What is your inten-
tion?”
TEXT 263
ভট্টাচার্য কহে,-_“ভক্তি'-সম নহে মুক্তি-ফল ।
ভগবস্তক্তিবিমুখের হয় দণ্ড কেবল ॥ ২৬৩ ॥
bhattacarya kahe, — ‘bhakti’-sama nahe mukti-phala
bhagavad-bhakti-vimukhera haya danda kevala
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kahe—said; bhakti—devotional ser-
vice; sama—equal to; nahe—not; mukti—of liberation; phala—the result;
bhagavat-bhakti—to the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; vimukhera—of one who is averse to; haya—it is; danda—the punishment;
kevala—only.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya replied: “The awakening of pure love of God-
head, which is the result of devotional service, far surpasses liberation from
material bondage. For those averse to devotional service, merging into the
Brahman effulgence is a kind of punishment.”
PURPORT
In the Brahmanga Purana it is said:
siddha-lokas tu tamasah
pare yatra vasanti hi
siddha brahma-sukhe magna
daityas ca harina hatah
“In Siddhaloka [Brahmaloka] there live two kinds of living entities —those who are
killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead due to their having been demons in
their previous lives and those who are very fond of enjoying the impersonal
effulgence of the Lord!” The word tamasah means “the coverings of the universe.”
Layers of material elements cover the universe, and outside these coverings is the
impersonal Brahman effulgence. If one is destined to remain in the Lord's imper-
sonal effulgence, he misses the opportunity to render service to the Personality of


--- Page 352 ---
348 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
Codhead. Therefore devotees consider remaining in the impersonal Brahman
effulgence a kind of punishment. Sometimes devotees think of merging into the
Brahman effulgence, and consequently they are promoted to Siddhaloka. Because
of their impersonal understanding, they are actually punished. Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya continues to explain the distinction between mukti-pada and bhakti-pada
in the following verses.
TEXTS 264-265

কৃষ্ণের বিগ্রহ যেই সত্য নাহি मोटन |

যেই নিন্দা-যুদ্ধাদিক করে Sa সনে ॥ ২৬৪ ॥

সেই দুইর দণ্ড হয়-_“ত্রহ্মসাযুজ্য-মুস্তি” |

তার মুক্তি ফল নহে, যেই করে ভক্তি ॥ ২৬৫ ॥

krsnera vigraha yei satya nahi mane

yei ninda-yuddhadika kare tarra sane

sei duira danda haya— ‘brahma-sayujya-mukti’

tara mukti phala nahe, yei kare bhakti

SYNONYMS
krspera—of Lord Sri Krsna; vigraha—the transcendental form; yei—anyone
who; satya—as truth; nahi—not; mane —accepts; yei—anyone who; ninda—
blaspheming; yuddha-adika—fighting and so forth; kare —does; (012 sane—with
Him, Sri Krsna; sei—these; duira—of the two; danda haya—there is punishment;
brahma-sayujya-mukti—merging into the Brahman effulgence; tara—of him;
mukti—such liberation; phala—the result; nahe—not; yei—who; kare—exe-
cutes; bhakti —devotional service.
TRANSLATION
The Bhatticiarya continued: “The impersonalists, who do not accept the
transcendental form of Lord ওর Krsna, and the demons, who are always
engaged in blaspheming and fighting with Him, are punished by being
merged into the Brahman effulgence. But that does not happen to the person
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord.
TEXT 266
যত্যপলি সে মুক্তি: হয় পঞ্চ-পরকার ।
সালোক্য-সামীপ্য-সাকরূপ্য-সাষ্টি-সাযুজ্য অআর॥২৬৬॥


--- Page 353 ---
Text 267] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 349
yadyapi se mukti haya pafca-parakara
salokya-samipya-sarapya-sarsti-sayujya ara

SYNONYMS

yadyapi—although; se —that; mukti—liberation; haya—is; pafica-parakara—of
five different varieties; salokya—of the name salokya; samipya—of the name
samipya; sardpya—of the name sanipya; sarsti—of the name sarsti; sayujya—of
the name sayujya; ara—and.

TRANSLATION

“There are five kinds of liberation: silokya, samipya, sarupya, sarsti and

sayujya.
PURPORT

Salokya means that after material liberation one is promoted to the planet
where the Supreme Personality of Godhead resides. Samipya means remaining an
associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sardpya means attaining a four-
handed form exactly like that of the Lord. Sarsti means attaining opulences like
those of the Supreme Lord, and sayujya means merging into the Brahman
effulgence of the Lord. These are the five types of liberation.

TEXT 267
“সালোক্যাদি' চারি যদি হয় সেবা-দ্বার ।
তবু কদাচিৎ ভক্ত করে অঙ্গীকার ॥ ২৬৭ ॥
‘salokyadi’ cari yadi haya seva-dvara
tabu kadacit bhakta kare angikara
SYNONYMS

salokya-adi—beginning with salokya; cari—four kinds of liberation; yadi—if;
haya—are; seva-dvara—a means of rendering service to the Lord; tabu —still;
kadacit—occasionally; bhakta—a pure devotee; kare—makes; arigikara—accep-
tance.

TRANSLATION

“If there is a chance to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a pure
devotee sometimes accepts the silokya, sariipya, samipya or sarsti forms of
liberation, but never sayujya.


--- Page 354 ---
350 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TEXT 268
“সাযুজ্য' শুনিতে ভক্তের হয় ঘ্বণা-ভয় |
নরক বাষ্ছয়ে, তবু সাযুজ্য না লয় ॥ ২৬৮ ॥
‘sdyujya’ sunite bhaktera haya ghrna-bhaya
naraka varichaye, tabu sayujya na laya
SYNONYMS
sayujya—Iliberation by merging into the effulgence; sSunite—even to hear;
bhaktera—of the devotee; haya—there is; ghrna—hatred; bhaya—fear; naraka—
a hellish condition of life; vafichaye—he desires; tabu —still; sayujya—merging
into the effulgence of the Lord; na laya—never accepts.
TRANSLATION
“A pure devotee does not like even to hear about sayujya-mukti, which in-
spires him with fear and hatred. Indeed, the pure devotee would rather go to
hell than merge into the effulgence of the Lord.”
PURPORT
Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati has sung: kaivalyam narakayate. The imper-
sonalist’s conception of becoming one with the effulgence of the Lord is exactly
like hell. Therefore, of the five types of liberation, the first four (salokya, samipya,
sarapya and sarsti) are not so undesirable because they can be avenues of service
to the Lord. Nonetheless, a pure devotee of Lord Krsna rejects even these types of
liberation; he only aspires to serve Krsna birth after birth. He is not very interested
in stopping the repetition of birth, for he simply desires to serve the Lord, even in
hellish circumstances. Consequently the pure devotee hates and fears sayujya-
mukti, merging into the effulgence of the Lord. This merging is due to an offense
committed against the transcendental loving service of the Lord, and therefore
it is not at all desirable for a pure devotee.
TEXT 269
Cw, ঈশ্বরে जायूख शरदे ত” প্রকার |
THATS} হৈতে ঈশ্বর-সাযুজ্জ্য ধিক্কার ॥ ২৬৯ ॥
brahme, isvare sayujya dui ta’ prakara
brahma-sayujya haite i$vara-sayujya dhikkara


--- Page 355 ---
Text 269] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 351
SYNONYMS

brahme —in the Brahman effulgence; i$vare —in the body of the Lord; sayu-
jya—merging; dui—two; ta’—indeed; prakara—varieties; brahma-sayujya—
merging into the Brahman effulgence; haite—than; isvara-sayujya—merging into
the body of the Lord; dhikkara—more abominable.

TRANSLATION

Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya continued: “There are two kinds of sayujya-muk-
ti: merging into the Brahman effulgence and merging into the personal body
of the Lord. Merging into the Lord’s body is even more abominable than
merging into His effulgence.”

PURPORT

According to the opinion of the Mayavadi Vedantists, the living entity's ulti-
mate success is to merge into the impersonal Brahman. The impersonal Brahman,
or bodily effulgence of the Supreme Lord, is known as Brahmaloka or Siddhaloka.
According to Brahma-sarnhita (5.40), yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti:
the material universes are generated from the bodily rays of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Yogis who follow the principles of Patadjali accept the per-
sonality of the Absolute Truth, but they want to merge into the transcendental
body of the Supreme Lord. That is their desire. Being the greatest authority, the
Supreme Lord can easily allow many millions of living entities to merge into His
body. The origin of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan,
and His bodily effulgence is known as the brahmajyoti, Brahmaloka or Siddhaloka.
Thus Brahmaloka or Siddhaloka is a place where many sparklike living entities,
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are assembled. Because these living entities
do not wish to keep their individual existences, they are combined and allowed to
remain in Brahmaloka like so many atomic particles of sunshine emanating from
the sun.

The word siddha is very significant. Siddha refers to one who has realized the
Brahman effulgence and who has complete knowledge that the living entity is not
a material atom but a spiritual spark. This understanding is described in Bhagavad-
gita as brahma-bhata. In the conditioned state, the living entity is known as jiva-
bhiita, or “the living force within matter.” Brahma-bhata living entities are allowed
to stay in Brahmaloka or Siddhaloka, but unfortunately they sometimes again fall
into the material world because they are not engaged in devotional service. This is
supported by Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.32): ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa. These semi-liber-
ated souls falsely claim to be liberated, but unless one engages in devotional ser-
vice to the Lord, he is still materially contaminated. Therefore these living entities
have been described as vimukta-maninah, meaning that they falsely consider


--- Page 356 ---
352 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
themselves liberated although their intelligence is not yet purified. Although these
living entities undergo severe austerities to rise to the platform of Siddhaloka, they
cannot remain there perpetually, for they are bereft of dnanda (bliss). Even though
these living entities attain the brahma-bhata stage and realize the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead through His bodily effulgence, they nonetheless fall down
due to neglecting the Lord's service. They do not properly utilize whatever little
knowledge they have of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not attaining
ananda, or bliss, they come down to the material world to enjoy. This is certainly a
falldown for one who is actually liberated. The bhaktas consider such a falldown
equal to achieving a place in hell.

The followers of the Pataijali yoga system actually want to merge into the
body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This indicates that they do not
want to engage in His service despite their knowledge of Him, and thus their posi-
tion is even more abominable than that of those who want to merge into the
Lord's effulgence. These yogis meditate on the four-handed Visnu form of the
Lord in order to merge into His body. The Pataiijali system describes the form of
the Lord as klesa-karma-vipakasayair aparamrstah purusa-visesa iSvarah: “The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is a person who does not partake of a miserable
material life!” The yogis accept the eternity of the Supreme Person in their mantra,
sa parvesam api guruh kalanavac chedat: “Such a person is always supreme and is
not influenced by the element of time!” The followers of the Patafjali system
therefore accept the eternity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet, accord-
ing to them: purusartha-sanyanarih pratiprasavah kaivalyarn svarapa-pratistha va
citi-saktir iti. They believe that in the perfectional stage, the conception of purusa
is vanquished. According to their description: citi-saktir iti. They believe that
when one becomes perfect, he cannot remain a person. This yoga system is
therefore abominable because its final conception is impersonal. In the beginning,
these yogis accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they ultimately give
up this idea in order to become impersonal. They are most unfortunate because
although they have a personal conception of the Absolute Truth, they neglect to
render devotional service to the Lord and thus they fall down again into the mate-
rial world. This is supported by the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.32). Aruhya-krc-
chrepa param padam tatah patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah: due to
neglecting the lotus feet of the Lord, these yogis again fall down into the material
existence (patanty adhah). Consequently this path of yoga is more abominable
than the impersonalists’ path. This conclusion is also supported by Lord
Kapiladeva in the following verse from Srimad-8hagavatam (3.29.13).

TEXT 270
সালোক্য-সাষ্টি-সামীপ্য-সারপ্যৈকত্বমপুযুত |
দীয়মানং न গৃহুস্তি বিনা মৎং-সেবনং জনাঃ ॥ ২৭০ ॥


--- Page 357 ---
Text 272] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 353
salokya-sarsti-samipya-
samapyaikatvam apy uta
diyamanam na grhnanti
vina mat-sevanam janah
SYNONYMS
salokya—the liberation of living in the same planet as the Lord; sarsti—to have
opulence exactly like that of the Lord; samipya—to associate always with the
Lord; sardpya—to achieve a body like that of the Lord; ekatvam—to merge into
the body of the Lord; api—although; uta—it is said; diyamanam —being offered;
na—not; grhpanti—do accept; vina—without; mat—My; sevanam—service;
janah—the pure devotees.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya concluded: ‘ ‘Even though he is offered all kinds
of liberation, the pure devotee does not accept them. He is fully satisfied
engaging in the service of the Lord.” ^“
TEXT 271
AY ITT — “মুক্তিপদে”র আর অর্থ হয়।
মুক্তিপদ-শব্দে “সাক্ষাও ঈশ্বর” কহয় ॥ ২৭১ ॥
prabhu kahe, — ‘mukti-pade’ra ara artha haya
mukti-pada-sabde ‘saksat isvara’ kahaya
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —the Lord said; mukti-padera—of the term “mukti-pade”; ara—
another; artha—meaning; haya—there is; mukti-pada-sabde—by the word
“mukti-pada”; saksat—directly; isvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kahaya—is said.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied: “The word ‘mukti-pade’ has
another meaning. Mukti-pada directly refers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 272
মুক্তি পদে $17, সেই “মুক্তিপদ” হয়।
Forel নবম পদার্থ “মুক্তির” সমাশ্রয় ॥ ২৭২ ॥


--- Page 358 ---
354 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
mukti pade yanra, sei ‘mukti-pada’ haya
kimva navama padartha ‘muktira’ samasraya
SYNONYMS
mukti—liberation; pade—at the lotus feet; yarira—of whom; sei—such a per-
son; mukti-pada haya—is known as mukti-pada; kimva—or; navama—ninth;
pada-artha—subject matter; muktira—of liberation; samasraya—shelter.
TRANSLATION
“All kinds of liberation exist under the feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; therefore He is known as mukti-pada. According to another mean-
ing, mukti is the ninth subject, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
shelter of liberation.
PURPORT
Lord € Krsna is also known as Mukunda, or He who gives transcendental bliss
by offering all kinds of mukti. Srimad-Bhagavatam is divided into twelve cantos,
and in the Ninth Canto different kinds of mukti are described. But the Tenth Can-
to is the actual center of all discussions of mukti because the Personality of God-
head 57 Krsna, who is the tenth subject discussed in Srimad-Bhagavatam, is the
exclusive subject of the Tenth Canto. Since all types of muktis reside at the lotus
feet of इत Krsna, He may be called mukti-pada.
TEXT 273
দুই-অর্থে 'কুষ্ণ' কহি, কেনে পাঠ ফিরি ।
সার্বভৌম কহে,-__ও-প।ঠ কহিতে না পারি ॥ ২৭৩ ॥
dui-arthe ‘krspa’ kahi, kene patha phiri
sarvabhauma kahe, — o-patha kahite na pari
SYNONYMS
dui-arthe—by two interpretations; krspa—Lord Si Krsna; kahi—I| accept;
kene —why; patha—reading; phiri—changing; sarvabhauma kahe—Sarvabhauma
replied; o-patha—such a reading; kahite—to say; na—not; pari—am able.
TRANSLATION
“‘Since | can understand Krsna according to these two meanings,” Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said, “what point is there in changing the verse?” Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya replied: “| was not able to give that reading to the verse.


--- Page 359 ---
Text 276] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 355
TEXT 274
যতপি তোমার অর্থ এই শব্দে কয়।
তথাপি “আগ্লিয্য-দে।যে” কহন न যায় ॥ ২৭৪ ॥
yadyapi 1017078 artha ei sabde kaya
tathapi ‘aslisya-dose’ kahana na yaya
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; tomara—Your; artha—meaning; ei—this; sabde—by the
word; kaya—is said; tathapi—still; aslisya-dose—by the fault of ambiguity;
kahana—to say; na—not; yaya—possible.
TRANSLATION
“Although Your explanation is correct, it should not be used because there
is ambiguity in the word ‘mukti-pada’
TEXT 275
सशि “মুক্তি?-শব্দের হুয় পঞ্চ বৃত্তি ।
রূড়িবৃত্ত্যে কহে তবু 'সায়ুজে;” SASS ॥ ২৭৫ ॥
yadyapi ‘mukti’-sabdera haya parca vrtti
radhi-vrttye kahe tabu ‘sayujye’ pratiti
SYNONYMS
yadyapi —although; mukti —liberation; sabdera—of the word; haya—there is;
parica vrtti—five meanings; radhi-vrttye—by the chief or direct meaning; kahe —
it says; tabu—still; sdyujye—to become one with the Supreme; pratiti—the con-
ception.
TRANSLATION
“The word ‘mukti’ refers to five kinds of liberation. Usually its direct mean-
ing conveys the idea of becoming one with the Lord.
TEXT 276
মুত্তিমশব্দ কহিতে মনে হয় ঘ্বণা-ত্রাস।
ভক্তি-শব্দ কহিতে মনে হয় ত' উল্লাস ॥ ২৭৬ ॥


--- Page 360 ---
356 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
mukti-sabda kahite mane haya ghrna-trasa
bhakti-sabda kahite mane haya ta’ ullasa
SYNONYMS
mukti-sabda—the word mukti; kahite—by pronouncing; mane —in the mind;
haya—there is; ghrna—hatred; trasa—and fear; bhakti-sabda—the word bhakti;
kahite —to speak; mane—in the mind; haya—there is; ta’—indeed; ullasa—tran-
scendental joy.
TRANSLATION `
‘The very sound of the word ‘mukti’ immediately induces hate and fear, but
when we say the word ‘bhakti,’ we naturally feel transcendental bliss within
the mind.’
TEXT 277
শুনিয়া হাসেন প্রভু আনন্দিত-মনে।
ভট্টাচার্খে কৈল প্রভু ছৃড় আলিঙ্গনে ॥ २११ ॥
Suniya hasena prabhu anandita-mane
bhattacarye kaila prabhu drdha alingane
SYNONYMS
$uniya—hearing this explanation; hasena—laughs; prabhu—S$r Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; anandita-mane—with great pleasure in His mind; bhattacarye—
unto Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya; kaila—did; prabhu—the Lord; drdha—firm;
alingane —embracing.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this explanation, the Lord began to laugh and, with great
pleasure, immediately embraced Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya very firmly.
TEXT 278
CTE ভট্টাচার্য পড়ে পড়ায় মায়াবাদে |
তার এঁছে বাক্য স্ফুরে চৈতন্য-প্রসাদে ॥ ২৭৮ ॥
yei bhattacarya pade padaya mayavade
{2172 aiche vakya sphure caitanya-prasade
SYNONYMS
yei—that; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; pade—reads; paddaya—
teaches; mayavade—the philosophy of Mayavada impersonalism; tarira—his;


--- Page 361 ---
Text 280] The Liberation of Sirvabhauma Bhattacarya 357
aiche—such; vakya—explanation; sphure—manifested; caitanya-prasade—by
the mercy of Lord ऽत Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, that very person who was accustomed to reading and teaching
Mayavada philosophy was now even hating the word “mukti.’” This was
possible only by the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 279
লোহাকে যাবৎ স্পশি” (ङ्य নাহি कटन्न |
তাবৎ স্পর্শমণি কেহ চিনিতে না পারে ॥ ২৭৯ ॥
lohake yavat sparsi’ hema nahi kare
tavat sparsa-mani keha cinite na pare
SYNONYMS
lohake —iron; yavat—as long as; sparsi’—touching; hema—gold; nahi—not;
kare —transforms; tavat—until then; sparsa-mani—the touchstone; keha—some-
one; cinite—to recognize; na—not; pare —is able.
TRANSLATION
As long as it does not turn iron into gold by its touch, no one can recognize
an unknown stone to be a touchstone.
TEXT 280
ভট্টাচার্যের বৈষ্ণবত। দেখি” जर्वजन |
প্রভুকে জানিল- “সাক্ষাৎ लटजट्छनम्ननः ॥ ২৮০ ॥
bhattacaryera vaisnavata dekhi’ sarva-jana
prabhuke janila——'saksat vrajendra-nandana’
SYNONYMS
bhattacaryera—of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; vaisnavata—clear understanding
of Vaisnava philosophy; dekhi’—seeing; sarva-jana—all persons; prabhuke —Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; janila—knew; saksat—directly; vrajendra-nandana—
Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda.


--- Page 362 ---
358 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [{Madhya-lila, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing transcendental Vaisnavism in Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya,
everyone could understand that Lord Caitanya was none other than the son of
Nanda Maharaja, Krsna.
TEXT 281
কাশীমিশ্র-আদি যত লীলাচলবাসী |
শরণ লইল সবে প্রভু-পদে আসি” ॥ ২৮১ ॥
kasi-misra-adi yata nilacala-vasi
sarana la-ila sabe prabhu-pade asi’
SYNONYMS
kasi-misra—of the name Kasi Misra; adi—heading the list; yata—all; nilacala-
vasi—the residents of Jagannatha Puri; sarapna—shelter; la-ila—took; sabe —all;
prabhu-pade —to the lotus feet of the Lord; asi’—coming.
TRANSLATION
After this incident, all the inhabitants of Jagannatha Puri, headed by Kasi
Misra, came to take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 282
সেই जव কথা আগে করিব वर्मन |
সার্বভৌম করে CAE প্রভুর সেবন ॥ ২৮২ ॥
sei saba katha age kariba varpana
sarvabhauma kare yaiche prabhura sevana
SYNONYMS
sei saba—all these; katha—narrations; age —later; kariba—I shall make; var-
nana—description;  sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kare —does;
yaiche —as; prabhura—of the Lord; sevana—service.
TRANSLATION
Later I shall describe how Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya always engaged in the
service of the Lord.
TEXT 283
যৈছে পরিপাট্টা করে ভিক্ষা-নির্বাহুন।
বিস্তারিয়৷ আগে তাহা করিব বর্ণন ॥ ২৮৩ ॥


--- Page 363 ---
Texts 284-285] The Liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya 359
yaiche paripati kare bhiksa-nirvahana
vistariya age taha kariba varpana
SYNONYMS
yaiche—how; paripati—perfectly; kare—does; bhiksa—of offering alms; nir-
vahana—the execution; vistariya—in full detail; age—later; taha—that; kariba
varpana—I shall describe.
TRANSLATION
I shall also describe in full detail how Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya perfectly
rendered service to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by offering Him alms.
TEXTS 284-285
এই মহাপ্রভুর লীল৷- সার্বভৌম-মিলন।
ইহ যেই শ্রদ্ধা করি” করয়ে শ্রবণ ॥ ২৮৪ ॥
ভ্ঞান-কর্মপাশ হৈতে হয় বিমোচন |
অচিরে মিলয়ে তারে ese ॥ ২৮৫ ॥
ei mahaprabhura lila— sarvabhauma-milana
iha yei sraddha kari’ karaye sravana
jAdna-karma-pasa haite haya vimocana
acire milaye tanre caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
ei—this; mahaprabhura—of Lord ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 17/3--9501775; sar-
vabhauma-milana—meeting with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; iha—this; yei—any-
one who; sraddha—faith; kari’—having; karaye —does; sravana—hearing; jiiana-
karma—of speculation and fruitive activities; pasa—the net; haite—from; haya—
there is; vimocana—Iliberation; ৪0176 —very soon; milaye—meets; tanre—such a
devotee; caitanya-carana—the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya.
TRANSLATION
If one hears with faith and love these pastimes concerning Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s meeting with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, he very soon is freed
from the net of speculation and fruitive activity and attains the shelter of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s lotus feet.


--- Page 364 ---
360 ওঃ Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lili, Ch. 6
TEXT 286
জীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চেতন্তচরিতামৃত কহে কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ২৮৬ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvam;
pade —at the lotus feet; ydra—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritimrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of $ri Ripa and $ri Raghunitha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate $ri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta, Madhya-
112, Sixth Chapter, describing the liberation of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.


--- Page 365 ---
References

The statements of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta are all confirmed by standard
Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted jn this book
on the pages listed. Numerals in bold type refer the reader to Sri Caitanya-
caritamrta’s translations. Numerals in regular type are references to its
purports.
Aitareya Upanisad, 273
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya (Bhaktivinoda Thakura), 1,191,273
Anubhasya (Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati), 264
Bhagavad-gita, 30, 35, 37, 46, 48, 52, 68, 70, 128, 148, 158, 185, 233, 239,

240, 241, 263-264, 266, 268, 272,275,279, 281, 287, 288, 289, 290,
295, 296, 297, 301, 330, 331, 335, 337, 342-343, 351
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 36, 104, 198
Bhavisya Purana, 267
Brahmanda Purana, 347
Brahma-sambhita, 72, 233, 236, 272, 295, 351
Brahma-vaivarta Purana, 268
Brhan-naradiya Purana, 268, 351
Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (Kavi-karnapura), 271, 341-342
Caitanya-bhagavata, (Vrndavana dasa Thakura), 3, 5, 178, 179
Caitanya-caritamrta (Krsnadasa Kavirdja), 71, 245-246
Chandogya Upanisad, 275
Hari-bhakti-vilasa (Sanatana Gosvami), 26-27
Katha Upanisad, 238
361


--- Page 366 ---
362 ওরা Caitanya-caritamrta

Laghu-bhagavatamrta (Rapa Gosvami), 246

Mahabharata, 245, 249, 343

Mundaka Upanisad, 287, 296

Namastaka (Rapa Gosvami), 299

Padma Purana, 236, 276, 303, 324-325

Sarva-sarivadini (Jiva Gosvami), 265-266

Sik sastaka (Caitanya Mahaprabhu), 96

Skanda Purana, 178

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 41-42, 48, 64, 68-69, 72, 96, 123, 126, 148, 192, 230,
235, 243, 245, 247, 248-249, 251-255, 269, 274, 277-278, 329-330,
334, 335-336, 343, 346, 351, 352, 353

Susloka-sataka (Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya), 316

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 270, 273, 279, 280

Taittirlya Upanisad, 272, 273, 296

Tattva-sandarbha (Jiva Gosvami), 265

Ujjvala-nilamani (Rapa Gosvami), 199

Vedanta-sdtra, 272, 276, 288, 294-295

Visnu Purana, 280-283


--- Page 367 ---
~
Glossary

A
Abhiseka—the bathing ceremony of the Deity.
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by his own example.
Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva—Lord Caitanya’s “simultaneously one and different”

doctrine.

Ajita—the Supreme Lord who is unconquerable.
Amrta—nectar.
Anna—food grains.
Arca-marti—the form of the Lord made of material elements.
Arcana—Deity worship.
Arca-vigraha— See: Arca-mdrti.
Asutosa—Lord Siva who is very easily satisfied when one worships him.
Atma-nivedana—the devotional process of sacrificing everything for the Lord.
Atmaramas —those who are self-satisfied.
Avatara—an incarnation of the Lord who descends from the spiritual sky.
Avidya-sakti—material energy, or nescience.

B
Bahirmukha jana—a person influenced by the external energy.
Bhagavan —Krsna, who is full in six opulences.
Bhakti-yoga—devotional service to the Lord.
Bhava—manifestation of ecstatic symptoms in the body of a devotee.
Brahma-bhdta—the state of being freed from material contamination.
Brahmajyoti—the impersonal effulgence emanating from the body of Krsna.
Brahman —the all-pervading impersonal aspect of Krsna.
Brahmananda—the bliss derived from realizing the impersonal Brahman.
Brahmanas —the intelligent class of men.
Brahmanya-deva—the Supreme Lord of brahminical culture.

0
Channa-avatara—an incarnation in disguise.

D
Dadhi—yogurt.
Dana—charity.
Danda-bhanga-lila—the pastime of Lord Nityananda breaking the staff of Lord

Caitanya.
363


--- Page 368 ---
364 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta

Dandavats —offering obeisances by falling flat like a stick.

Dasya—the devotional process of serving the Lord as a friend.

Dhamayita—the stage exhibited by a devotee when only one or two transforma-

tions are slightly present and it is possible to conceal them.

Diksa—initiating a disciple with transcendental knowledge.

Dipta—the stage exhibited by a devotee when four of five ecstatic symptoms are
manifest.

Dugdha—milk.

Durga-sakti—the material energy.

Duskrti—a miscreant.

Dvija-bandhus —unworthy sons of the twice-born.

G

Gauda-mandala-bhami—the places in Bengal where Lord Caitanya stayed.

Ghrta—ghee.

Govardhana-dhari—Krsna, the lifter of Govardhana Hill.

(00103500395 —householders.

H

Hari-kirtana— See: Sankirtana.

Hladini sakti—the bliss portion of the Lord's spiritual potency.

Hrsike$a—a name of Krsna, the master of all senses.

Indra—the king of the heavenly planets.

J

Jadya—the ecstatic symptom of loss of memory.

Jiva-bhata—the living force within matter.

JAana—knowledge.

JAana-kanda—the division of the Vedas dealing with empirical speculation in pursuit

of truth.

JAani—one who is engaged in the cultivation of knowledge.

Jvalita—the stage exhibited by a devotee when more than two or three transcen-
dental transformations are manifest and it is possible to conceal them with
difficulty.

K
Kali-yuga—the age of quarrel in which we are now living.


--- Page 369 ---
Glossary 365
Kama—lust.
Karma—action performed according to scriptural regulations.
Karma-kanda—the division of the Vedas dealing with fruitive activities and their
reactions.
Kirtana—the devotional process of chanting.
Krodha—anger.
Krsna-viraha—the feeling of spiritual separation from Krsna.
Krsne matir astu —greeting of Vaisnava sannyasis meaning “Let your attention be on
Krsna.”
Ksira-cora—Lord Gopinatha the thief who stole the sweet rice.
Ksudha-trspa—hunger and thirst.
Karma—the tortoise incarnation of the Lord.
L
Lila-avatara—an incarnation of the Lord who performs a variety of activities without
making any special endeavor.
Lobha—greed.
M
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Maha-snana—a vast bath with ghee and water used to bathe the Deity.
Maha-vakya—transcendental sound vibration.
Matsarya—enviousness.
Matsya—the fish incarnation of the Lord.
Maya —illusion; an energy of Krsna’s which causes the living being to forget Him.
Mayadhisa—the Lord of all energy.
Mayavadis —impersonalists or voidists who believe that ultimately God is formless
and without personality.
Maya-vasa—subjected to the influence of the illusory energy.
Moha—illusion.
Magdha—a fool or rascal.
Mukti—liberation.

Mukti-pada—the Supreme Lord under whose feet exist all kinds of liberation.
Mukunda—the Lord who gives transcendental bliss by offering all kinds of mukti.
N
Namo nardayanaya—greeting of Mayavadi sannyasis meaning “| offer my obeisances

to Narayana.”
Nirvana—the cessation of all material activities.


--- Page 370 ---
366 इ Caitanya-caritamrta
Nitya-baddhas —eternally conditioned living beings.
Nitya-siddha-bhaktas —the eternally liberated associates of the Lord.
Nrsirhhadeva—the half-man, half-lion incarnation of the Lord.

0
Ornkara—the transcendental syllable which represents Krsna.

P
Pada-sevana—the devotional process of serving.
Pafica-gavya—five kinds of products of the cow used to bathe the Deity.
Paficamrta—five kinds of nectar used to bathe the Deity.
Paramaharinsa—the highest stage of the renounced order of life.
Paramatma—the Supersoul, the localized aspect of the Supreme Lord within the

heart of all living beings.
Parampara —the disciplic succession through which spiritual knowledge is transmit-
ted.

Parinama-vada—the theory of transformation in the creation of the universe.
Pathana—a brahmana’s duty to be conversant with the Vedic scriptures.
Prakrti—energy or nature.
Pranava— See: Ornkara.
Prasada—spiritualized foods offered to Krsna.
Pratibimba-vada—the worship of a form that is the reflection of a false material form.
Pratigraha—the duty of a brahmana to accept contributions from his followers.
Parpa—complete.
Purusa—person or enjoyer.

R
Rasa-lila—the group dancing of Krsna and His cowherd girlfriends in His Vindavana

pastimes.

9

Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the transcendental form of the Lord which is eternal, full of
knowledge and blissful.

Sad-aisvarya-parna—the Supreme Lord who is complete with six opulences.
Sahajiyas —pseudo-devotees with a mundane conception of Krsna's pastimes.
Salokya—the liberation of being promoted to the planet where the Lord resides.
Samipya—the liberation of becoming an associate of the Lord.
Sampradaya—disciplic succession through which spiritual knowledge is transmitted.
Samvit-sakti—the knowledge portion of the Lord's spiritual potency.


--- Page 371 ---
Glossary 367
Sandhini $akti—the eternity portion of the Lord's spiritual potency.
Sankirtana—congregational chanting of the glories of the Lord.
Sannyasa—the fourth order of spiritual life.
Sannyasa-danda—the staff carried by a sannyasi.
Sannyasis —those in the renounced order of life.
Sarsti—the liberation of attaining opulences like those of the Lord.
Sarapya—the liberation of attaining a four-handed form exactly like that of the Lord.
Sarvatma-nivedana— See: Atma-nivedana.
Sastra—revealed scripture.
Sayujya-mukti—merging into the Brahman effulgence of the Lord.
Seva-paja—Deity worship.
Siddha—one who has realized the Brahman effulgence.
Siva—the personality in charge of the mode of ignorance.
S$ravana—the devotional process of hearing.
Stri—women.
Saddipta—the manifestation in a devotee of all eight ecstatic symptoms multiplied a
thousand times and all visible at once.

Sadras—the laborer class of men.
Svadhyaya—the reading of Vedic literature.

T
Tamasah —the coverings of the universe.
Tattva—truth.
Triyuga—a name of Visnu meaning one who appears in only three yugas.

{1
Uddipta—the manifestation in a devotee of five, six or all eight ecstatic symptoms

simultaneously.

১4
Vaikali-bhoga—food offered to the Deity at the end of the day.
Vaikunthalokas —variegated spiritual planets situated in the brahmajyoti.
Vairagya—renunciation.
Vaispnava—a devotee of the Supreme Lord Visnu, or Krsna.
Vaisyas —people engaged in agriculture and commerce.
Vanas —forests.
Vandana—the devotional process of praying.
Varaha—the boar incarnation of the Lord.
Vedasraya nastikya-vada—agnosticism under the shelter of Vedic culture.


--- Page 372 ---
368 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Vijita-sad-guna—one who has conquered the six material qualities.
Visnoh smarana—the devotional process of remembering.
Vrajendra-nandana —Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja.
Vindavana—the site of Krsna's pastimes exhibited when He was present on earth
5,000 years ago.
Y
Yajana—the duty of a brahmana to assist others in performing ceremonies.
Yajana—the duty of a brahmana to perform Vedic rituals.
Yamaraja—the demigod who punishes sinful living beings after their deaths.
Yoga—Ilinking the consciousness of the living being with the Supreme Lord.
Yoga-maya—the eternal creative potency of the Lord.
Yuga-avataras —the incarnations of the Lord in each millennium who prescribe the
process of self-realization for that age.


--- Page 373 ---
Bengali Pronunciation Guide
BENGALI DIACRITICAL EQUIVALENTS AND PRONUNCIATION
Vowels
Tw: আঃ Bi ঈ: Bu উদ सखै
RH T গর ০ ॐ ai ॥ ০ ॐ au
2 m (anusvara) ॐ 1} ( candra-bindu) ९ h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutterals: ६.1 ka gq kha গা ga q gha 8 na
Palatals: Deca চু cha $F ja A jha <P 72
Cerebrals: ট ta 5 tha YG da छ dha न्‌ ja
Dentals: छक 18 থ tha @ da q dha ® na
Labials: of pa सफ pha न्तु ba प्छ bha (| ma
Semivowels: Yya Dra A la न्तु va
Sibilants: =f sa स्‌ sa H sa Rha
Vowel Symbols
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
~
ta fi चैः Su नप दद ২৮ Ge Tai ८ Yo ८१०५
For example: न्क ka f= ki কী ki ¥ ku कू ka (-) kr
क ki क्छ). दक kai क ko = kau
369


--- Page 374 ---
370
The letter a is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virama (৬) indicates that there is no final vowel. क्कू k
The letters above should be pronounced as follows:
a —like the ০ in hot; sometimes like the © in go; d —like the d indawn.
final a is usually silent. dh —like the dh in good-house.
a —like thea in far. n --like the n in graw.
i,T—like the ee in meet. t—as in ralk but with the tongue against the
u, u —like the u in rule. the teeth.
r —like the 77 in rim. th—as in hor-2ouse but with the tongue against
7 —like the ree in reed. the teeth.
€ —like the ai in pain; rarely like € in bet. d—as in dawn but with the tongue against the
ai —like the oi in boil. teeth.
০ —like the ০ in go. dh—as in good-house but with the tongue
au —like the ow in owl. against the teeth.
th —(anusvara) like the ng in song. n—as in nor but with the tongue against the
h —(visarga) a final 07 sound like in Ah. teeth.
n —(candra-bindu) a nasal n sound p —like the p in pine.
like in the French word bon. ph —like the ph in philosopher.
k —like the k in kite. b —like the b in bird.
kh —like the kh in Eckhart. bh —like the bh in rub-hard.
g —like theg in got. m —like the m in mother.
gh —like the gh in big-house. y —like the j in jaw. य्‌
fi —like the n in bank. y —like the y in year. য়
© —like the ch in chalk. 7 —like the 7 in run.
ch —like the chh in much-haste. 1 —like the 7 in Jaw.
1 —like the jinjoy. v —like the b in bird or like the w in dwarf.
jh —like the geh in college-hall. 4, s —like the sk in shop.
पि —like the n in bunch. = —like thes in sun,
t —like the 7 in ralk. h—like the ¢ in home.
th —like the {41 in hor-house.

This is a general guide to Bengali pronunciation. The Bengali transliterations in this
book accurately show the original Bengali spelling of the text. One should note, however,
that in Bengali, as in English, spelling is not always a true indication of how a word is pro-
nounced. Tape recordings of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
chanting the original Bengali verses are available from the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, 3959 Landmark St., Culver City, California 90230.


--- Page 375 ---
. ও
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete alphabetical listing of the first and third line of each four-line
verse and both lines of each two-line verse in Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. In the first column the trans-
literation is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the chapter-verse references
and page number for each verse are to be found.
A amake dekhile, ami rahiba sei sthine 598 759
amargalé dara kari’ karila snana 4.60 27
-bala-vrddha gramera loka karaha bhojane = 4.83 39 ama prati bhattacaryera haya anugraha 6.116 255
‘abhidha‘-vrtti chadi’ kara sabdera laksana 6.134 264 amara bahu-priti bade inhara upara 6.69 224
acamana diya dila vidaka-saficaya 4.80 38 amara gramete keha na rahe upavasi 4.28 14
acamana diya se tambala nivedila 4.65 29
acarya—bhajini-pati, $yalaka 6.112 253 amara matr-svasa-grha— nirjana sthana 6.65 222
amara name gana-sahita kara nimantrane 6.110 252
acaryakahe,— ‘anumane nahe Isvarandne 6.81 == 232 == amarasange yabe, kimva amara loka-sane = 6.62 = 221
acaryakahe, — “vastu-visaye haya vastu 6.89 239  amara sannyasa-dharma cahena rakhite 6117 255
acaryakahe, — ‘vijfia-mata isvara-laksape’ = 6.80 = 231  ama-sabachadi’ age gela darasane 6.24 204
acaryera dosa nahi, isvara-ajiia haila 6.180 302
acaryera siddhante mukundera haila santosa = 6.113 254 ami akulina, dra dhana-vidya-hina 5.22 122
ami balaka-sannyasi— bhanda-manda nahi = 6.59 = 220
acintya prabhava tinera na yaya kathana 6.196 310  ami-saba asiyachi mahaprabhura sane 6.21 202
acintya-sakti iévara jagad-riipe parinata 6.170 293 ami-saba pache 21150 tarra anvesane 6.24 204
acire milaye (38076 caitanya-carana 2.285 359  ami-saba pache yaba, na yaba tomarasange 5.155 186
acire milaye tare gopala-carana 5.160 189
‘adhiriigha bhava’ yarra, tarra ০ vikara 6.13 198 ama uddharile tumi,—e Sakti ascarya 6213 319
ananda badila mane, duhkha na ganila 4188 96
adrsya aspréya, sei haya yama-dandi 6167 290  anandarhie ‘hladini,’ sad-ammse ‘sandhini’ 6159 284
aharkara itiyarh me 6.164 288  anande candana lagi’ karila yatana 4150 78
aho bhagyam aho bhagyarmn 6.149 277  anande karila jagannatha darasane 6118 256
aiche acintya bhagavanera guna-gana 6.185 305
‘aiche vat mukhe tumi na anibe ara 538 131  anande puri-gosaira prema uthalila 4175 90
anande sarvabhauma (३13 laila pada-dhali 6.38 210
aila sakala loka saksi dekhibare 5.109 163 aneka ghata bhari’ dila suvasita jala 4.76 34
&ji krsna-prapti-yogya haila tomara mana 6.234 329 anna, ghrta, dadhi, dugdha,—grame yata == 4.93 45
aji mora parna haila sarva abhilasa 6.331 327 anna-kata kare sabe harasita hana 4.90 44
“&ji mudi andyase jininu tri-bhuvana 6.230 326
aji muni karinu vaikuntha drohana 6.230 326  annalafa eka-gramera 3113 loka-gana 4.92 45
anna-vyanjana saba rahe ghite bhasi’ 4.71 32
3// saba mahaprasada kara asvadana 6.45 213 antaranga-cic-chakti — tatasthi—sjiva- = 6.160 285
3// se khandilatomara dehadi-bandhana 6.233 332 anumana pramana nahe iSvara-tattva-jidne == 6.82 = 234
aji tumi chinna kaile mayara bandhana 6.233 332 anya gramera loka yata dekhite ila 4.85 40
ji tumi niskapate baila krsnasraya 6332 328
ओ ye hailaamara bada-i vipatti 6.61 220 anya yatasidhya-sadhana kari’ dcchadana 6.197 = 311
anye haite nahe, tumi calaha tvarite 4.107 54
कतव magi’ gauda-dese karila gamana 4109 55  anyonye lokera mukhe ye katha sunila 6.25 204
कतव magi’ gela gopinatha acaryake lana 6.47 = 214 = ‘apadana’, ‘karana’, ‘adhikarana™-karaka tina = 6.144 273
jria-palana lagi’ ha-ila susthira 4.46 21
jra-sthane kichu nahe ५17९2 gocara 6.79 230  apane bahuta anna anila magiya 411 6
alaukika prema citte lage camatkara 4178 91 apane madhava-purikaila abhiseka 4.59 26
ama dravaile, pratapa pracanda’ 6.214 319  ‘apani-pada’-sruti varje ‘prakrta’ pani-carapa = 6.150 278
371


--- Page 376 ---
372 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
apareyam itas tv anyam 6.165 189 athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya- 6.84 235
dra-bara asi’ ami ei bhanga la-iba 4.31 15  atma-kanya diba, keba pare nisedhite 5.71 145
ara dina 2/5 magi’ calila brahmana 5.101 160
ara dina bhattacarya aila darsane 6.239 333 atma-ninda kari’ laila prabhura sarana 6.201 313
ara dina gramera loka ekatra karila 5.53 138 ‘atmarama’ paryanta kare isvara bhajana 6.185 305
atmaramas ca munayo 6.186 305
ara dina gopinitha prabhu sthane giya 6.67 223 atmaramas ca-sloke ‘ekadasa pada haya 6.194 309
ara dina laghu-vipra tara ghare ila 5.48 136 atyanta nivida kunja-nari pravesite 4.49 22
ara dina mahaprabhu bhattacarya-sane 6.118 256
ara dina prabhu gel jagannatha-darasane 6.216 320  avasya mora vakya tenho karibe pramana’ = 5.79 = 149
ara jana-dui deha, diba ye vetana 4.166 85 avarana dara kari’ karila vidite 4.52 23
avese calila prabhu jagannitha-mandire 6.3 193
ara keha sange nahi, ei sarge ekala 5.60 141 avese karila puri se ksira bhaksana 4.138 73
arati dekhiya puri kaila namaskara 4122 62 avidya-karma-sarjianya 6.154 281
arati karila loke, kare jaya jaya 4.80 38
aratrika kari’ kaila bahuta stavana 4.66 30 avirbhava hana ami tahan saksi diba 5.92 156
ara vipra—— yuva, (33 karena sahaya 5.16 119  avirbhotas tasya padaravinde 6.255 342
avista hana kaila gopala stavana 56 114
ara ye ye-kichu kahe, sakala-i kalpana 6.179 301  ayacaka-jane ami diye ta’ shara 4.29 14
‘dre adhama! mora bhagni ০303 vivahite 5.52 137 ayacita ksira prasada alpa yadi pai 4.120 61
arunodaya-kale haila prabhura agamana 6.219 321
asambhava kaha kene, yei nahi haya 521 121  ayécitapaile khi'na, nahe upavasa 4.123 62
asankhya aise, nitya badila bhandira 4100 50  ayacita-vrtti puri-virakta, 00353 4.123 ০2
‘ayi dina’, ‘ayi dina’ bale bara-bara 4201 103
asan varnas trayo hy asya 6.101 247  ayi dina-dayardra natha he 4.197 100
asa-pasa gramera loka dekhite 5112 4.89 44
4sa-pasa vraja-bhamera yata grama saba 4.97 49 B
asi’ age dhari’ kichu balila hasiya 4.24 12
3513 parama-bhaktye namaskara kari’ 5.49 136 bada eka pathara prsthe avalamba dila 4.54 24
bada-vipra chota-vipre kanya-dana kaila 5.112 165
asru, stambha, pulaka, sveda, kampa 6.208 316 bada-vipra kahe, — “kanya mora nija-dhana 5.29 127
astadasa artha kaila abhipraya lana 6.195 310 bada-vipra kahe, —‘tumi na kara sarnsaya = 5.25 124
astama-divase tanre puche sarvabhauma 6.124 259 bada-viprera mane, —krsna 8993 dayavan = 5.79 149
aste-vyaste asi’ kaila carapa vandana 6.221 322 bahiranga— maya, — tine kare prema- 6.160 285
aste-vyaste kole kari nila nityananda 4199 102
bahire aila, kare kichu na kahila ara 4.122 62
ataeva ‘aprakrta’ brahmera netra-mana 6.146 274 bahire prabhura (24700 paila darasana 6.221 322
ataeva bada sampradayera nahika apeksa 6.73 226 bahir-vase bandhi’ sei thikari rakhila 4.139 73
ataeva han tomara ami nija-dasa’ 6.56 218 bahu-dina tomara patha kari niriksana 4.39 18
ataeva kalpana kari’ nastika-sastra kaila 6.180 302 bahu-dinera ksudhaya gopala khaila sakala 4.76 34
ataeva i$vara-tattva na para janite 6.86 236
bahu 7561-8 05 {007 tomara bahuta bandhava 5.26 125
ataeva nama haila ‘ksira-cora hari’ 4.20 10 bahu-ksane caitanya nahe, bhogera kala 6.7 195
ataeva nama haila ‘ksira-cora’ kari’ 4.174 89 bahu nrtya-gita kaila 1275 bhakta-gana 4.15 8
ataeva sruti kahe, brahma —savisesa 6.151 278 bahu parisrame candana remuna anila 4.188 96
ataeva taha varnile haya punarukti 4.6 4 = bahu sitala jale kara $ri-anga marjana 4.38 18
ataeva tanra paye kari namaskara 4.9 5
bahu taila diya kaila sri-ariga cikkana 4.60 27
ataeva tomdya ami diba kanya-dana 5.20 121 bahuta prasada sarvabhauma anaila 6.41 211
ataeva ‘tri-yuga’ kari’ kahi tara nama 6.99 245  balaka kahe,— gopa ami, ei grame vasi 4.28 14
ataeva ‘tri-yuga kari’ kahi visnu-nama 6.95 243  balakera saundarye purira ha-ila santosa 4.26 13


--- Page 377 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 373
“balya-kale mata mora nasa chidra kari’ 5129 173 bhattacarye kahe kichu vinaya vacana 6.57 219
bata dekhe, se balaka punah na aila 4.33 16 bhattacarye kaila prabhu drdha alingane 6.277 356
bhagavad-bhakti-vimukhera haya danda 6.263 347 bhattacarye vakye mane haila duhkha-rosa 6.113 254
bhagavan bahu haite yabe kaila mana 6.145 274 bhattacaryera ghare aila tvarayukta hana 6.218 321
bhagavane bhakti— parame purusartha 6.184 304 bhattacaryera name tanre kaila nimantrana 6.114 254
bhagavanera savisese ei tina cihna 6.144 273 bhattacaryera ninda kahe, mane pana vyatha 6.115 254
bhagavan— ‘sambandha’, bhakti 6.178 300  bhattaciryera nrtya dekhi’ hase prabhura 6.209 317
bhagavan, tanra sakti, tanra guna-gana 6.196 310 bhattacaryera prarthanate prabhu vyakhya 6.193 309
bhagavata-bharata dui sastrera pradhana 6.97 244 bhattacaryera vaispavata dekhi’ sarva-jana 6.280 357
bhagavatera ‘brahma-stave’ra sloka padila 6.260 345 bhavete avista haila prabhu nityananda 6.34 208
bhagavatta-laksanera inhatei sima 6.78 229 bhiksakaranaacamana karaila 6.46 213
bhakta-gana avista 17373, sabe nace gaya 5.145 181  bhiksa lagi’ eka-dina eka grama giya 4.11 €
bhakta-gana-sange prabhu karena bhojana 6.42 211 bhismakera 10003, —krsne kanya samarpite 5.28 126
bhakta-gane dekhe —yena dunhe eka- 5135 176 bhittye dekhi’ bhakta saba sloka kanthe kaila 6.253 341
bhakta-gane kahe prabhu sei ta’ akhyana 4.19 10 bhoga-samagri 2113 sandesadi yata 4.58 26
bhakta-gane khaoyaite parca ksira laila 4.206 105 bhoke rahe, tabu anna 1725617 na khaya 4.181 93
bhakta-gane sunana prabhu kare asvadita 4.170 88 bhramite, bhramite gela giri govardhana 4.21 11
bhakta-sange 8115 prabhu mahesa ९1611105 5.143 180  bhamir apo ‘nalo vayuh 6.164 288
bhakta-sange sri-mukhe prabhu kaila 4.210 107 bhuvanesvara-pathe yaiche kaila darsana 5.140 178
bhakti dekhaite kaila prasada bhaksana 4.208 106 brahma haite janme visva, brahmete jivaya 6.143 272
bhakti kari’ bahu alarkara kaila samarpane 5125 172 brahmana-brahmani-gane age khaoyaila 4.84 40
bhakti kari’ kaila prabhu tarra darasana 4.13 7 brahmana kahila saba bhoga-vivarane 4.116 59
bhakti kari’ nana dravya bheta deya ani’ 4.99 50 brahmana-sevaya krsnera priti bada haya 5.24 123
‘bhakti-pade’ kene pada, ki tomdra asaya 6.262 346  brahmanera pratijid yiya— ei bada duhkha 5.89 154
bhakti-sabda kahite mane haya ta’ ullasa 6.276 356  brahmanere kahe — “tumi yaha nija-ghara = 5.107 163
bhakti-sadhana-srestha sunite haila mana 6.241 333 brahmanya-deva-gopalera mahima ei dhanya 5.159 188
bhakti vinu $astrera ara 173 kare vyikhyana == 6.237 = 332 “brahmanya-deva tumi 0303 dayd-maya 5.88 153
bhala haila aila ama kadha savadhane 4.43 20 brahma-sabde kahe [90103 svayam bhagavan 6.147 = 275
bhala-manda nahi kaha, raha mauna dhari’ == 6.125 259  brahma-sayujya haite isvara-sayujya dhikkira 6.269 350
bhala-manda nahi kahe, vasi’ matra sune 6.123 258 brahme, iSvare sayujya dui ta’ prakara 6.269 350
bhangana krodhe tenho inhike dosdya 5.157 187  brhaspati taiche loka na pare karite 6.206 315
bharati-sampradaya inho— hayena 6.72 225  bujha, ki na bujha,— ih bujhite na pari 6.12 259
bhattacarya acarya-dvare bhiksa karaila 6.215 320 bujhibara lagi’ seha puche punarbara 6.128 261
‘bhattacrya’, jani— tumi saksat brhaspati = 6.191 = 308  bujhite nd pare keha dui prabhura mati 5.156 186
bhattacarya kahe, — ‘bhakti’-sama nahe 6.263 347  bujhi teo ama-sabara nahi adhikara 4190 97
bhattacarya kahe,— ekale tumi na yaiha 6.62 221 C
bhatticarya kahe, — ‘inhdra praudha 6.74 227
bhattacarya kahe, — na bujhi’, hena 78/18 = 6.128 261  Caitanya-carana vine nahi jane ana 6.237 332
bhattacirya kahe tarre kari’ namaskdre 6.245 337  caitanya-caritimyta kahe krsnadasa 4.213 108
bhattacarya premavese hailaacetana 6.207 316  Caitanya-caritimrtakahe krspadasa 5.161 189
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa 6.286 360
bhattacarya parva-paksa apéra karila 6.176 299  caitanya-mangale yaha karila varpana 4.7 4
bhattacarya-sange tanra mandire dila 6.119 256  caitanya-praside manera saba jadya gela 6.224 324
‘bhattacarya’ tumi inhéra na jana mahima 678 229  cala, sabe yai sarvabhaumera bhavana 6.28 205


--- Page 378 ---
374 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
cali’ cali’ puri $ri-nilacala 4.143 75 dekhiya cintita haila bhattacaryera mana 6.9 196
calila daksine puri tarre diksa dina 4111 56  dekhiya purira prabhava loke camatkara 4.86 41
calila madhava-puri candana lana 4.154 80 desamyayau viprakrte + 5.1 112
calite calite aila yajapura-grama 5.3 113 dese asi’ dui-jane gela nija-ghare 5.35 130
calite calite prabhu aila ‘atharanala’ 5.147 182 dhadara ancala-tale paila sei ksira 4.131 67
candana pari’ bhakta-srama karila saphala 4.177 91 dhadara aficale dhaka eka ksira haya 4.128 65
candana, tulasi, puspa-mala ange dila 4.63 29 dhana 06101 ei dustera laite haila mana 5.59 140
‘candanesvara’ nija-putra dila sabara sathe 6.33 207 dhapa, dipa, kari’ nana bhoga lagaila 4.64 29
carana pakhali’ prabhu asane vasila 6.40 210  dhuturd khioyana vape karila pagala 5.60 141
cari bhakta sarge krsna-kirtana-kutuhale 4.10 6 dine loka-bhida habe mora pratistha jani’ 4.141 74
catur-bhuja-rapa prabhu ha-ila takhana 6.202 314  diyamanarh na grhpanti 6.270 353
chota-vipra bale, — ‘patra karaha likhana 5.81 150 dugdha-dana-chale krsna yanre dekha dila 4.172 89
chota-vipra bale, — “thakura, tumi mora 5.33 129 dugdha pana kari’ bhanda dhuna rakhila 4.33 16
chota-vipra bale, —‘"tomara stri-putra saba 5.26 125 dui-arthe ‘krsna’ kahi, kene patha phiri 6.273 354
chota-vipra kahe, — 5073, vipra-mahasaya 5.21 121 dui-janara bhare danda khanda khanda haila 5.150 184
chota-vipra kahe, — "yadi kanya dite mana 5.31 127 dui-jane dhari’ dunhe karena nartana 6.228 326
chota-vipra kare sada tanhara sevana 5.17 120 dui raksa kara, gopala, lainu sarana’ 5.47 135
cid-arse ‘samvit,’ yare jana kari mani 6.159 284 dui sloka bahira-bhite likhiya rakhila 6.252 340
cada pana mahaprabhura anandita mana 4.15 8 dui-vipra-madhye eka vipra—vrddha- 5.16 119
dui-vipra vara mage ananda-antara 5.114 167
D dui viprera dharma rakha hada sadaya 5.88 1753
dadhi, dugdha, ghrta aila grame yata chila 4.57 25 00703 dekhi’ nityananda-prabhu maha-range 5.138 777
dadhi-dugdha-sandesadi yata kichu ३112 4.64 29 dunhara bhavavesa, durhe—candra-vadana 5.137 176
dainya kari’ kahe nija parva-durmati 6.240 333 dunhara sammati lana madhyastha rakhila 5.82 19
daive sarvabhauma tarhake kare darsana 6.5 194 dunhara satye tusta ha-ilan, dunhe maga’ 5114 167
daive sei ksane (21/८1) tomdra darsana 6.27 205
durhe — eka varna, dunhe— prakanda- = 5.136 176
dambha kari’ varni yadi taiche nahi sakti 4.6 4 dunhe——raktambara, durhara svabhava 5.136 176
danda-bhanga-Iila ei—parama gambhira ~~ 5.158 187  dvadasa mrt-patre bhari’ amrta-samana 4.117 59
dandavat kari’ kahe saba vivarana 5.87 153 dvadasa-vana dekhi’ sese gela vrndavana 5.12 117
dandavat kari’ kaila atma-samarpana 4.66 30  dvaradiyagrame gelaseiksira lana 4.132 67
dandavat kari’ kaila bahu-vidha stuti 6.240 333 dvidha na bhaviha, na kariha kichu mane 4.161 83
dandavat kari preme nacite lagila 5.144 181 E
darsana diya nistariba sakala sarhsara 4.40 18
darsanakarila jagannatha-sayyotthane 6.216 320 ebe kichu nahi kaha, ki tomara vicara’ 5.50 137
dasa-vipra anna randhi’ kare eka stapa 4.69 31 ebe muni grame ainu, yaimu bhavana 5104 161
dekhaila tanre age catur-bhuja-rapa 6.203 314  ebe ye na dena, pucha irihara vyavahara’ 555 139
ei buddhye dui-jana ha-ila sammate 5.80 150
dekhi’ anandita haila mahaprabhura mana 6.227 325 ei bhakti, bhakta-priya-krsna-vyavahara 4.190 97
dekhi’ gopinathacarya harasita-mana 6.209 317
dekhile na dekhe tare bahirmukhajana* 6.92 241 ei dhyana, ei japa, laya ei nama 6.258 344
06101 saba loka haila anande vismita 4.51 23 ei dui $loka——bhakta-kanthe ratna hara 6.256 343
dekhi’ sarvabhauma dandavat kari’ padi’ 6.204 315 ei icchaya lajja pana visnu-smarana kaila 4.121 61
dekhi’ sarvabhauma haila vismita apara 6.6 195 ei kali-kale visnura avatara nai 6.94 242
dekhite aila saba de sera loka-jana 5.116 167 ei krspa-mahapremera sattvika vikara 6.11 197


--- Page 379 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 375
ei lagi’ puchilena brahmanera sthane 4.116 59 eta bali’ gela bilaka na dekhiye dra 4.32 15
ei lagi ‘saksi-gopala’ nama haila khyati 5.133 175 eta bali’ gopalagela, gosani jagila 4.162 84
ei mahdprabhura lili—sarvabhauma-milana 2.284 359 eta bali’ namaskari’ karild gamana 4138 73
ei mata candana deya pratyaha ghasiya 4167 86 eta bali’ pade prabhu tara krta sloka 4.191 98
ei-mata mahdprabhu calila nilicale 4.10 6 eta bali’ pithd-pana saba khdoyaila 6.46 213
ei-matamahd-range se (3001 variciya 5.139 177 eta bali’ premavese padila bhamite 4.45 20
ei-mata nand artha karena vyakhyana 6.198 312 eta bali’ se-balaka antardhana kaila 4.44 20
ei-mata vatsara dui karila sevana 4105 53 etabhavi’sei vipraphiriya cahila 5.106 162
लं mata vidydnagare saksi-gopala 5119 169  etacinti’ bhatticarya achena vasiya 6.14 199
ei-mata vipra citte cintite lagila 5.48 136 eta cinti’ namaskari’ geld sva-bhavane 5.128 173
ei-mate cali’ vipra nija-dese dila 5.103 161  etajani’tumi saksi deha, dayd-maya 590 155
ei-mate kalpita bhasye sata dosa dila 6.176 299 eta kahi’ mahaprabhu 5115 nija-sthane 6.236 331
ei marti giya yadi ei sri-vadane 5.94 156 eta suni’gopinatha sabare laid 6.29 206
ei 51०43 kahiyachena radha-thakurani 4194 99 eta uni’ lokera mane ha-ila samsaya 5.63 142
ei sloka 03011317073 bhaksana karila 6.224 324 eta suni’nastika lokaupahasakare 5.86 152
ei sloka padite prabhu ha-ild marcchite 4198 102 eta uni’ prabhu age calila Sighra-gati 5.156 186
9 slokera artha sundila kariya vistara 6.243 336 eta suni’ puri-gosafi paricaya dila 4135 21
ei slokera artha sunite varicha haya’ 6.187 306 eta suni’ sei vipra rahe mauna dhari’ 551 137
ei sloke ughadild premera kapata 4.203 104 eta suni’ tarra putra vikya-cchala pana 558 140
eita’ akhyane (30113 donhara mahima 4.211 107
eta Suni’ viprera cintita haila mana 546 135
ei tara 83073 prema loke dekhaite 4.187 96  ethanitydnanda-prabhu kaila danda-bhange 5.142 180
ei tine hare siddha-sadhakera mana 6.197 311 ethapajari kardila thik ure sayana -4.125 64
ei vakye saksi mora dche mahd-jana 5.76 147  ethdya rahiba mi, nd yaba atahpara” 5.107 163
ei vipra mora sevdya 10513 yabe haila 5.65 143
ei vipra—satya-vakya, dharma-pardyana = 5.83 151 G
eka-dina nija-loka ekatra karila 537 130  gandha 8306, taiche ei slokera vicara 4.192 98
eka-dina puri-gosani dekhila svapana 4105 53 garudera pase rahi’ darsana kariba’ 6.63 221
eka-dina sarvabhauma prabhu-age 3//3 6.259 345  gauda ha-ite dila dui vairagi brihmana 4.103 52
eka-dinera udyoge aiche mahotsava kaila 4.79 37 gaya vdranasi, prayaga—sakala kariya 5.11 117
eka eka dina sabe kare mahotsava 4.97 49 = ghare 33 bhattacarya jagannatha dekhiya 6.248 338
eka eka vraja-vasi eka 83801 dila 4102 51 ghare ani’ pavitra sthane rakhila Soyana 6.8 196
ekakunje lana gela hatete dharina 4.35 16 = ghasiteghasite yaiche malayaja-sara 4.192 98
eka mahd-dhani ksatriyakardila mandira 4101 50  ghati-dani chadaite raja-patra dvare 4153 80
eka matha kari’ tahan karaha sthapana 4.38 18 gita-sastre jiva-rapa ‘Sakti’ kari’ mane 6.163 288
ekanta-bhave cinte vipra gopala-carana 5.46 135  go-dohana karite cahi, sighra ami yaba 4.31 15
ekasannydsi asi’ dekhi’ jagannatha 6.15 200  gopdla siya kahe, —suna he madhava 4.158 82
eka-sera anna randhi’ kariha samarpana 5100 160  gopdla-balaka eka dugdha-bhanda 120 4.24 12
ekavipra, eka sevaka, candana vahite 4152 79 gopdla candana mage,— Suni’ bhakta-gapa 4.150 78
ekeka dina ekeka grame la-ila magina 4.90 44 = gopala-carane mage, — ८212 mora rajya 5.122 170
€ saba 1113 prabhura dasa vindavana 4.4 3 gopila dekhifia loka dandavat kare 5.109 163
€-saba siddhanta tabe tumiha kahibe 6.106 250  gopla dekhiya saba prasida khdila 4.85 40
eta bali’ dui-jane calild desere 5.34 129  gopala dekhiya sabara khande duhkha-soka 4.96 48


--- Page 380 ---
376 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
gopéla-gopinatha-puri-gosanira guna 4.210 107  grameraisvara tomara—govardhana-dhari 4.48 2
gopala kahe, puri 2712123 tapa nahi yaya 4106 53  gramera loka ani’ ama kadha’ (102 haite 4.37 17
gopdla la-iya sei katake dila 5.123 17] gramera nikata asi’ manete cintila 5.103 161
gopala-prabhave haya, anye na janila 4.79 37 gramerasanya-hate vasi’ karenakirtana 4125 64
gopdla prakata haila, — dese sabda haila 4.89 44 gramera yateka tandula, dili godhama-cdrna 4.67 30
gopala-prakata suni’ nana desa haite 4.98 49  gramya-varta-bhaye dvitiya-sanga-hina 4179 92
gopala rahila, dunhe karena sevana 5.116 167  grisma-kala-ante punah nilicale gela 4169 87
gopila-saundarya dekh’ 03115 anandite 5:5 114 grisma-kale gopinatha paribe candana 4.165 85
gopala-saundarya dekhi’ loke anandita 5110 164  guru-buddhye chota-viprabahu sevikare 5.34 129
gopala-saundarya dunhara mana nila hari’ 5.15 119  guruinhdra kesava-bharati maha-dhanya 6.71 225
gopala tarre dja candana anite 4187 96 H
gopala yadi saksi dena, apane 251" etha 5.77 148
gopale paraiba’—ei ananda pracura 4.182 93 harer nama harer nama 6.242 334
gopalera age kaha € satya-vacana” 5.31 127. 1211" *311*0211* nace hate tali diya 6.238 332
gopalera age kaha e-satya vacana 5.72 146 17356, (37068, nice prabhu hurkdra garjana 5.146 182
hasina gopala-deva tathdya rahila 5.106 162
gopilera age loka aniyé dharila 4.93 45 hasina gopala kahe,—“sunaha, 012/1110202 5.97 158
gopalera age pade dandavat hana 5.111 164
gopilera age vipra kabhite 28112 5.32 128  hite hite bule madhava-purike cahind 4.132 67
gopalera age yabe prabhura haya sthiti 5.135 176  hena-bhagavane tumi kaha nirakara? 6.152 279
gopalera parva-katha sune bahu range 5.7 115 hena-jana candana-bhara vahi’ 20 yaya 4.181 93
hena-jana gopalera ajfamrta pana 4180 9%
gopalera sahaja-priti vraja-vasi-prati 4.95 47 hena jive 'bheda’ kara isvarera sane 6.163 288
gopinathacarya bale, —'ami parve ye 6.244 336
gopinathacarya kahe mahaprabhura prati 6.120 317  hena-jive isvara-sahakahata’ abheda 6.162 286
gopinathacarya kahe, — navadvipe ghara 6.51 216 hena-kdle dila tahan gopinathacarya 6.17 200
gopindthacaryake kahe sarvabhauma 6.64 222 hena-kile bhogasari’ arati bajila 4.121 গা
hena-kale sei bhoga thakure lagila 4119 ০0
gopindthacarya kichu kahite lagila 6.77 229  hena-mate anna-kata karila sajana 4.75 34
gopinathacarya tanra vaisnavata dekhiya 6.238 332
gopinatha acaryere kahe sarvabhauma 6.50 215 hena Sakti nahi mana, — parama sahasa 6.161 286
gopinatha amdra se eka-i anga haya 4160 83  hladini sandhini samvit 6.157 283
gopindtha-carane kaila bahu namaskara 4155 8]  hlada-tapa-kari misra 6.157 283
hrdayari tvad-aloka-katarari 4197 100
gopinatha kahe, —inhara nahi bahyapeksa 6.73 = 226
gopinathakahe— nama sri-krsna-caitanya = 6.71 225  hrdaye ki ache tomdra, bujhite na pari 6.129 262
gopinatha prabhu lana tahan vasa dila 6.66 222 hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te 6.261 34
gopindtha-rape yadi kariydchena bhojana 4.208 106  hunkarakariya uthe ‘hari’ ‘hari’ bali’ 6.38 210
gopinatha-sevaka dek he prabhura prema- = 4.203 104 = hunkdra karaye, hase, kande, nice, gdya 4200 102
gopinathera ange nitya karaha lepana 4.163 84 1
8০017310613 ange nitya karaha lepana 4.159 82
gopinathera ksira bali’ prasiddha nama ydra 4.118 = 60  ihd anubhava kaila madhava gosari 4.78 36
gopinathera sevaka-gane 03/0)3 anila 4.162 84  ihaasvadite dra nahi cautha-jana 4195 9
gosaiiira janite cahi kahan parvasrama 650 215 iharaki dosa—ei mdyara prasada 6107 250
103 va-i slokera ache aro abhipraya 6192 308
gosanira sthane dcarya kaila agamana 6.114 254 jhaye sraddhd kari’ karaye sravana 2284 349
govinda-kundera jala anila chanifna 4.55 24 inhake candanadile, gopdla ha-ibe 51212 4164 84
gramera brahmana saba nava ghata lana 4.55 24 inhake candana dile habe mora tdpa-ksaya = 4.160 8


--- Page 381 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 377
‘inha more kanya dite karyache angikara 5.55 139  jayajayagauracandra jaya nitydnadna 6.2 193
ihan yadi rahena, tabu nahi kichu bhaya’ 5105 162 jaya jaya $ri-caitanya jaya nitydnanda 52 112
inhdra punye krsne ani’ saksi boldiba 5.85 152 jiti'kanya labe, mora vyarthadharmahaya’ 5.42 133
inhdra sarire saba isvara-laksana 6.90 240 jiva-bhatarh mahapbaho 6.165 289
inho kene danda bharge, tenho kene 5.157 187 jiveraasthi—vistha dui—sankha-gomaya 6.136 266
10/10 ta’ saksat krsna, —muni nd janiya 6200 313 jivera dehe atma-buddhi—sei mithyd haya 6.173 297
isat calaye tula 06101 dhairya haila 610 197  jivera nistdra lagi’ 5003 kaila vydsa 6.169 292
isat krodha kari’ kichu kahite lagila 5.152 185  jAana-karma-pasa haite haya vimocana 2.285 359
ista-gosthi vicara kari, na kariha rosa 6.93 242 jnati loka kahe, — ‘mordtomdke chadiba’ = 5.41 132
i¢vara-darsane prabhu preme acetana 6.26 204
iSvara-sevaka mala-prasada ani’ dila 6.35 208 K
Kvarera krpa-lesa haya ta’ yahare 6.83 235  kabe asi‘ madhava ama karibe sevana 4.39 18
ISvarera krpa-lesa nahika tomate 6.86 236  kabe ki baliyachi, mora nahika smarana’ 5.57 140
iSvarera maya ei— bali vyavahara 6.91 240  kahan mudi daridra, markha, nica, kula-hina 5.67 144
iSvarera sri-vigraha sac-cid-anandékara 6.166 289 13087 tumi pandita, dhani, parama kulina 5.67 144
iti dvapara urvisa 6.102 247  kahena yadi, punarapi yoga-patta diya 6.76 228
J kahilan tanra pade minati karina 5.74 147
kahila, —yana karaha iSvara darasana 6.247 338
jagadananda ddmodara, —dui 53786 land ~~ 6.248 338  kalan nastarh bhakti-yogarn nijari yah 6.255 342
jagad-rapa haya isvara, tabu avikara 6.171 294 kalau nasty eva nasty eva 6.242 334
jagannatha alingite calila dhana 6.4 194 kali-yuge avatara nahi,—sastra-jnana 6.95 243
jagannatha-darasane maha-sukha paya 4144 75
jagannatha dekhi’ preme ha-ila asthire 6.3 193 kali-yuge lilavatdra na kare bhagavan 6.99 245
kalpanarthe tumi (303 kara dcchadana 6.132 263
jaganndtha dekhi’sabaraha-ila ananda 6.34 208  kamala-pure asi bharginadi-snana kaila 5141 179
jagannatha inhare krpakaila bhala-mate’ 6.211 318  kampa, sveda, pulakasru, stambha, vaivarnya 4.202 103
jagannatha kaiche kariyachena bhojana 6.45 213 kanthe na nihsare vani, netre asru-dhara 4.201 103
jagannatha na dekh” aila prabhu-sthane 6.239 333
‘jaganndtha’ — nama, padavi— 1711512 651 216  kanya-dana-patra ami nd ha-i tomdra 523 123
‘kanya dite cahiydche —uthaila vacana 5.61 141
jagannathe ani’ dila manikya-sirnhasana 5124 171 kanya dite naribe, habe asatya-vacana 5.70 145
jagannathera deula dekhi’ avista haila 5.144 181  ‘kanydkene na deha, yadidiyachavacana’ = 5.56 = 139
jagannathera sevaka yata, yateka mahdnta 4149 78  kanydpaba,— mora mane ihanihisukha == 5.89 154
Jagat nistarile tumi,—seha alpa-karya 6.213 319
jagat ye mithya nahe, nasvara-matra haya 6.173 297 kanya tore dilun, dvidha na kariha cite 971 145
kapotesvara dekhite geld bhakta-ganasarge 5.142 180
jagiya madhava-puri vicara karila 4.44 20 karpira-candana ami pailima saba 4158 82
1313 jala-patradika sarva simadhana kaila 6.66 222  karpara-candana yarra ange cadaila 4.175 90
jala nite stri-gana tomare dekh’ gela 4.30 14 karpira-sahitaghasi’ e-saba candana 4159 82
Jand-pancarandhe vyanjanadi nana 5003 4.69 31
Jana parica-sata ruti kare rasi-rasi. 4.71 32 kasi-misra-adi yata nildcala-vasi 6.281 358
kata dine bada-vipra cintita antare 5.35 130
janati tattvarh bhagavan-mahimno 6.84 235  kata-dine remunate uttarilagiya 4154 80
Jani’ saksi nahi deya, (३18 papa haya 5.90 155  katake dila saksi-gopala dekhite 5.5 114
Jayddvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda 4.2 2
Jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda 5.2 112 katake gopala-seva karila sthipana 5124 171
Jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda = 6.2 193 kehaanna magi’ khaya, keha dugdhahara 4.29 14
Jayajaya gauracandra jaya nityananda 4.2 2 kehabada-badi-kadi kare vipra-gana 4.70 32


--- Page 382 ---
378 ও Caitanya-caritamrta
keha bale, isvara— dayalu, asiteha pare 5.86 152 kumbhakara ghare chila ye mrd-bhajana 4.68 3
keha gaya, keha nace, mahotsava haila 4.57 25 (८५/12 dek hana kahe, — ami ei kunje ra-i 4.36 17
keha paka-bhandara kaila, keha ta’ pracira 4.101 50  kudjakati’ dvara kari’ karila pravese 4.50 22
ke-mate candana niba— nahi € vicara 4184 94  kunjedche, cala, tarre bahira ye kari 4.48 2
ke-mate janile, ami kari upavasa 4.27 13 kurvanti caisammuhur dtma-moham 6.108 251
kemate sannydsa-dharma ha-ibe raksana 6.74 = 227 = kurvanty ahaitukirh bhaktim 6.186 305
kesi-tirtha, kaliya-hradadike (2112 57373 5.14 118  kuthari kodali laha 0५३०2 karite 4.49 22
ke tomara saksi 0186, 01713 kara kise 5.43 133 ‘kyakyd bhoga lige?’ brihmane puchila 4.113 58
khaile premavesa haya, —adbhuta kathana 4.140 = 73
kiba ami age yai, na yaba sahite 5.154 186 L
kiba gauracandra 103 kare asvadana 4195 99  ‘laksana’karile svatah-pramanya-hani haya = 6.137 267
kiba nama inhdra, sunite haya mana 670 224  lohake yavat sparsi’ hema nahi kare 6.279 357
kichu bhoga lagaila kardila jala-pdna 4.88 43 lokerasanghatta dekhi’ prabhurabahya haila 4.204 104
kimva navama paddrtha ‘muktira’ samasraya = 6.272 354 10096 kahiba giya saksira gamana 5.104 161
kinkarere daya tava sarva-loke jane 5115 167
M
kintu tumi artha kaile panditya-pratibhaya 6.192 308
kon sampradaye sannyasa karyachena 6.70 224  madhava-puriracitte ha-ila camatkdra 4.32 15
krandana kariya tabe uthe gauracandra 4199 102 madhava-puri sannyasi ache hatete vasina 4129 66
10003 vinaisvarere keha nahi jane 6.82 234 ‘'madhava-puri sripada dila’, —loke haila 4145 76
krsna ji niskapate toma haila sadaya 6.332 328  madhurimahankara-sarikocanah 2.52 202
magi’ kene nahi (0030, kiba kara dhyana 4.25 12
krsna kahe, — “pratima cale, kothaha na 595 157
krsna kahe, —vipra, tumi yahasva-bhavane 5.91 = 155  mahd-aparadha kainu garvita ha-iyd’ 6.200 313
‘krsna’ 10503 sphuta kahi’ bhattacarya (28115 = 6.220 322 maha-bhagavata haya caitanya-gosani 6.94 242
krsna-nama 011" prabhura dnanda badila 6.220 322  maha-bhari thakura— keha nare céliite 4.52 23
krsna-preme pratistha cale sarge gadana 4.147 76  mahid-dayd-maya prabhu—bhakata-vatsala 4.177 91
maha-kulina tumi— vidya-dhanadi-pravina 5.22 122
krsna-pritye kari tomdra seva-vyavahdra 523 123
krsna-varnpam tvisakrsnam 6.103 248  maha-maha-balistha loka ekatra karina 4.53 24
krsna ye inhara vasa, — haya yathocita 4.137 72 mahd-mahotsavakaila dnandita hana 5.132 174
‘krsne matir astu’ bali’ gosani kahila 6.48 214  mahdprabhura bhakta tenho prabhu-tattva- 6.18 201
krsnera vigraha yei satya nahi mane 6.264 348  mahaprabhura seva-vina nahi jane dna 6.257 344
mahd-prasada khaila asiya saba loka 4.96 48
1003 karibére tabe prabhura haila mana 6.201 313
krta-ghnata haya tomaya na kaile sammana = 5.20 = 121 = mahaprasada-ksira-lobhe rahila prabhu tatha 4.18 9
ksaneka rodana kari, mana kaila dhira 4.46 21 maha-premavesa tumi panacha darsana 6.90 240
ksane uthe, ksane pade, nahi sthanasthana 4.22 11 mahd-snana karaila sata ghata dina 4.61 27
*ksira-cora gopinatha’ prasiddha tanra nama = 4.19 10 maha-tejo-maya durihe kamala-nayana 5.137 176
ksira dekhi’ mahaprabhura ananda 83013 4206 105  malayajaana, yana nilicala haite 4107 54
ksira diyd pajdri tarre dandavat haila 4135 71] malayaja-candana lepa’, tabe se judaya 4106 53
ksira eka rakhiyachi sannyasi-karana 4127 65 mam cagopayayena syat 6.181 303
ksira-iccha haila, (306 mane aparadhe 4124 63 mandira kariya rajd seva calaila 5118 168
ksira laha ei, ydra nama ‘madhava-puri’ 4.133 68  mandire padila preme avista hana 6.4 194
ksira lana sukhe tumi karaha bhaksane 4134 69  manekacandana, told-visekakarpara 4182 93
ksira-prasada diya tare bhiksa karaila 4156 81  mangala-arati dekhi’ prabhate calild 4209 106
ksirera vrttanta tanre kahila pajari 4136 71] ‘manikya-sinhdsana’ nama aneka ratana 5.121 170


--- Page 383 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 379
mani yaiche avikte prasabe hema-bhara 6.171 294 namaskara kari’ sloka padite lagila 6.259 345
manusyera dehe dekhi,—bada camatkiara 6.13 198 ‘namo nardayandya’ bali’ namaskara kaila 6.48 214
mathurara loka saba bada 8903 dhani 4.99 50  ndnadravyalana lokalagila site 4.98 49
mathurdte ila dunhe dnandita hana 5.11 = 117 = nand-rape prityekailaprabhura sevana 4.17 9
‘mayadhisa’ ‘maya-vasa'—isvare-jive 6.162 286  nana-tantra-vidhinena 6.102 247
mayaiva vihitari devi 6.182 303 nana upahara, taha kahite pari kata 4.58 26
mayarh madiyam udgrhya 6.109 251 nana vadya-bheri baje, stri-gana gaya gita 4.56 25
mayavadam asac-chastram 6.182 303  narakavanchaye, tabu sdyujya na laya 6.268 350
mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-nasa 6.169 292  navasata-ghata jala kaila upanita 4.56 25
‘misra purandara’tarira manya, hena jani 6.54 217  naumi tam gaura-candram yah 6.1 192
mleccha-bhaye sevaka mora gela (02105 4.42 19 navavastraani’ tara upare patiya 4.81 38
mleccha-desa dura patha, jagati apara 4184 94  nava-vastra pati’ tahe palasera pata 472 33
mleccha-dese karpira-candana anite jaijala 4.176 ~~ 90  nava-vidhaarthakailasastra-mata lana 6.190 307
mora aparadhe tomara dandaha-ilakhanda = 5.151 184 nice kanyadile kula yaibeka nasa 539 131
‘mora dharma raksa paya, na mare nija-jana = 5.47 = 135  ‘nihsaktika’ kari’ tarre karaha niscaya? 6.153 280
‘mora pitdra kanya dite yogya ki ihare’ 5.62 142 nija-dhana dite nisedhibe kon jana 529 127
mukhe na nihsare vani, ha-ila stambhita 6.183 304  nija-duhkha-vighnadira nd kare vicara 4.186 95
mukhyartha chadiya kara gaunartha kalpana = 6.134 264 173 krta dui sloka likhiya tala-pate 6.250 339
‘mukhya’ 00301" ‘laksana ‘te mane nirvisesa = 6.151 278  nija krtya kari’ pajari karila Sayana 4.126 65
mukta paranachila bahu yatna kari’ 5.129 173 = nija-rdpa prabhu tarre kairdila darsana 6.202 314
mukti-pada-sabde ‘saksat isvara’ kahaya 6.271 353 nija-vipra-hte dui jana sange dila 6.249 339
mukti pade yarira, sei ‘mukti-pada’ haya 6.272 354  nilicale dila sarge ama-saba lana 6.23 203
mukti-sabda kahite mane haya &/11108-1/व52 = 6.276 = 356 = nilacale ani’ mora sabe hita kaila 5.153 185
mukunda datta kahe, —prabhu, tumi yaha = 5.155 186 171621९ caturmasya dnande rahila 4169 ৪7
mukunda-datta lan aila sirvabhauma sthane 6.68 = 223 = niladri-gamana, jagannatha-darasana 43 3
nilambara cakravartira hayena daubhitra 6.52 216

mukunda 02112 (02111 nila tira hate pana 6.251 340
mukunda dekhiya tanra ha-ilavismaya 619 201  ninda-stuti-hasye Siksa kard’ na dcarya 6.112 253
mukunda kahe, — ‘mahaprabhu sannyasa ~~ 6.23 = 203 = nirantara inhake vedanta suniba 675 228
mukunda kahe, — prabhura ihan haila 6.21 202 nirantarakara tumi vedanta sravana 6121 257
mukunda-sahita kahe bhattacaryera katha 6.115 254  nirveda, visada, jadya, garva, harsa, dainya 4.202 103
‘nirvisesa’ tarre kahe yei sruti-gana 6.141 270

mukunda-sahita parve ache paricaya 6.19 201
mukunda tanhare dekhi’kaila namaskara 6.20 202 nitydnanda bale, —danda (12112 tinakhanda 5.148 183
mui bhiksa dimu &ji maha-prasadanna 6.39 210  nityanandadi simha-dvare milila asiya 6.14 199
marcchitahaila, cetana na haya sarire 616 200  nitydnanda-gosanike acarya kaila namaskara 6.22 203
nityananda-gosanire (26700 kaila namaskare = 6.31 207
N nitydnanda-gosani yabe tirtha bhramila 5.8 115
17306, gdya, kande, pade prabhu-pada dhari’ = 6.208 316  nityananda-hate prabhu danda dharila 5.141 179
nd desa-niyamas tatra 6.226 324  nityanande kahe prabhu, — deha mora 5148 183
nadiya-nivasi, visaradera jamata 6.18 = 201 = nityananda-mukhe Suni’ gopala-carita 5.134 175
nadiya-sambandhe sarvabhauma hrsta haila 6.55 218. nityananda— vaktd yara, Srotd—sri- 5.159 188
nahi kahi— na kahio e mithya-vacana 5.44 134  nitya-siddhabhakte se ‘siddiptabhiva’haya 6.12 = 197
ndma-prema-dana-adi varpena mahattva 6.205 315  nrtya-gitakaila preme bahuta stavana 5.4 113
ndma-sankirtane sef ratri gonaila 4209 106  nrtya-gitakari’jaga-mohane vasila 4113 58


--- Page 384 ---
330 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
napurera dhvani-matra amara suniba 5.99 159  prabhu kahe, — “sdtrera artha bujhiye 6.130 262
napurera dhvani Suni’ anandita mana 5.102 160  prabhukahe,— 'tumibhakta, tomarasanga 6.211 318
nydyajinibare kahe asatya-vacana 5.64 143 prabhu kahe,— 'tumiki arthakara, (505 = 6.188 306
‘prabhuke diha’ bali’ dila jagadananda-hate ~~ 6.250 339
P prabhuke janila—saksat vrajendra- 6.280 357
[03076 ami kariba artha, yeba kichu jani’ 6.188 306  prabhuke krsnajani’ kare 30373 dhikkara 6.199 312
pache syama-vamsi-mukha svakiya svardpa = 6.203 314 03800 krpa kaila more tomara sambandhe = 6.246 337
padbhyan calan yah pratima-svaripo 5:1 112 prabhura age ani’ dila prasada bara ksira 4.205 105
padicha marite tenho kaila nivarana 6.5 194 = prabhura 303 haila, — ei karpdra-candana ~~ 4.163 84
panca-gavya, paficamrte 57373 karana 4.61 27 = prabhura bhakta-vatsalya, ara bhakta-prema- 4.211 107
panca-ksira pafica-jane vantiya khaila 4.207 106  prabhura krpdya (3773 sphurila saba tattva 6.205 315
pandityadye isvara-tattva-jidna kabhu nahe’ 6.87 = 237  prabhura nikata 5115 bhojana karina 6.47 214
(2215112 mukta nasaya chidra dekhina 5.132 174  prabhura prabhava dekhi’ prema-rapa-guna 4.16 9
parama santosa paila gopale dekhina 5.117 168  prabhura saundarya ara premera vikdra 6.6 195
parama virakta, mauni, sarvatra (1025118 4179 92 prabhure sana diya dpane vasila 6.119 256
pardya sevaka saba ananda kariya 4167 26  prabhusloka padi’ patra chindiya phelila 6.253 341
pariksa karite gopala kaila 2/5 dana 4189 97  prabhu-sthane 33 dunhe prasada-patri (278 6.251 340
pariksa kariya sese haila dayavan 4189 97  prabhu upadesakaila nama-sankirtana 6.241 333
‘parindma-vada’ —vyasa-sitrera sammata = 6.170 293 pragadha-premera ei svabhava-acara 4186 95
parvata-upari gela puri thakura lana 4.53 24 pragalbha ha-iya kahe sammukhe asia 5.58 140
parvata-upari land rikha bhala-mate 4.37 17 ‘prakrta’ nisedhi kare ‘aprakrta’ sthapana 6.141 270
pascdt asi’ amare kardiha siksa 6.111 253 prakrta-saktite tabe kaila vilokana 6.145 274
patharera simhasane thakura vasaila 4.54 24 ‘prakrti-vinita, sannydsi dekhite sundara 6.69 224
pathe 0903 bada dani vighna nahi kare 4.12 7 pramanera madhye sruti pramanapradhana = 6.135 265
patra praksalana kari’ khanda khanda kaila 4139 73 pranavahaite sarva-veda, jagat-utpatti 6.174 298
pdyasa, mathani, sara pase dhari ani’ 4.74 33 prapava na mani’ tire kahe mahd-vakya 6.175 298
pitira sambandhe dorihake pajyakari’ mani 6.54 = 217 = ‘prapava’ maha-vakya—isvarera mdrti 6.174 298
pitha-pana deha tumi irha-sabakare 6.44 212 praptam annarh 01137 sistair bhoktavyam = 6.226 = 325
prabhate calila mangala-arati dekhifa 5.139 177  prdpti-matrena bhoktavyari 6225 324
prabhu-ajnd palibare gela parva-desa 4108 55  prasadaani’tanre karaha age bhiksa 6111 253
prabhu-bhrtya 00773 sparse, dortharaphule 6.228 326  prasadanna khuli’ prabhu tara hate dila 6.222 323
prabhu dekhi’ dcryera duhkha-harsa haila == 6.30 = 206  prasdddnna-mald pana prabhu harsa haila 6.217 320
prabhu dekhi’ pache kariba isvara darsana’ = 6.28 = 205  prasaddnna pana bhattacaryera ananda 021 6.223 323
prabhu dekhi’ sabdra haila harasita mana 6.32 207  prasadapana sabe hailddnanditamane 6.36 209
prabhu kahe, —bhattacarya nd kara vismaya 6.184 304  pratah-kale punah taiche karila sevana 4.92 45
prabhu kahe,— ‘mandira bhitare niyaiba = 6.63 ~~ 221  pratah-snana kari’ puri grama-madhye gela = 4.47 21
prabhu kahe, —more deha laphra-vyafijane 6.43 ~~ 212 prati-dina eka-khani karena bhaksana 4140 73
prabhu kahe, — ‘more tumi kara anugraha = 6.122 258 pratima (21175 ila, — sunind vismita 5110 164
prabhu kahe ‘mukti-pade’—iha patha 6.262 346 pratima naha tumi,—saksat vrajendra- 5.96 1757
prabhu kahe, — ‘mukti-pade’ra ara artha 6.271 353
prabhu kahe, — “markha ami, nahi 6.126 260  pratisthara bhaye purigela palana 4147 76
prabhu kahe, — nityananda, karaha vicara = 4171 = 88  pratisthdra svabhava ei jagate vidita 446 76
prabhu kahe, ‘mukti-pade—ihapatha haya 6.262 346  pratiyuge karena krsna yuga-avatara 6100 246


--- Page 385 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 381
pratyaha candana paraya, yavat haila anta 4.168 86  pirva-dina-praya viprakarilarandhana 4.94 47
prema dekhi’ sevaka kahe ha-iya vismita 4137 72 parve isvara-puri tanrekahiyachena katha 4.18 9
premamirte trpta, ksudha-trsnd nahi badhe 4124 63 parve madhava-purira lagi’ ksira kaila curi 4.20 10
premd—'prayojana’, vede tina-vastu kaya 6.178 300  pdrve sri-madhava-puri 211 vindavana 4.21 11
premavese nrtya-gita kaila kata-ksana 5.6 114 parve vidya-nagarera dui ta’ brahmana 5.10 116
premavese nrtya-gita karila apara 4.155 81 putra bale, — “pratima saksi, seha 0013 5.43 133
premavese padila tumi, tomare dharinu 5.149 183  putreo pitara aiche na kare sevana 5.19 120
premavese prabhu-sange raja-marge yaya 5.145 181  putreramane, — pratima na asibe saksi 580 150
premavese uthe, 0906, hase, nace, gaya 4144 75  putreravirodhe kanya narila arpite” 528 126
premavista 1205 prabhu kabhite lagila 6.229 326
premavista hana prabhu kaila alingana 6.227 325 R
preme matta,—nahi tarra ratri-dina-jiana = 4.22 11 raja-lekha kari’ dila puri-gosafira kare 4153 80
premete vivasa 733 padila bhumite 4.198 102  raja-patra-sane yara ydra paricaya 4151 79
premonmdda haila, uthi’ iti-uti dhaya 4200 102  raja-saha mukta land mandire ila 5131 174
prita hana gosanire kahite lagila 6.55 218  ratri-Sese gopala (3176 kahena svapane 5.128 173
réja-seva haya, — purira dnanda badila 4.104 52
prthak prthak kaila padera artha niscaya 6.194 309
prthivite aiche bhoga kahan nahi ara 4118 60  randhi’ randhi’ tara upara rasi kaila bhata 4.72 33
prthivite nahi pandita tomara samana 6.85 236  rasa-kavya-madhye taiche ei sloka gani 4193 99
(20/27 aniya mala-prasadanna-dila 6.217 320  ratna-gana-madhye yaiche kaustubha-mani 4193 99
punah dina-sese prabhura karaila utthana 4.88 43 ratri-kale thakurere kardiya sayana 4.91 45
punah kahe, sighra cale, kare sarva grahana = 6.150 278 = remunate gopinatha parama-mohana 4.13 7
punah taila diya kaila sri-arga cikkana 4.62 28 remunate kaila gopinatha darasana 4.112 57
punah uthi’ stuti kare dui kara yudi’ 6.204 315 ragdhi-vrttye kahe tabu ‘sayujye’ pratiti 6.275 355
punah yena nahi cale e-saba vacana’ 5.81 150  rukminira pita bhismaka tahate pramana 5.27 125
punarapi 313 sabe mahaprabhura sthane 6.36 209
punarapi kahe vipra kariya yatana 5.70 145 9
purana-vakye sei artha karaya niscaya 6.148 277  saba anaila prate, cadila randhana 4.68 31
puri dekhi’ sevaka 5209 sammana karila 4156 81 5989 dhana lana kahe— ‘core la-iladhana’ 5.61 141
puri duhkha pabe iha janiya gopala 4.176 90  sabake kahila puri gopala-vrttanta 4149 78
puri, ei dugdha 1204 kara tumi pana 4.25 12 sabakhandi’ prabhu nija-mata se sthapila 6.177 300
saba loka asi’ (376 kare bahu bhakti 4145 76
puri-gosani aja dila sakala brahmane 4.83 39  saba loka bada-vipre dakiya anila 5.54 138
puri-gosarii gopalere kaila samarpana 475 34
puri-gosafii kaila kichu gavya bhojana 4.91 45 = sabalokaekatrakari'kahite lagila 4.47 21
puri-gosani rakhila tare kariya yatana 4103 52 sabasahita yatha-yogya karila milana 6.32 207
(2041-8 0580112 sange dila sambala-sahite 4152 79 5386 danda-dhana chila, taha na rakhila 5.153 185
sabe kahibe—'mora kichu nahika smarana’ 5.44 134
puri kahe, —ei dui ghasibe candana 4.166 85 sabe meli’ dhari tarire susthira karila 635 208
puri kahe, — ke tumi, (8/5) {02/23 vasa 4.27 13
purira prema dekhi’ dcarya ananda antare 4.110 55  sabemeli’ puche prabhuravartabara bara 6.22 203
purira prema-parakastha karaha vicara 4178 91 53806 vasi’ krame bhojana karila 4.84 40
sabha kari’ more tumi kariha smarane 5.91 155
Puri-sama bhagyavan jagate nahi ara 4171 88 sac-cid-dnanda-maya haya isvara-svarapa 6.158 284
purusottama-deva sei 0903 bhakta arya 5122 170  sad-aisvarya-parnananda-vigraha yanhara 6.152 279
parva 3৪/79/0019 yena haila saksatkara 4.86 41 sad-vidha aisvarya— prabhura-cic-chakti- 6.161 286


--- Page 386 ---
382 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta

‘sahajei pajya tumi, are ta’ sannydsa 6.56 218  sarvabhauma kichu tanre balilavacane 6.68 223
sahaje vicitra madhura caitanya-vihara 4.5 3 sarvabhauma kirti ghose dhakka-vadyakara 6.256 343
sahasra krosa asi’ bule candana maginia 4180 92 sarvabhauma lana geld dpana-bhavana 6.26 204
sahasra sahasra gabhi gopalera haila 4.102 51 sarvabhauma lai gela apanaraghare 6.16 200
sahaya 20 more tirtha karaila 5.18 120  sarvabhaumamane tabe updya cintila 6.7 195
saila parikrama kari’ govinda-kunde asi’ 4.23 12 sarvabhauma sarva-bhama 6.1 193
Saila-upari haite ama kunje lukana 4.42 19 sarvabhauma parivesanakarena pane 6.43 212
sakala aniya dila parvata haila pirna 4.67 30  sarvabhauma pathila saba darsana karite 6.33 207
sakala brahmane puri vaisnava karila 487 42 sarvabhauma-sthine giya prabhuke dekhila 6.30 206
sakala lokera age gopala saksi dila 5.112 165  sarvabhaume janafiasaba nila abhyantare 6.31 207
saksate na dekhile mane pratiti na haya 5.105 162 sarva-bhitesu bho-pala 6.156 282
saksi bolaimu tomdya, ha-io savadhana 5.75 147  sarvaisvarya-pariparna svayarn bhagavan 6.140 269
saksi deha yadi— tabe sarva-loka sune 594 156  sarva-prakdre karibe amaya palana 6.60 220
‘saksi-gopala’ bali’ tanra nama khyati haila 5118 168  sastra-drstye kahi, kichu na la-iha dosa 6.93 242
saksi-gopala dekhibare kataka aila 58 115 sastra-jria karifia tumi kara abhimane 6.96 244
saksi-gopalera katha suni, loka-mukhe 59 116. sastra-vyakhya karite aiche karo nahi Sakti = 6.191 308
‘salokyadi’ cari yadi haya seva-dvdra 6.267 349  sdta dina kara tumi vedanta sravana 6.124 259
salokya-samipya-sardpya-sarsti-sdyujyadra = 6.266 349  satadina paryanta aiche karena sravane 6.123 258
salokya-sarsti-samipya- 6.270 353 sata ksira pajarike bahudiyd dila 4.207 106
‘sambhave,— dhana-lobhe loka chade 5.63 142 sataslokakailaeka dandana yaite 6.206 315
sarnsdra-tapan akhildn 6.155 282 ‘sdyujya’sunite bhaktera haya ghrnd-bhaya 6.268 350
sarhsaya na kara tumi, karaha svikara” 5.30 127  sayya karaila, natana khata anana 4.81 38
samskdra kariye uttama-sampradaye aniyd’ = 6.76 = 228  sayyotthdna darasana karaila laa 6.67 223
samudra-snana kari’ mahdprabhu sighra 2/1 6.40 = 210 se desera rdja dila dscarya 5073 5.117 168
sanakadi-sukadeva tahate pramana 6.198 312 seiarthamukhya,—vydsa-sitre sabakaya 6.133 264
sandhyaya bhoga lage ksira—‘amrta-keli- 4117 59 ‘sei bhattacaryera prabhu kaile ei gati’ 6.210 317
sange eka vata nahi ghati-dana dite 4.185 95 sei bhaye ratri-sese calild sri-puri 4142 72
sankha-gandhodake kaila snana samadhdna = 4.62 28 581 brahma— brhadvastu, isvara-laksana 6.139 268
sannydsa-krc chamah santo 6.104 249  seibrahme punarapi hayeyayalaya 6.143 272
sannyasira dharma lagi’ sravana matra kari 6.127 260  5€। bujhe, dunhara pade yarra bhakti dhira = 5.158 187
santipura aild advaitacaryera ghare 4110 55 sei chidra adydpiha chaye nasate 5.130 174
sarana la-ila sabe prabhu-pade asi’ 6.281 358 sei desajini’ nila kariya sangrama 5.120 169
sdrvabhauma bhattdcarya-prabhuramilana = 4.3 3 sei dui-grantha-vakye nahi avadhina 6.97 244
sarvabhauma-ghare geld 02105110 haa 6.29 206 sei dui kahe kalite saksat-avatdra 6.98 245
sarvabhauma-grhe prabhu, —anumdna kaila 6.25 = 204 sei duira danda haya— ‘brahma-sayujya-m’ 6.265 = 348
sdrvabhaumera haila maha-prasade visvasa = 6.331 = 327 sei dui sisya kari’ seva samarpila 4104 52
sarvabhauma haild prabhura bhakta ekatina = 6.257 344 sei haite bhattacaryera khandila abhimane 6.236 331
sarvabhauma kahe, —adcarya, kaha 6.88 238 sei haite gopdlera katakete sthiti 5.133 175
sarvabhauma kahe, — ‘inhara nama 6.72 225 sei haiterahi ami ei kufja-sthane 4.43 20
sarvabhauma kahe, — nilambara cakravarti = 6.53 = 217  sei-kdle bhattacdryera hailajagarana 6.219 321
sarvabhauma kahe, —o-patha kahite ni pari 6.273 354 sei katha kahena, prabhu sune mahd-sukhe = 5.9 116
sarvabhauma kahe, —sighra karaha madya- 6.39 = 210 sei khanda [37073 padila, kichu nd janila 5.150 184
sdrvabhauma kare yaiche prabhurasevana = 6.282 358  sei-khane gopinathe dandavat kari’ 4.142 74


--- Page 387 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 383
sei mukta paraha, yaha cahiyacha dite” 5.130 174  §ri-rapa-raghuntha-pade ydra asa 5161 189
sei prasadanna-mala aficale bandhiya 6.218 32]  $ri-rdpa-raghundtha-pade ydra asa 6.286 360
sei raj jini’ nila tanra simhasana 5.121 170  $ri-vigraha ye ni mane, sei ta’ pasandi 6.167 290
sei ratre devalaye karila Sayana 4157 81  Sruti-vakye sei dui maha-pavitra haya 6.136 266
sei ratri tahan prabhu karila vaficana 4.17 9 Sruti ye mukhyartha kahe, sei se pramana 6.135 265
sei ratri tahan rahi’ bhakta-gana-sarige 5.7 115 = sthana lepi’ ksira lana ha-ila bahira 4131 67
sei sabde dmdra gamana pratiti kariba 599 159 str, putra, jidti, bandhu janibe niscaya 536 130
sei sei seva-madhye 5383 niyojila 4.87 42 stri-putrakahe, — ‘visakhaiya mariba’ 5.41 132
sei se kartavya, tumi yei more kaha’ 6.122 258  stri-saba dugdha diya amare pathaila 4.30 14
sei saba katha age kariba varnana 6.282 358  sthira hana bhattacarya bahu stuti kaila 6.212 318
sei ta’ iSvara-tattva janibare pare 6.83 235  stuti Suni’ mahaprabhu nija vasa dila 6.215 320
se kale nahi janme ‘prakrta’ mano-nayana 6.146 274  ‘suddiptasattuika’ ei ndma ye ‘pralaya’ 6.12 197
se mandire gopalera maha-seva haya 5.13 118  sukha pana rahe tahan dina dui-cari 5.15 119
sesa-kale ei sloka pathite pathite 4.196 100  Suklo raktas tatha pita 6.101 247
sesa-ratre tandra haila, — bahya-vrtti-laya = 4.34 16 stksma (013 ani’ nasa-agrete dharila 6.10 197
Sesa-ratri haile puri dekhila svapana 4157 81 Suna, bhatticarya, tomra sei ta’ ha-ila’ 6.244 336
seva angikara kari’ dchena cira-kdla 5.119 169  $uni’anandita haila sevakera mana 4165 85
seva angikdra kari’ jagata tarila 4.173 89  suni’bhatticarya hailaparama vismita 6.183 304
sevdra nirbandha— loka karila sthapana 4109 55 Suni’ bhatticirya kahe, — ‘Suna, mahasaya 6.187 306
sevara sausthava dekhi’ dnandita mane 4.114 58 uni’ bhatticarya-mane haila camatkara 6243 336
se-vigrahe kaha sattva-gunera vikara 6.166 289 Suni’ bhattacdrya sloka karla vyakhyana 6.189 307
siddhi-prapti haila purira slokera sahite 4.196 100 $0/ bhattdcaryera mane haila camatkara 6199 312
Sisya-gana kahe, — ‘vara kaha kona 6.80 231  suni’gopinatha-mukunda durhe duhkha 677 229
sisya kahe, — ‘ivara-tattva 5301 anumane’ 6.81 = 232 Suni’ hasi’ sarvabhauma balila vacana 6.92 241
sisya padlicha-dvara prabhu nila ৮৪373 6.8 196  suni’kichumahaprabhu duhk ha prakasila 5.152 185
sita-vrsti-vatagnite maha-duhka pai 436 17 Suni tanra sarge calila harise 4.50 22
sloka-Sese dui aksara-patha phirdila 6.260 345  suni mahaprabhu kahe aiche mat kaha 6.116 255
snana kari’ kapata khuli, mukta kaila dvara 4130 66  sunifia sakala loka camatkdra haila 5.108 163
snana kari, vrksa-tale ache sandhydya vasi’ 4.23 12 = 5401105 sakala loka karibe upahasa’ 539 131
snana, sandhyd, danta-dhavana yadyapind = 6.223 323 suni’ premavista haila $ri-madhava-puri 4136 21
Suni’ puri-gosari kichu mane vicérila 419 16

sneha-bhakti kari’ kichu prabha 6.120 257
sraddha-yuk ta 7303 iha sune yei jana 4.212 108  suni’ prabhukahe kichu sat hasiya 6.190 307
Sraddha-yukta hand iha sune yei jana 5.160 189  suni’saba gosthi tara kare haha-kdra 538 131
Sri-arga marjana kari’ vastra parila 4.63 29 = suni’ sabe janili ei mahdprabhura karya 617 200
sri-gopala dekhi’ tahan karila visrama 514 118 Suni’ sarvabhauma mane vicara karila 6.49 215
Sri-gopala’ ndma mora, — govardhana- 4.41 19 suni’sukhe prabhu tarre kaila alingana 6.207 316
sri-gopalah pradurasid-vasah san 4.1 1 Suniya acdrya kahe duhkhi 0373 mane 6.96 244
$ri-krspa-caitanya saci-suta guna-dhama’ 6.258 344  Suniya hasena prabhu anandita-mane 6.277 356
sri-krspa-caitanya-sarira-dhari- 6.254 341  sapa-adi-vyanjana-bhanda caudike dharila = 4.73 33
sri krsna-carane sei pdya prema-dhana 4.212 709  Suskarh paryusitari vapi 6.225 324
sri-krspake dekhinu mudi narinu cinite 4.45 20 satra-rape sei lila kariye sacana 4.7 4
$ri-mukhe madhava-purira amrta-carita 4170 88  satreraartha bhasya kahe prakasiya 6.131 263
$ri-ripa-raghunatha-pade yéra 353 4.213 108  satreramukhya artha na karaha vyakhyana = 6.132 263


--- Page 388 ---
384 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta

suvarna-thalira anna uttama vyaiijana 6.42 21] tabe sei dui vipre kahila isvara 5113 165
suvarna-varno hemango 6.104 249  tabe sei laghu-vipra kahite lagila 554 138
suvasita jala nava-patre samarpila 4.65 29 (386 sei vipra yai nagare kahila 5.108 163
svabhavika tina sakti yei brahme haya 6.153 280 1386 sei viprere puchila sarva-jana 5.56 139
svada jani’ taiche kira gopale lagai 4.120 6] tabu ei vipra more kahe bara bara 5.68 144
tabu kadacit bhakta kare angikara 6.267 349

svagamaih kalpitais tvar ca 6.181 303
svajana-mrtya-bhaye kahe asatya-vacana 5.84 152 tabu ta’ ivara-jidna nd haya tomdra 6.91 240
sva-kalpita bhasya-meghekare dcchadana  6.138 268 tabu tomara vakye karu na habe pratiti 593 156
svapane thakura asi’ balila vacana 4126 65  taha dite icchd, haila, manete cintaya 5.126 172
svapna dekhi’ pajari uthi’ karila vicara 4130 66  taha haite kaile tumi amara avyahati” 6.61 220
tahake ta'ei ksira Sighra deha 1208 4.129 66

svapna dekhi’ puri-gosanira haila premavesa 4.108 55
svapne dekhe, sei balaka sammukhe asina = 4.35 16 taha khana tomara sange kariba gamana 5.100 160
svapne 06001 sei rani rajake kahila 5.131 174 1303) asi’ prabhu kichu bahya prakasila 5.147 182
svarna, raupya, vastra, gandha, bhaksya- 4100 50 13087 edaila raja-patra dekhana 4183 94
Svdsa-prasvasa nahi udara-spandana 6.9 196 13073) ५25 deha, kara sarva samadhana’ 6.65 222
tahara madhura-vakye gela bhoka-sosa 4.26 13

svatah-pramana veda satya yei kaya 6.137 267
svatah-pramdna veda-vakye kalpenalaksana 6.179 301 (3036 vikhydta inho parama-isvara 6.79 230
svatantra isvara —tanra 373 se prabala 4164 84 taiche anna-kata gopala karila bhojana 4.94 47
sva-vakya chadite inhdra nahi kabhu mana = 5.84 152 (3006 bhiydne bhoga gopile lagaiba 4.115 58
svayarh bhagavan krsna—sastrerapramana 6.147 = 275 = tanharamahisi ila gopala-darsane 5.125 172
sveda-kampa-asru 00176 dnande bhasila 6.229 326  tanharanasate bahu-malya mukta haya 5.126 172
T tnhara santose bhakti-sampad badaya” 5.24 123
tanhara sevaya viprera tusta haila mana 5.17 120
tabe ami gopalere saksi karina 5.74 147  tanhasune loke kahe anyonye vat 6.15 200
tabe ami kahilan drdha kari’ mana 5.72 146 tarraaiche vikya sphure caitanya-prasade = 6.278 356
tabe ami kahilan— suni, maha-mati 5.69 145  tarra bhakti-vase gopdla tarre ajnadila 5123 171
tabe ami nyaya kari’ brahmanere jini’ 5.45 134 tanra hasta-sparse punah temani ha-ila 4.77 35
tabe bada-vipra kahe, — “ei satya katha 5.77 148 tanrakrpdyasphuriyiche madhavendra-vani 4.194 99
tabe bhattacarya kahe, yahagosanira sthane 6.110 252  tarira nava artha-madhye eka na chunila 6.193 309
tabe bhattdcarya kahe yudi’ dui kare 6.44 212 tanrenirakarakari’karaha vyakhyana 6.140 269
tabe bhatticarye prabhu susthira karila 6.212 318  tarra pada-padma nikata prandma karite 4.14 8
tabe chota-vipra kahe,— “Suna, mahajana = 5.64 = 143  tanra paya 20215072 na ha-uk amara 49 5
tanra puspa-c ida padila prabhura mathate 4.14 8

tabe chota-vipra kahe,— Suna, sarva-jana 5.83 151
tabe dui viprera satya pratijia rakhiba 5.92 156 tanraputra kahe,— ‘ei bhala vita haya’ 5.78 149
tabe ei 0851 muktd nasdya pardita 5.127 172  tanra putra mérite ila hate thenga kari’ 5.51 137
tabe ei viprera satya-pratijna rakhiba 5.85 152 (0/2 rapa dekhina haila vihvala-mana 4112 57
tabe 1/0 gopdlera 38616 kahila 5.73 146 tanrasatre 3006, tenha na kaila varpana 4.8 5
tabe jagaddnanda patri prabhuke lana dila 6.252 340 tanrathani gopalera lukana kichu nai 4.78 36
tara thani mantra laila yatana karina 4.111 56

tabe kanya diba ami, janiha niscaya” 5.78 149
tabe mahaprabhu suk he bhojana karila 6.41 211 taramuktiphalanahe, yei kare bhakti 6.265 348
tabe mui nisedhinu,— suna, dvija-vara 5.66 143  tdrapiche pache gopala karila gamana 5101 160
tabe saba loka meli’ patra ta’ likhila 5.82 151 tarapase dadhi, dugdha, 77303, sikharini 474 33
tabe sei bada-vipra dnandita hana 111 164 tara pase ruti-rasiraparvata ha-ila 4.73 33
tabe sei chota-vipra geld vindavana 5.87 153  taremagi’ karpara-candana karila saficaya 4151 79


--- Page 389 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 385
tarka-nistha hrdaya tomdra nahika vicara 6.100 246 tomdra sakala loka karaha vicare 5.62 142
tarka-sdstra-mata uthaya vividha vidhana 6.189 307  tomdra sambandhe prabhu krpakailamore ~~ 6.245 337
tarka-sastre jada ami, yaiche lauha-pinda 6.214 319  tomara sanga lagi’ mora 1/4 agamana 6.60 220
ta-sabara age 5204 vrttanta kahila 5.37 130  tomara stri-putra-jiatire na habe sammati 569 145
td"-sabara sammati vind nahe kanyd-dana 5.27 125
tomara upare tanra krpa yabe habe 6.106 250
td’ sabare krpa kari’ 313 remunare 4.12 7 tomdra vyakhya suni’ mana haya ta’ vikala 6.130 262
tathapi ‘aslisya-dose’ kahana na yaya 6.274 355  tomara ye Sisya kahe kutarka, ndnd-vada 6.107 250
tathapi utsaha 8303 candana 1303 yaite 4.185 95  tomd-saha sei danda-upare padinu 5149 183
tathdya rahila puri tavat paryanta 4.168 86 toma saksi bolaimu, yadi anyatha dekhi” 5.33 129
tat-tat-pada-pradhanye ‘atmarama’ milana = 6.195 310
tomd-sama bhagyavan nahi tri-bhuvane 4.134 69
tat te ‘nukampam susanksamano 6.261 346  tomite isvara-kipd ithe ki pramane 6.88 238
“tat tvam asi'—jiva-hetu pradesika vakya = 6.175 298 ‘tore ami kanya diba’ dpane kahila 5.65 143
tavat sparsa-mani keha cinite na pare 6.279 357 tore kanya dilun, tumi karaha svikara 5.68 144
tayd tirohi tatvac ca 6.156 282 trna-tati diya cari-dik avarila 4.82 39
te dustaramatitaranti ca deva-maydrn 6.235 329
trtiya prahare haila prabhura cetana 6.37 209
tenho dlingiya puche prabhura samacara 6.20 202 tulasi adi, puspa, vastra dila aneka 4.59 26
thakura dekhila mati-trne acchadita 4.51 23 tumi, bhasya kaha—sdtrera arthaacchadiyd 6.131 263
‘thakura more ksira dila—Iloka saba Suni" 4141 74 “tumi-dui— janme-janme amara kinkara 5113 165
thakurera bhoga sari" arati béjila 4.204 104 (071 gosanire lafia (21513 darasana 6.64 222
thakurera candana-sadhana ha-ila bandhana 4.148 77
‘tumi jagad-guru—sarvaloka-hita-karta 6.58 219
thakurera nasate yadi chidra thakita 5.127 172 tumi jana, ei vipre kanya ami dila 5.73 146
thakure sayana (21505 pajari haila bahira 4.205 105  ‘tumijana, nija-kanya ihre ami 0197 532 128
tharathari kari’ hase bhakta-gana-sarge 5.138, 177  tumi kaha, —kalite nahi vispura pracara 6.98 245
thena dekhi’ sei vipra palana gela 5.53 138  tumi— mahabhagavata, ami— tarka- 6.246 337
tina amse cic-chakti haya tina rapa 6.158 284  ‘tumi more kanya dite karydcha angikara 5.50 137
tina-bare svapna asi’ yanre jn kaila 4.172 89
tumi-saba 386 yaha isvara dekhite 5.154 186
tina khanda kari’ 03003 dila bhasana 5.143 180  tumi Suni’ Suni’ raha mauna matra dhari’ 6.129 262
tina-krosa patha haila— sahasra yojana 5.146 182  tumi yadi kaha,— ami kichui nd jani’ 545 134
tirtha karibare dunhe (८2111 gamana 5.10 116  tumi yei arthakara, bujhite na pari” 6.127 260
“tirtha-yatraya pitdra 59186 chila bahu dhana 5.59 140  tusta haila mahaprabhu svabhakta-sahita 5.134 175
tirthe vipre vakya 001) — kemate satya 5.36 130
tomdke kanya diba ami, karila niscaya” 5.25 124
(1
tamake kanya 0109, sabake kari’ tiraskara 5.30 127
toma lagi’ gopinatha ksira kaila curi 4.133 68  uccakari’ kare sabe nama-sankirtana 6.37 209
tomara age etakathara nahi prayojana 6.105 250  ulatiyd ama tumi nd kariha darasane 598 159
tomdra ajfiate matra kariye sravana 6.126 260  upanisad-sabde yei mukhya artha haya 6.133 264
tomdra asraya nilur, guru kari’ mani 6.59 220  uparete eka tati diya acchadila 4.82 39
tomdra kanyara yogya nahi muni vara 5.66 143  asara-bhimite yena bijera ropana 6.105 250
uthaha, pajari, kara dvdra vimocana 4127 65
{07153 milane yabe amara haila mana 6.27 205
tomdra nahika dosa, Sastre ei kahe 6.87 237  utkalera dani rakhe candana dekhina 4.183 94
tomdra na janila taha dmara maydya 4128 65  utkalera raja purusottama-deva nama 5120 169
tomdra [03006 pache ami kariba gamana 597 158  uttama 80088 lige—etha bujhi anumane ~~ 4114 58
tomdra prasade ami na pailima srama 5.19 120  uttamanna paka kari’ karaya bhojana 5102 160
tomdra prema-vase kari seva angikara 4.40 18  uttama uttama prasdda bahuta anila 6.249 339


--- Page 390 ---
386 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
‘visSvambhara’— nama inhara, tanra inho 6.52 216
Vv visvasa kari’ candana deha amara vacane 4.161 83
vitanda, chala, nigrahadi aneka uthaila 6.177 300
vairagya-advaita-marge pravesa karaiba 675 228 ‘vivarta-vada’ sthapiyache kalpana kariya 6772 296
vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga- 6.254 341
vaisnava-sannyasi 10/10, vacane janila 6.49 215  vraja-vasi lokera krsne sahaja piriti 4.95 47
vajrera sthapita, ami ihan adhikari 4.41 19 vrndavana-dasa-muk he amrtera dhara 4.5 4
vamana (120 canda yena caha ta’ dharite’ 5.52 137 vndavane govinda-sthane maha-devalaya 5.13 118
vyasa—bhranta bali’ sei satre dosa diya 6.172 29%
vana-yatraya vana dekhi’ dekhe govardhana 5.12 117 == vyasa-sitrera artha—yaiche saryera kirapa 6.138 = 268
vanya $aka-phala-male vividha vyafjana 4.70 32
varaha-thakura dekhi’ karila pranama 5.3 113 Y
vasi’ bhattacarya mane karena vicara 6.11 197
vasi’ nama laya puri, nidra nahi haya 4.34 16  yac-chaktayo vadatam vadinam vai 6.108 251
yadi ei vipra more na dibe kany-dina 5.75 147
vasite 35373 diya dunheta vasila 6.222 323 “yadi vara dibe, tabe raha ei sthane 5.115 167
vastu-tattva-jiana haya krpate pramana 6.89 239  yadyapi gopala saba anna-vyaijana khaila 477 35
vatsalye karuna karena, ki dosa ihate 6.117 255  yadyapi jagad-guru tumi—Sastra-jidnavan = 6.85 = 236.
veda-dharma larighi’ kaile prasada bhaksana” 6.234 329
veda na maniya bauddha haya ta’ nastika 6168 291  yadyapi ‘mukti-sabdera haya paca vrtti 6.275 355
yadyapi se mukti haya panca-parakara 6.266 349
vedanta padaite tabe drambha karila 6.120 257 yadyapi tomara artha ei sabde kaya 6.274 355
vedanta (2240130, sannyasira upakarta 658 219  yadyapi udvega haila paldite mana 4148 77
vedanta-$ravana, — ei sannyasira dharma 6.121 257  yaiche ihabhoga lage, sakala-i puchiba 4115 58
veda-purane kahe brahma-nirapana 6.139 268 yaiche paripati kare bhiksa-nirvahana 6.283 359
vedasraya nastikya-vada bauddhake adhika 6.168 291
vedera nigadha artha bujhana na haya 6.148 277  ydjapure se ratri karila yapana 5.4 113
yajfiaih sankirtana-prayair 6103 248
vicara-yoge sati hanta tasari 6142 277. yan-mitrarh paramanandari 6149 277
vinaya uni’ tustye prabhu kaila alingana 6.247 338  yanra lagi’ gopinatha kira kaila curi 4174 89
vipra bale, — “pratima hana kaha kene vani 5.95 = 157  yarra preme vasa hai prakata ha-ila 4.173 89
vipra bale,— "saksi bolana karibeka nydya 5.42 133 = yathakathancit kari’ se 111 kathana 4.8
vipra bale, — “tirtha vakya kemane kari dana 5.40 132
yarira vakya satya kari mane tri-bhuvana” 5.76 147
vipra bale, — tumi mora bahu seva kaila 518 120  yasmai daturh corayan ksira-bhandarn 41 2
vipra bale, — "yadi hao caturbhuja-marti 5.93 156 yaya ksetra-jia-saktih sa 6.155 282
vipra kahe, — Suna, loka, mora nivedana 5.57 140 yaya srutir jalpati nirvisesarn 6.142 271
vipra lagi’ kara tumi akarya-karapa” 5.96 157 ye hauk, se hauka, ami diba kanya-dana” 5.40 132
vinaya karifa kahe kara dui yudi’ 5.49 136  yeibhattacirya pade padiya mayavade 6.278 356
visaradera samadhyayi,— ei tanra khyati 6.53 217 yei ninda-yuddhadika kare tanre sane 6.264 348
vismita ha-ila gopinathera dasa-gana 4.16 9 yei sloka-candre jagat karyache dloka 4.191 98
visnu-saktih para prokta 6.154 281 ye navarche, tara haya vidhata-nirmita 4146 76
vistari’ kariyachena uttama varnana 4.4 ও yesam sa esa bhagavan dayayed anantah 6.235 329
vistariya age taha kariba varnana 6.283 359 ye ucita haya, mora kara tara danda 5.151 184
vistari’ varniyachena dasa-vrndavana 5140 178 yuktari ca santi sarvatra 6.109 251


--- Page 391 ---
General Index
Numerals in bold type indicate references to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
verses. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
A Agnostics
Buddhists considered, 291-292
Abhiseka those who don't accept form of Lord
description of, 26-30 are, 290
Abhyutthanam adharmasya Aharh sarvasya prabhavah
verses quoted, 343 quoted, 272
Absolute Truth 40970 tvam sarva-papebhyo
as original source of everything, 296 verses quoted, 330
categorized in three cases, 273-274 Abharikara itiyarn me bhinna
difference between relative truth and, verses quoted, 297
68-69 Aitareya Upanisad
followers ০1123097191 accept personality quoted on nature of Absolute Truth,
of, 351 273
is a person, 269-270 Ajita-jito ‘py asi tais tri-lokyam
is Krsna, 272 quoted, 72
knowledge of as evidence of Lord's America
mercy, 239 installation of Deities in, 43
knowledge of not derived by logical hy- Amrta-pravaha-bhasya
pothesis, 232-234 cited on nature of Supreme Brahman,
known in three phases, 230, 269, 292 273
Mayavadis try to establish as formless, summary of Fourth Chapter in, 1
280 summary of Sixth Chapter in, 191
Mayavadis try to prove impersonal Ananga-bhima, King
nature of, 264, 278-279 temple of Jagannatha Puri constructed
Supreme Brahman is, 269 by, 181
the real philosophy of the, 192 Andha yathandhair upaniyamanah
transcendental nature of mind and eyes quoted, 69
of, 274-275 Animals
See also Krsna, Supreme Lord without God-consciousness humans are
Acaryas like, 128
one must follow path traversed by, 277 Annakata ceremony
previous to Caitanya accepted a danda, description of, 31-35
188 leaders should execute, 46
statements of proof Caitanya is Anubhasya
Supreme Lord, 231 word upanisad explained in, 264
See alsoSpiritual master Anyabhilasita-sanyam
Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva quoted, 299
Caitanya’s philosphy of, 288 Apani-pado javano grahita
Activities verses quoted, 270, 279
four opulences as result of pious, 122 Arjuna
Adbhiradha-mahabhava accepted Krsna as Supreme Brahman,
explanation of, 199 269
Advaita Acarya accepts Krsna as God, 232
initiated by Madhavendra Puri, 56 addresses Krsna as original person, 279
387


--- Page 392 ---
388 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Arjuna Atmarama verse
secrets of Gita disclosed to, 233 quoted, 306
victorious by grace of Krsna, 37 Atma va idam eka evagra 35
learned about Krsna by His mercy, 234, verses quoted, 273
330 Austerity
Aruhya-krcchrena param padam tatah performed by Mayavadis doesn't purify
quoted, 292, 352 their intelligence, 292
Aryans Avajananti mari madha
King Purusottama advanced in civiliza- verse quoted, 279
tion of, 170 Avidya-sakti
Asita provokes fruitive activity, 281
accepts Krsna as God, 232 Ayi mukta-kulair upasyamanam
Aslisya va pada-ratarh pinastu mam quoted, 299
quoted, 96
Asramas B
observance of Caturmasya obligatory
for all, 87 62/10/5077 janmanam ante
Asutosa verses quoted, 275
Siva known as, 178 verses quoted, 331
Atah sri-krsna-namadi Baladeva Vidyabhuasana
verse quoted, 36, 236, 276 cited as reference, 265
Atharanala Balarama
as bridge at entrance of Jagannatha Puri, as lila-avatara, 246
183 rebuked Krsna for punishing Rukmi, 126
Nityananda broke Caitanya's staff at, Bhagavad-gita
111 Arjuna accepted Krsna as Supreme
Atharva Veda Brahman in, 269
as Vedic literature, 268, 276 brahma-bhata described in, 351
Athato brahma (17558 cited on material elements as Lord's en-
quoted, 296 ergy, 158
Atheism conclusion of, 240
Sankaracarya presented Vedic literature discourse on ksetra and ksetra-jAa in,
full of, 302-304 281
See also Impersonalism duty of vaisyas described in, 46
Atheists interpreted by Mayavadis, 263
can’t understand how Deity eats, 35 is within Mahabharata, 268
don't believe in spiritual position of Krsna declared to be God in, 263-264
Deity, 134 quoted on actual purpose of Vedas, 301
interpret Vedas imaginatively, 263-264 quoted on approaching spiritual master,
Mayavadis are actually, 192 279
See also Impersonalists, Mayavadis quoted on auspicious presence of Krsna
Atmarama verse and Arjuna, 37
eleven words in listed, 310 quoted on brahma-bhata platform, 287
explained by Caitanya in eighteen quoted on deluded world not knowing
ways, 192, 309-312 Krsna, 233
explained by Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya quoted on demons who don't sur-
in nine ways, 307-308 render to Krsna, 68


--- Page 393 ---
General Index 389
Bhagavad-gita Bhagavan
quoted on difference between body as phase of Absolute Truth, 269
and self, 330 brahmajyoti as bodily effulgence of, 351
quoted on example set by great men, explicitly described in Bhagavatam, 292
185 Krsna or Rama sometimes accepted as
quoted on escaping danger by devo- by Mayavadis, 232
tional service, 337 See also Krsna
quoted on food offered to Krsna, 35 Bhagavata Purana
quoted on full surrender to Lord, 330 especially meant for Vaisnavas, 268
quoted on inferior energy of Lord, 297 See also Srimad-Bhagavatam
quoted on Krsna as goal of Vedas, 275 Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
quoted on Krsna as source of every- loss of memory described in, 104
thing, 272, 296 quoted on Krsna's revealing Himself to
quoted on Krsna being known by Vedas, devotees, 36
269 saddipta-sattvika explained in, 198
quoted on Krsna helping His devotee, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
148 cited on invitation of Advaita, 56
quoted on Kuruksetra, 266 cited on nature of Absolute Truth, 273
quoted on living being as marginal cited on Nityananda’'s breaking
potency, 288, 289 Caitanya'’s staff, 180
quoted on Lord's not being exposed to cited on story of two brdhmanas and
everyone, 239 Saksi-gopala, 124
quoted on Lord working through His en- cited on transformation of energy, 294
ergies, 295 danda-bhanga-lila explained by, 188
quoted on principle followed in Battle quotes Rapa Gosvami on mahabhava
of Kuruksetra, 128 199
quoted on qualifications for engaging in word saddipta-sattvika explained by,
devotional service, 335 198
quoted on rareness of knowing Krsna, word “upanisad” explained by, 264
275 Bhakti-yoga
quoted on rascals who worship imagin- Mayavadis equate worship of imaginary
ary forms of Cod, 290 forms with, 290
quoted on reason for Lord's descent, offers immortality to conditioned soul,
342-343 293
quoted on reciprocation between Krsna senses purified to engage in, 51
and devotee, 48 spiritual activities other than, 311
quoted on surrender of wise man to See also Devotional service, Krsna con-
Krsna, 331 sciousness
quoted on those eligible for devotional Bhakto ‘si me sakha ceti
service, 241 quoted, 233
quoted on transcending modes of Bhaktivinoda Thakura
nature, 70 cited on nature of Supreme Brahman,
quoted on understanding Lord by devo- 273
tional service, 52 Bhaktya mam abhijanati
reading of means to understand Krsna, quoted, 52, 233
237 Bharati sampradaya
secrets of disclosed to Arjuna, 233 brahmacaris named Caitanya in, 224


--- Page 394 ---
390 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta
Bharati sampradaya Brahman
in disciplic succession of Sankaracarya, as feature of Absolute Truth, 230, 269,
226 292
Bharginadi River bliss derived from realizing, 312
Nityananda threw Caitanya’s staff in, considered central point of relationship
111, 179-180 of Mayavadis, 302
Bhavisya Purana indicates Krsna, 275-277
quoted on Vedas as self-evident, 267 known as Brahmaloka, 351
Bhismaka Mayavadis consider living beings identi-
as father of Queen Rukmini, 125-126 cal with, 293
Bhamir 300০ ‘nalo vayuh means the greatest of all, 269-270
verses quoted, 297 merging in as kind of punishment,
Bhuvanesvara 347
Vrndavana dasa described Lord's See also Brahmajyoti
journey to, 178 Brahmananda
Caitanya visited temple of Sivaat, 111 as inferior to transcendental bliss, 312
Bindu-sarovara Brahmanas
as lake created by Siva, 179 devotees under protection of Lord are
Body, material automatically, 189
Mayavadis think Krsna has, 232 initiated into Vaisnava cult by Madha-
Brahma vendra Puri, 42-43
accepts Krsna as God, 231-232 Krsna arranged worship of Govardhana
made a mistake in understanding Krsna, Hill and, 41-42
236 Krsna pleased by service to, 123-124
prayers of quoted by Sarvabhauma, 345 not necessarily Vaisnavas, 42-43
quoted on fortune of Nanda Maharaja, offer obeisances to devotees, 71
277-278 prasada offered first to, 40
Brahma-bhata proper initiation of, 56-57
described in Gita, 351 six duties of, 42-43
Brahma-bhatah prasannatma Brahmanda Purana
verse quoted, 287 quoted on two kinds of beings in Sid-
Brahma-bhayaya kalpate dhaloka, 347
quoted, 70 Brahma-sambhita
Brahmacaris quoted on brahmajyoti as effulgence of
different kinds of, 227 Lord, 233, 272
named Caitanya in Bharati sampradaya, quoted on energies of Lord, 295
224 quoted on generation of material uni-
sometimes take sannyasa, 216 verses, 351
Brahmajyoti quoted on Lord as all-pervasive, 272
as bodily effulgence of Lord, 351 quoted on pure devotee understanding
as cause of creation, 233 Lord, 236
Vaikunthalokas situated in, 327 quoted on understanding Krsna by love,
See also Brahman 72
Brahmaloka verses from chanted at abhiseka
See Siddhaloka, 347 ceremony, 27
Brahman Brahma-satra
as bodily rays of Krsna, 232-233 See Vedanta-satra


--- Page 395 ---
General Index 391
Brahma-vaivarta Purana Caitanya Mahaprabhu
especially meant for Vaisnavas, 268 ecstatic feelings of came from Madha-
Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti vendra Puri, 101
quoted, 230, 292 ecstatic symptoms of, 181-182,194,
Brhan-naradiya Purana 198-199
Caitanya explained harer nama verse of, explained atmarama verse in eighteen
336 ways, 309-312
quoted on chanting holy names, 335 His bodily complexion was yellowish,
Brhaspati 247, 249
Caitanya compared Bhattacarya to, 308 His philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda-
Sarvabhauma composes verses quicker tattva, 288
than, 316 identical with Gopinatha Deity, 106,
Buddha 176-177
as lila-avatara, 246 never discussed rasa-lila publicly, 69
rejected ritualistic ceremonies of Vedas, not dependent on inferior or superior
291 sampradaya, 229
Buddhism personally tasted qualities of Gopalaji,
Sankaracarya’s philosophy similar to, Copinatha and Madhavendra Puri,
303 107
Buddhists pleased to hear of marital dealings be-
considered agnostics, 291-292 tween devotees, 124
process recommended by, 301
C quoted on Krsna being understood from
devotees, 233
quoted on real guru, 56
Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka quoted on qualification of guru, 71
quoted on two features of Supreme relished characteristics of Madhavendra
Lord, 271 Puri, 88, 91-97
Sarvabhauma's verses included in, retained His brahmacari name, 224
341-342 revealed conclusion of Madhvacarya-
Caitanya Mahaprabhu sampradaya, 101
always expressed ecstatic emotions of things happen wonderfully by grace of,
Radharani, 101 37-38
and His devotees as paramaharsas, 188 thought Himself servant of the servant
appearance of confirmed in Vedic scrip- of God, 123
tures, 343 verse understood only by Radharani,
as covered incarnation 243-244, 246 Madhavendra Puri and, 100-101
as Krsna Himself, 180, 191, 227, 313, Caitanya-bhagavata
341-342, 358 Lord's journey to Bhuvanesvara de-
associates of as nitya-siddhas, 166 scribed in, 178, 179
as son of mother $30, 344 pastimes of Caitanya described in,
considers Mayavadis more dangerous 3,5
than the Buddhists, 292 Caitanya-caritamrta
criticized Sariraka-bhasya, 299-300 quoted on lila-avataras, 245-246
danced with Sarvabhauma, 326 quoted on qualification of guru, 71
does not rely on external formality, Caitanya-mangala
226-227 See Caitanya-bhagavata


--- Page 396 ---
392 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Candaneévara
as son of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, D
208
Catuh-sana Dadami buddhi-yogari tam
as lila-avatara, 246 verses quoted, 48
Caturmasya Damodara
observance of, 87 took prasada and verses to Caitanya,
Chadiya-vaisnavaseva nistara payeche 339-340
quoted, 123 Danda
Chandamsi yajnah kratavo vratani significance of, 188
verses quoted, 273 Danda-bhanga-nadi
Chand Kazi River Bharginadi now known as,
Caitanya’s discussion with, 261 179-180
Chandogya Upanisad Dattatreya
quoted on creation by Lord, 275 as lila-avatara. 246
Chanting Dehino ‘smin yatha dehe
identical with devotional service, 64 verse quoted, 330
public encouraged by Caitanya, 69 Deity
See also Holy name atheists don’t believe in spiritual posi-
Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu tion of, 134
verses quoted, 27 bathing ceremony of described, 26-30
Cit potency can act exactly as Lord in His original
described, 283 form, 158-159
Conditioned souls devotees should engage everyone in
almost all envious, 77 service of, 51
See also Human beings extends reality of transcendental princi-
Conjugal love ples, 189
conception of introduced in only Vaisnavas can worship, 43
Madhvacarya-sampradaya, 101 quarrels settled before, 128
Cow Vaisnavas don’t eat anything not
as most important animal, 46 offered to, 46
Deity bathed with stool and urine of, 28 worship of considered false by
dung of is pure, 266-267 Mayavadis, 292
Krsna arranged worship of Govardhana worship of described, 43
Hill and, 43-44 worship of necessary to understand
Creation Krsna, 72
brahmajyoti as cause of, 233 worship of not neglected by disciple of
by glance of Lord, 274-275 transcendental sannyasis, 57
Krsna's direction in background of, 295 Demons
Lord as one with and different from His, turned into Vaisnavas by taking prasada,
192 46
scientists set forth false theories about, Devotees
252 all godly qualities exist in, 148
subsists by energy of Supreme Brah- are already freed from sin, 241
man, 273 are automatically brahmanas, 189
Cuttak aspire to reach Coloka Vrndavana, 327
See Kataka brahmanas offer obeisances to, 71


--- Page 397 ---
General Index 393
Devotees Devotional service
consider merging in Brahman a punish- in conjugal love introduced by Madha-
ment, 348 vendra Puri, 101
don’t consider personal inconve- Krsna conquered through, 72
niences, 95-96 Lord understood only by, 233
ecstatic symptoms manifest by ad- manifested by Caitanya, 106
vanced, 198 nine kinds of, 64, 334
expected to accept all nine processes of no titular superiority required to engage
devotional service, 64 in, 227
following in footsteps of exalted, 343 of Madhavendra Puri as subject of
four sampraddyas of uncontaminated, Chapter Four, 1-109
101 one must be purified to engage in,
Krsna can deal with in any form, 159 335
Krsna controlled by, 72 one not engaged in is materially con-
Krsna reciprocates with, 48 taminated, 351
Krsna understood only by mercy of, one who engages in transcends modes
279 of nature, 70
Lord consents to be captured by, 236 opulence of one’s increases by pleasing
Lord eats everything offered by, 35-36 Lord, 123
Lord understood only by, 233 perfect knowledge acquired by, 276
many are nitya-siddha, 166 rendered through spiritual master, 302
Mayavadis should not be seen by, 290 saves one from danger, 337
of Caitanya follow in footsteps of system of had been lost at time of
Madhavendra Puri, 92 Caitanya, 342
purified conditioned souls as, 302 those averse to punished by merging in
Sarvabhauma'’s verses as necklaces on Brahman, 347
necks of, 344 understood by sense control, 228
should engage people in service to the See also Bhakti-yoga, Krsna conscious-
Deity, 51 ness
understand Krsna by revelation, 36 Dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre
See alsoPure devotees, Vaisnavas quoted, 128, 266
Devotional service Dharman mahapurusa pasi
after studying Vedas one must execute, verses quoted, 243
301 Dhanvantari
as highest perfection of human activity, as lila-avatara, 246
305 Dharmah svanusthitah (2८117507)
as one’s real occupation, 301 verses quoted, 276
begins when mind is purified, 330 Diksa
bliss of superior to brahmananda, 312 defined, 57
Caitanya descended to teach, 341-342 Dina-dayardra-natha
Caitanya fixed in, 249 Krsna known as, 101
chanting identical with, 64 Dronacarya
chanting holy name as most important Yudhisthira spoke like diplomat to
item of, 334 134-135
described in Vedanta, 293 Durga
engagement in by taking shelter of Siva explains his appearance as
omkara, 298 Sarkaracarya to, 303


--- Page 398 ---
394 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta
Dvapara-yuga Form of the Lord
Krsna accepted blackish body in, 247 impersonalists don’t accept, 293, 348
worship of Govardhana Hill begun at never lost due to transformation of His
end of, 41 energies, 297
Dvapare paricarydyarn omkara as sound, 298
verses quoted, 336 one who does not accept is an agnostic,
Dva suparna sayuja sakhaya 290
verses quoted, 287 shown by Caitanya to Sarvabhauma,
314-315
E unknown to Mayavadis, 292
Fruitive activities
Ekamra-kanana everyone addicted to in Kali-yuga, 343
as place given to Siva by Krsna, 178-179 hearing Sarvabhauma frees one from,
Elements 360
Lord can appear through material, 158 Lord bestows results of, 287
Energy Mayavadi scriptures make one addicted
living beings as marginal, 288, 289 to, 304
Lord enjoys six kinds of opulence in His,
286 G
Lord's inferior described, 288
material acts on living beings in त~ Cadadhara
ferent degrees, 283 as personal expansion of Caitanya, 249
material world as manifestation of ma- Gargamuni
terial, 297 quoted on yuga-avataras, 247
of Lord manifested in three phases, Cauda-mandala-bhami
285-286 equal to Vrajabhami, 166
of Lord sometimes manifest sometimes Gaudiya-Madhva-sampradaya
not, 294-295 worship in separation in, 101
power of illusory, 252 Cauracandra
Supreme glanced over material, See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
274-275 Caurangera sangi-gane, nitya-siddha
three kinds of the Lord's, 280-283 verses quoted, 166
Europe Gautama
installation of Deities in, 43 set forth false theories, 252
Evidence Gaya
ten kinds of, 265-266 as place of pilgrimage, 117
Vedic accepted as foremost, 267-268 Codavari
Vidyanagara situated on bank of, 169
8 Coloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhatah
quoted, 272
Fame Goloka Vindavana
Vaisnavas don’t hanker after, 77 devotees aspire to reach, 327
Food Lord always stays in, 272
preparation of nutritious, 46 See also: World, spiritual, Vindavana
Form of the Lord Copala Deity
as complete in eternity, knowledge and Caitanya personally tasted qualities of,
bliss, 289 107


--- Page 399 ---
General Index 395
Gopila Deity Copis
established on Govardhana Hill, 1 approached Lord out of lust, 69
as directly son of Maharaja Nanda, symptoms of mahabhava exhibited by,
158 199
brought to town of Kataka, 111 Cosvamis, the six
Caitanya pleased with beauty of, 114 as paramaharnsas, 62-63
Caitanya of same form as, 176-177 Caitanya praised by, 343
history of, 19-20 chanted fixed number of rounds, 64
known as Saksi-gopala, 111 temples started by, 53
given pearl by Queen of Purusottama- Government
deva, 172-175 Krsna conscious, 46-47
nondifferent from Gopinatha Deity, 83 Govardhana Hill
now situated in city of Kataka, 175 Gopala Diety established on top of, 1
originally installed by grandson of Krsna, Krsna instituted worship of, 41-42
2 Govinda
quarrel of love between Jagannatha Krsna known as, 233
Deity and, 116 Govinda-kunda
tested love of Madhavendra Puri, 97 Gopila Deity bathed with water from,
went back to Kataka, 171 25
whole world liberated by, 89 Madhavendra Puri took a bath at, 12
Copinatha Acarya Crhastha-brahmana
as brother-in-law of Sarvabhauma Bhat- worship of Visnu by, 57
tacarya, 253 Grhasthas
as son-in-law of Visarada, 201 may be spiritual masters, 57
convinced that Caitanya is Krsna, sannyasis offered respect by, 218
226-227 Gupta-kasi
ecstatic to see Sarvabhauma as a devo- visited by Caitanya, 179
tee, 332 Guru
established that Caitanya is Krsna, 191 See: Spiritual master
found residential quarters for Caitanya, Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-
222-223 quoted, 233
met with Mukunda Datta, 202
pleased at ecstasy of Sarvabhauma,
317-318 H
Copinatha Deity
Caitanya identical with, 106 Hare Krsna mantra
Caitanya personally tasted qualities of, See also: Maha-mantra
107 Hari
famous sweet rice offered to, 60 as name of Supreme Lord, 306
given sandalwood meant for Gopala See also: Krsna, Supreme Lord
Deity, 82-86 Hari-bhakti-vilasa
helmet of fell on head of Caitanya, 8 cited on bathing ceremony of Deity,
Madhavendra Puri overwhelmed by 26-27
beauty of, 57 Harhsa
nondifferent from Gopala Deity, 83 as lila-avatara, 246
openly declared he was a thief, 68 Hare Krsna mantra
story of summarized, 1 chanted by Caitanya on way to Puri, 6


--- Page 400 ---
396 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta
Hare Krsna mantra Impersonalism
devotees of Caitanya chanted, 209 little difference between voidism and,
Haridasa Thakura 291-292
chanted fixed number of rounds, 64 Sarvabhauma saved from great
Hayagriva falldown of, 337
See: Hayasirsa Impersonalists
Hayaéirsa path of yoga more abominable than
as lila-avatara, 246 path of, 352
Holy name punished by merging in Brahman, 348
chanted by Sarvabhauma on arising think “spiritual” refers to an absence of
from bed, 322 form, 290
chanting of as most important item of See also: Mayavadis
devotional service, 334 Incarnations
chanting of encouraged by Caitanya, enumerated to Sanatana Gosvami, 246
69 magicians accepted as, 234
ornkara as form of, 298 pseudo not referred to in sastras, 231
one becomes purified by chanting, 69 India
Sarvabhauma always chanted custom of arranging marriage in, 128
Caitanya’s, 344 many pseudo-incarnations in, 231
Sarvabhauma could understand impor- system of marriage in, 122
tance of chanting, 315 Indonesia
Hrsikesa Vedic culture lost in, 54
served by purified senses, 51 Indra
Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanarh bhaktir worship of by cowherd men stopped
quoted, 51 by Krsna, 41-42
Human beings Intelligence
devotional service as highest perfection of Mayavadis not purified, 292, 330
for, 305 Tévara Puri
four defects of, 265 as disciple of Madhavendra Puri, 43
like animals without God conscious- Caitanya heard story of Madhavendra
ness, 128 Puri. from, 1, 10
spiritual consciousness comparatively ecstatic feelings of Caitanya come
awakened in, 283 through, 101
supreme occupational duty for all, 301 Ittharn nr-tiryag-rsi-deva-jhasavatarair
verses quoted, 243
1
J
Idam hi visvarn bhagavan ivetaro
verses quoted, 274 Jagadananda
lllusion, theory of took prasdda and verses to Caitanya,
Mayavadis try to establish, 296 339-340
the genuine platform of, 297 Jagannatha Deity
Immortality Caitanya fainted on entering temple of,
of individual person as highest perfec- 191, 194
tion, 293 Caitanya fainted on seeing, 194
Impersonalism Caitanya fainted on seeing temple of,
jAanis overly stress, 331 181


--- Page 401 ---
General Index 397
Jagannatha Deity Jiva Gosvami
Caitanya received garlands and prasada warns against interpreting scriptures,
from, 321 266
devotees of Caitanya go to see, 208 JAdna
Gopinatha Acarya took Caitanya to see Lord attracts those engaged in activities
early rising of, 223 of, 311
helped King Purusottama, 111 JAdna-kanda karma-kanda, kevala visera
Madhavendra Puri overwhelmed with bhanda
ecstasy on seeing, 77 verse quoted, 331
Manikya throne presented to, 171 JAanis
quarrel of love between Gopala Deity overly stress impersonalism, 331
and, 116
sandalwood and camphor used for,
79 K
Sarvabhauma acquired faith in maha-
prasada or, 327
Sarvabhauma pleased to receive Kaivalyarh narakayate
prasada or, 323 quoted, 350
showed mercy to Sarvabhauma, 318 Kalatmana bhagavata
visited by Caitanya and Sarvabhauma, verses quoted, 41
256 Kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
visited by Sarvabhauma, 339 verses quoted, 335
Jagannatha Misra Kaliya-ghata
as father of Caitanya, 216 pilgrims bathe at, 119
Jagannatha Puri Kali-yuga
bridge at entrance of, 183 as ocean of faults, 336
Caitanya chanted Hare Krsna on way to, chanting holy names important in,
6 335-336
Caitanya went to, 3 everyone in attached to fruitive ac-
inhabitants of took shelter of Caitanya, tivities in, 343
358 Lord appears in disguise in, 243
Madhavendra Puri collected sandal- mahd-mantra chanted in congrega-
wood pulp at, 1 tionally in, 248
present temple of constructed by King no lila avataras in, 246
Ananga-bhima, 181 order of sannydsa prohibited in, 261
River Bhargi six miles north of, 179 Siva appears as Sankaracarya in, 303
visited by Madhavendra Puri, 75-76 Kalki
Jaimini as lila-avatara, 246
set forth false theories, 252 Kamalapura
Janayaty asu vairagyari Caitanya visited, 111, 179
verses quoted, 276 Kanada
Janmady asya yatah set forth false theories, 252
quoted, 272, 296 Kapila
Java as lila-avatara, 246
Vedic culture lost in, 54 Kapila (atheist)
Jiva Gosvami set forth false theories, 252
as a brahmacari, 53 Kapote$vara
cited as reference, 265 Caitanya visited temple of, 180


--- Page 402 ---
398 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Karma Knowledge
Lord attracts those engaged in activities hearing Sariraka-bhasya deprives one of,
of, 311 293
Karma-kanda jAana-kanda kevala visera Krsna as ultimate goal of, 236
quoted, 124 Mayavadis bereft of real, 290
Karmis Mayavadi scriptures make one bereft
fully under bodily conception of life, of, 304
331 must be cultivated to understand devo-
Kasi tional service, 228
as place of pilgrimage, 117 of summum bonum as evidence of
Kasi Misra Lord's mercy, 239
inhabitants of Puri led by take shelter of real not attained by logical hypothesis,
Caitanya, 358 232-234
Kasiraja subject matter of, 284
fight between Krsna and, 178 understanding Vasudeva as real, 276
Kataka Vedic necessary to understand Krsna,
Copila Deity now sitated in, 175 279
King of defeated by King Purusottama, Kotisv asesa-vasudadhi-vibhdati-bhinnam
111 quoted, 272
temple of Saksi-gopalaat, 111 Krsna
Katha Upanisad Absolute Truth is, 272
quoted on understanding Krsna by His all Vedic knowledge leads to, 276
mercy, 238 Arjuna victorious by grace of, 37
Kaustubha-mani as lila-avatara, 246
verse of Madhavendra Puri compared as son of Nanda 14431731313, 358
to, 99 as Supersoul knows everyone's desire,
Kavi-karnapura 149
as author of Caitanya-candrodaya- as Supreme Brahman, 269-270
nataka, 342 as the all-attractive, 311
quoted on two features of Supreme as the greatest of everything, 269
Lord, 271 as ultimate goal of knowledge, 236
Ke$ava Bharati as ultimate object of Vedic literature,
Caitanya took sannyasa from, 224, 225 275
Keéi-ghata began Govardhana-paja, 41-42
pilgrims bathe at, 119 Brahman as bodily rays of, 232-233
Kiba vipra kiba nyasi sadra kene Caitanya appeared in original form of to
verses quoted, 56, 71 Kirtanad eva Sarvabhauma, 314-315
krsnasya Caitanya as, 180, 191, 227, 230, 313,
verses quoted, 335 341-342, 358
Klesa-karma-vipakasayair can appear in any material element,
quoted, 352 158-159
Knowledge compared to sun, 158
acquired by taking shelter of samvit considered immoral by mundane ras-
potency, 285 cals, 68
all Vedic produced from oritkara, 298 considered ordinary human by
Caitanya descended to teach real, Mayavadis, 232
341-342 controlled by devotees, 72


--- Page 403 ---
General Index 399
Krsna Kuruksetra, Battle of
declared to God in (713, 263-264 principle followed in, 128
established as God by statements from
authorized persons, 231-232
feelings of separation from, 92 L
Coloka Vrndavana as residence of, 327
has transcendentally attractive features, Living beings
306 as knowers of field of activities, 281
known as brahmanya-deva, 189 as marginal potency, 288, 289
known as dina-dayardra natha, 101 as servants of Lord's potencies, 287
known as Mukunda, 354 as superior energy of Lord, 297
liberated souls attracted by qualities of, pleasure potency in, 283
312 sometimes described as Brahman, 269
love of in separation expressed by suffer threefold miseries, 282
Radharani, 101 tat tvam asi meant for understanding,
pleased when one is servant of His ser- 299
vant, 123, 124 two kinds of, 166
reading of Gita means understanding, Love of God
237 as ultimate goal of life, 301, 302
reason for His descent, 342-343 attained by hearing narration about
understood by purified senses, 36 Madhavendra Puri, 108
Vajra as grandson of, 2 awakened by devotional service, 72
whatever He does is all good, 68-69 Caitanya danced in ecstasy of, 181
word “Brahman” indicates, 275-277 Caitanya overwhelmed with, 194-195
See also Absolute Truth, Supreme Lord characteristics of those who have
Krsna Caitanya developed, 95-96
See Caitanya Mahaprabhu in separation expressed by Radharani,
Krsna consciousness 101
perfection of human civilization Madhavendra Puri mad in ecstasy of, 11
depends on, 46-47 Madhavendra Puri overwhelmed in
religion without as waste of time, 48 ecstasy of, 75, 90
spread by grace of Krsna, 37-38 manifest in Madhavendra Puri, 56
Vrajabhimi as ideal place to execute, Sarvabhauma could understand impor-
47 tance of distributing, 315
See also Devotional service Sarvabhauma overwhelmed in 316-317
Krte yad dhyayato visnum surpasses liberation, 347-348
verses quoted, 336 the best example of, 92
Ksira-cora-gopinatha Lust
Gopinatha Deity known as, 1, 10, 90 gopis approached Krsna out of, 69
Kumaras
attracted by flowers offered to Krsna,
312 M
Karma
as lila-avatara, 246 Madhvacarya
Kuruksetra, Battle of cited as reference, 265
Arjuna successful in by grace of Krsna, cited on Vedic literatures, 276
37 cited on Vedas as self-evident, 267-268


--- Page 404 ---
400 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Madhvacarya-sampradaya Maha-mantra
conception of conjugal love introduced Madhavendra Puri had acute interest in
in, 101 chanting, 64
Madhavendra Puri belonged to, 43 meant for liberated soul, 299
Madhva-Caudiya-sampradaya mundane people should be given, 70
as sampradaya of author, 43 to be chanted in Kali-yuga, 335-336
Madhavendra Puri we should take directly to chanting,
as king of Vaisnavas, 77 301
Madhavendra Puri See also: Hare Krsna mantra
belonged to Madhva-sampradaya, 43 Maha-prasada
Caitanya personally tasted qualities of, distributed by Sarvabhauma Bhat-
107 tacarya, 191
characteristics of relished by Caitanya, given to the Bhattacarya by Caitanya,
88, 91-97 192
devotional service of as subject of injunctions for honoring, 342-325
Chapter Four, 1-109 of Jagannatha accepted by Caitanya,
ecstatic feelings of Caitanya come from, 210-213
101 See also: Prasada
famous verse spoken by, 98-101 14317301853
Gopala tested love of, 97 Caitanya known as, 243
introduced conception of conjugal love Maha-snana
of God, 101 described, 28
5 Gopala pleased by love of, 2 Malabara district
story of narrated by Caitanya, 1 Sankaracarya 00717, 304
verse understood only by Caitanya, Malaya
Radharani and, 100-101 sandalwood produced in is popular,
Mahabharata 54
appearance of Caitanya confirmed in, Malaysia
249, 343 Vedic culture lost in, 54
as Vedic literature, 268, 276 Mamakah pandavas caiva
compiled for common men, 276 verses quoted, 266
Cita is within, 268 Marh ca yo 'vyabhicarepa
Lord's appearance described in, 245 verses quoted, 70
Mahabhava Mam eva ye prapadyante
symptoms of manifest only by eternal quoted, 330
associates of Lord, 199 Manikya-sirhasana
Mahajanas presented to Lord Jagannatha, 171
one should understand Lord through, as throne won by King Purusottama,
234 170
Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah Man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah
quoted, 277 verse quoted, 301, 343
Maha-mantra Manusyanar sahasresu
Caitanya advised Sarvabhauma Bhat- verse quoted, 279
tacarya to chant, 192 Marriage
chanted by Madhavendra Puri, 16 arrangements for as karma-kanda deal-
chanted congregationally in age of Kali, ings, 124
248 system of in India, 122


--- Page 405 ---
General Index 401
Material nature Mental speculation
sometimes described as Brahman, 269 Mayavadi scriptures make one addicted
Mathura to, 304
as place of pilgrimage, 117 Mercy
Krsna left Vrndavana to accept Caitanya as ocean of, 342
kingdom of, 101 knowledge of summum bonum as evi-
people of came to see Gopala Deity, 50 dence of Lord's, 239
Matsya Krsna understood by His, 234-239
as lila-avatara, 246 Krsna understood only by devotees,
Mattah sarvam pravartate 279
quoted, 296 Lord showed Sarvabhauma His,
Maya 313-314
devotional service saves one from of Gopinatha Acarya praised by Sar-
clutches of, 287 vabhauma, 337
obscures one’s spiritual identity, of Lord Jagannatha saved Sarvabhauma,
285-286 318
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih of Lord not bestowed on those in bodily
quoted, 295 concept of life, 329-331
Mayapura Mayavadis can't receive Lord's, 292
inhabitants of not different from inhabi- Sarvabhauma’s mind cleared by
tants of Vrndavana, 166 Caitanya’s, 324
Maya tatam 1027) sarvarn Milk
quoted, 272 as miracle food, 46
Mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-nasa Modes of nature
quoted, 261 Lord untouched by, 295
Mayavadis transcended by devotee, 70
Absolute Truth interpreted as imper- Mohammedans
sonal by, 278-279 attack of frightened priests of Gopala
accuse Vyasadeva of error, 296 Deity, 19
are actually atheists, 192 inhabitants of Malaysia are, 54
consider Brahman as central point of some provinces of India governed by,
relationship, 302 83,91
cover meaning of Vedanta, 263-264 Mohini
don't understand that Krsna has a sis লে
নর টা as lila-avatara, 246
spiritual body, 232 ‘
imagine five specific forms of the Lord, Monism त त
290 Sarvabhauma wanted to train Caitanya
more dangerous than Buddhists, 291 in, 228
try to establish absolute as formless, Moon वि
280 verse of Madhavendra Puri compared
See also: Impersonalists to, 98 ॥
Mayayapahrta-jfanah Madho ‘yam nabhijanati
quoted, 292 verses quoted, 233
Mental speculation Mukta api lilaya vigrahari
everyone addicted to in Kali-yuga, 343 verse quoted, 312
hearing of Sarvabhauma frees one from, Mukti-pada
360 Lord known as, 353-354


--- Page 406 ---
402 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Mukunda Naradiya Purana
Lord known as, 354 especially meant for Vaisnavas, 268
Mukunda Datta Nara-Narayana
angry at statements of Bhattacarya, as lila-avatara, 246
254, 255 Narayana
copied verses of Sarvabhauma on wall, Mayavadi sannydsis consider them-
340 selves, 291, 330
his talk with Gopinatha Acarya, Narottama dasa Thakura
191 quoted on associates of Caitanya, 166
met with Gopinatha Acarya, 202 quoted on association of devotees,
Mukunda Datta 37
told Caitanya to go ahead to Jagan- quoted on being servant of servant of
natha Puri, 186 Krsna, 123
Mundaka Upanisad quoted on karma-kanda sections of
quoted on distinction between Lord Vedas, 124
and living beings, 287 quoted on position of jadnisand karmis,
quoted on Krsna as source of every- 331
thing, 296 Nathadvara
Gopala Deity situated at, 2
N Navadvipa
Jagannatha Misra as resident of, 216
Nadiya Nayam atma pravacanena labhyo
Gopinatha Acarya as resident of, 201 verses quoted, 238
Naharh prakasah sarvasya Nectar of Devotion, The
verses quoted, 233, 239 sixty-four devotional processes, 334
Naimisaranya Nidrahara-viharakadi-vijitau
atmdrama verse discussed at, 308 quoted, 62
Naisa tarkepa matir apaneya Nilacala
verses quoted, 238 See Jagannatha Puri
Nama-gana-natibhih Nilambara Cakravarti
quoted, 64 as grandfather of Caitanya, 216
Na marh duskrtino madhah Visarada as classmate of, 201
verses quoted, 68, 290 Nimbarkacarya
Namastaka cited as reference, 265
quoted on chanting of holy name by Nirvana
liberated souls, 299 Buddha's philosophy on, 291
Namo brahmanya-devaya Nityananda
verses quoted, 189 asked by Caitanya to judge fortune of
Namo maha-vadanyaya Madhavendra Puri, 88, 91-92
verse quoted, 343 as plenary expansion of Caitanya,
Nanda Maharaja 248-249
began Govardhana-paja, 42 broke sannyasa staff of Caitanya,
fortune of praised, 277-278 111-112
Copala Deity as directly son of, 158 Caitanya heard story of Saksi-gopala
Krsna as son of, 358 from, 111, 115-116
accepts Krsna as God, 232 Caitanya narrated story of Madha-
as lila-avatara, 246 vendra Puri for, 1


--- Page 407 ---
General Index 403
Nityananda Padma Purana
considered Caitanya’s acceptance of quoted on taking maha-prasada,
sannyasa useless, 185, 188 324-325
Gopinatha Acarya offered obeisances Parica-gavya
to, 203 ingredients of, 28
nearly fainted on seeing Lord Jagan- Paficakro$t Vindavana
natha, 208 temple of Gopala formerly at, 118
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya offered obei- Pancamrta
sances to, 207 ingredients of, 30
remarked on (०012 Deity and Pancaratra
Caitanya as identical, 177 as Vedic literature, 268, 276
took Caitanya on His lap, 102 (2212171 brahma param dhama
threw Caitanya'’s staff in river, 179-180 quoted, 269
Nitya-siddha-bhaktas Paramaharmsas
enjoy company of Lord in four relation- Caitanya and His devotees as,
ships, 198 188
never forget the Lord, 166 can't give up chanting, 64
Nondevotees described, 62-63
Lord not exposed to, 233 inexperienced neophytes try to imitate,
Notpadayed yadi ratiri 185
verses quoted, 276 must give up sannyasa staff, 180
Nrsirhhadeva See also Pure devotees
as lila-avatara, 246 Paramatma
as feature of Absolute Truth, 230, 269,
fe) 292
transmigration under direction of, 287
See also Supersoul
Ori bhagavate vasudevaya namah 03138013773
as mantra chanted at abhiseka as lila-avatara, 246
tale 26727 Parasya Saktir vividhaiva srayate
as the sound form of the Lord, 298, i verse quoted, 239, ১2৪9
299 Paritranaya sadhanarn
Orissa quoted, 243
See Jagannatha Purl Pastimes of Caitanya
considered mundane by Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya, 241
P like a shower of nectar, 4
Pastimes of Krsna
Pacyantam vividhah pakah are all good, 70
verses quoted, 41 liberated souls attracted to, 312
Padma Purana not understood by nondevotional
quoted on impossibility of under- research, 36
standing Krsna with mundane senses, not understood with mundane senses,
276 276
quoted on Sankaricirya as Siva, with gopis not to be discussed by com-
303 mon men, 69


--- Page 408 ---
404 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Pasupata-astra Pure devotees
as weapon baffled by Krsna, 178 would rather go to hell than merge in
Patapjali Brahman, 350
followers want to merge, 351 See also Devotees, Spiritual master,
Patram (0८150217) phalari toyar Vaisnavas
verses quoted, 35 Parpasya parpam adaya
Prabodhananda Sarasvati quoted, 35
quoted on merging in Brahman as Purusartha-sanyanarh pratiprasavah
hellish, 350 quoted, 352
Prahlada Maharaja Purusottama, King
quoted on staunch devotee as most conquered King of Vidyanagara, 170
learned scholar, 148 defeated King of Kataka, 111
Prasada managed to control Orissa, 169
as much as possible should be offered Queen of gave pearl to Gopala Deity,
to Deity, 43 172-175
Caitanya collected grains for prepara- Purusottama-deva
tion of, 6 King Purusottama known as, 170
given to Jagadaranda by Sarvabhauma,
339
given to Sarvabhauma by Caitanya, R
323-325
importance of distribution of, 46
offered first to brahmanas, 40 Rg Veda
offered to sannyasis by Sarvabhauma, as Vedic literature, 268, 276
219 Rg-yajuh-samatharvas ca bharatarm
of Lord Jagannatha received by verses quoted, 267
Caitanya, 321 Rsabha
See also Maha-prasada as lila-avatara, 246
Prataparudra, King Rukmi
Ramananda Raya as governor during as elder brother of Rukmini, 126
time of, 169 story.of her marriage to Krsna, 125-
Prayaga 126
as place of pilgrimage, 117 Rapa Gosvami
Prénigarbha lila-avataras enumerated by, 246
as lila-avatara, 246 mahabhava explained by, 199
Prthu quoted on holy name, 299
as lila-avatara, 246 Radharani
Puranas Caitanya always expressed ecstatic
especially meant for Vaisnavas, 268 emotions of on seeing Uddhava, 101
meant for supplement Vedic knowl- Caitanya as Krsna and, 180
edge, 276 feelings of separation of, 101
Puranani ca yaniha verse of manifest in words of Madha-
verses quoted, 267 vendra Puri, 99, 101
Pure devotees verse understood only by Caitanya,
as richest men in the world, 148 Madhavendra Puri and, 100-101
hearing about the Lord from, 301 Raghavendra
types of liberation accepted by, 349 as lila-avatara, 246


--- Page 409 ---
General Index 405
Rajasid bhismako nama Sa gunan samatityaitan
verses quoted, 126 verse quoted, 70
Ramacandra Saksi-gopala
as lild-avatara, 246 activities of, 111-190
sometimes accepted by Mayavadis as four points of instruction in story of,
Bhagavan, 232 189
Ramananda Raya stayed in Vidyanagara for a long time,
as governor during time of King Pra- 169
taparudra, 169 temple of is in Kataka, 111
Ramanujacarya See also Gopala Deity
cited as reference, 265 Sakti-sakimator abhedah
Ramayana quoted, 288
as Vedic literature, 268, 276 Samane vrkse puruso nimagno
Rasa-lila verses quoted, 287
never discussed publicly by Caitanya, Sama Veda
69 as Vedic literature, 268, 276
Rasikananda Prabhu Sampradayas
tomb of at Remuna, 7 four named, 101
Regulative principles Samvit potency
brahmanas must strictly follow, 189 knowledge acquired by taking shelter
followed unfailingly by Caitanya, 185, of, 285
188 Sanaka
none for taking maha-prasada, 324-325 Caitanya gives as evidence, 312
purify one of contamination, 335 Sanandana
Religion . Caitanya gives as evidence, 312
cheating form of, 48 Sanat-kumara
present Systems of deny worship of _Caitanya gives as evidence, 312
Remuna Sanatana
J Caitanya gives as evidence, 312
Caitanya narrated story of Madha- Ya 8 “
vandra Puri at, 1 Sanatana Gosvami
visited by Caitanya, 7 Caitanya described lila-avataras to,
visited by Madhavendra Puri, 57 245
Renunciation Sandalwood
must be cultivated to understand devo- produced in Malaya is popular, 54
tional service, 228 Sankaracarya
as Lord Siva, 302-304
born in Malabara district, 304
5 had ten names for his sannyasa disci-
ples, 226-227
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha his theory of illusion, 296, 297
Supreme Lord is, 283-284 his Vedanta commentary, 257
৩৪০7 stressed the vibration of tat tvam asi,
Caitanya as son of, 344 299
Sahajiyas Sankara-sampradaya
falsely present themselves as humble, sannyasis in seriously study Vedanta,
77 257


--- Page 410 ---
406 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Sankarites Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
See Mayavadis accepted Caitanya as his master, 218
Sankirtana acquired faith in maha-prasada of Lord
spread by Caitanya, 249 Jagannatha, 327
Sannyasa as the reservoir of all bad logic, 193
acceptance of by Caitanya considered Caitanya met with, 3
useless by Nityananda, 185 Caitanya showed His Visnu form to,
four divisions of, 180 314
order of prohibited in age of Kali, 261 changed word in Bhagavatam, 346-347
sometimes taken from brahmacari life, compared to Brhaspati by Caitanya,
216 308
taken by Caitanya from Kesava Bharati, composed verses for Caitanya on palm
224 leaf, 339
Sannyasis danced with Caitanya, 326
always worshiped by householders, 218 defended Sankaracarya, 299-300
assisted by brahmacaris, 227 discussed Vedanta with Caitanya,
Caitanya distinguished from Mayavadi, 191-192
249 Gopinatha Acarya as brother-in-law of,
Caitanya set good example for, 185 253
Deity worship not neglected by disci- liberation of as subject of Chapter Six,
ples of transcendental, 57 191-360
etiquette among, 214-215 Vaisnavism manifest in, 358
Mayavadi customarily called jagad- Sarva-dharman parityajya
guru, 219 verses quoted, 330
Mayavadi declare themselves jagad- Sarva-samvadini
gurus, 260-261 , cited on direct evidence, 265-266
Mayavadi enjoy studying Vedanta, 257 Sastras
Mayavadi think themselves falsely liber- Brahman described as bodily rays of
ated, 330 Krsna in, 232-233
may take part in marriage ceremony to nature of Lord described in, 284
spread Krsna consciousness, 124 one should understand Lord through,
must be detached from sense gratifica- 234
tion, 228 spiritual master must be conversant in
Sankaracarya had ten names for his, essence of, 57
226 verify Lord's internal potency as
Santipura spiritual, 281
Madhavendra Puri visited house of warn against considering Deity to be
Advaita at, 56 material, 158-159
Sa parvesam api guruh kalanavac chedat See also Vedas
quoted, 352 Sastra-yonitvat
Sarasvati quoted, 276
as goddess of music and learning, 226 Sat-karma-nipuno vipro
Sariraka-bhasya quoted, 42
as Sankaracarya’s Vedanta commentary, Satyavadi
257 Copala Deity stationed at, 116
Caitanya criticized, 299-300 Saunaka Rsi
form of Lord denied in, 293 sages at Naimisaranya headed by,
one who hears is doomed, 261 308


--- Page 411 ---
General Index 407
Sa vai pumsam paro dharmo Society
verse quoted, 302 division of human, 301
Sayujya-mukti Soul
as spiritual suicide, 293 See Living beings
two kinds of, 351-352 Spiritual master
Scientists devotee determined to execute order
can't understand spiritual energy, 295 of, 95-96
setforth false theories, 252 devotional service rendered through,
Sense gratification 302
observance of Caturmasya meant to must be conversant in essence of sastra,
minimize, 87 57
one can’t protect sannydsa order when See also Pure devotees
attached to, 228 Sravanadi suddha-citte karaye
paramahamsa has conquered desire for, quoted, 72
62-63 त त Sravapari kirtanarn vispoh
rascals present so-called incarnation for verses quoted, 334
their own, 236 <... क्रे
Sridhara Svami
Sefises cited on Visnu appearance in Kali-yuga,
Krsna understood by purified, 36 243 004 app! ১০৪৭,
of Lord all transcendental, 275 ह | को Co
purified to engage in bhakti, 51 Sri-gauda-mandala-bhumi, yeba jane
Vedic mantras not understood by mun- | Ese quoted, 166
dane, 276 Sri-krsna-caitayna, radha-krspa nahe anya
Separation from Krsna , quoted, 180
feelings of as prime success of life, Srimad-Bhagavatam
92 appearance of Caitanya confirmed in,
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau 343
verses quoted, 36, 236, 239 as real commentary on Vedanta, 261
Siddhaloka atmarama verse of explained by
Brahman known as, 351 Caitanya, 192
,  twokinds of beings in, 347 Brahma's prayer in quoted, 346
Siksastaka cited on cheating form of religion, 48
quoted on determination of lover of cited on Lord as all good, 68-69
Krsna, 96 cited on nine kinds of devotional ser-
Sin vice, 64
devotees are freed from, 241 divided into twelve cantos, 354
Sisupala heard by Sukadeva by mercy of
Rukmini was supposed to marry, 126 Vyasadeva, 312
Siva Lord's appearance described in, 245
appeared as Sankaracarya, 302-304 nine processes of devotional service
Caitanya visited temple of at listed in, 334
Bhuvanesvara, 111 quoted on appearance of Caitanya,
established Gupta-kasi as place of 248-249
pilgrimage, 179 quoted on blind leading blind, 69
helped Kasiraja in fight with Krsna, 178 quoted on falldown of yogis, 352
Skanda Purana quoted on false logicians, 251-252
Krsna's fight with Kasiraja described in, quoted on fortune of Nanda Maharaja,
178 277-278


--- Page 412 ---
408 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Srimad-Bhagavatam Supreme Lord
quoted on importance of chanting holy as central point of all relationships, 301
name, 335-336 as master of all potencies, 287
quoted on impure intelligence of as master of innumerable energies,
Mayavadis, 292 294-295
quoted on Krsna being conquered by as protector of brahminical culture, 154
devotee, 72 as reservoir of all potencies, 284
quoted on marriage of Rukmini, 126 as untraceable in Vedas, 276
quoted on mercy of Lord, 329-330 compared to touchstone, 294-295
quoted on nature of Absolute Truth, eats everything offered by devotees,
274 35-36
quoted on pure devotee not accepting full with six opulences, 230, 280,286
liberation, 353 glanced over material energy, 274-275
quoted on semi-liberated souls, 351 has three primary potencies, 280-283
quoted on serving devotee, 123 His qualities full of spiritual potency,
quoted on staunch devotee as most 305
learned scholar, 148 impersonal descriptions of, 270-271
quoted on three phases of Absolute is all-pervading, 272
Truth, 230 is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, 283-284
quoted on understanding Lord by His known as Krsna, 306, 311
mercy, 235 known as mukti-pada,1, 353-354
quoted on worship of Govardhana Hill, not exposed to nondevotees, 233
41-42 not possible to fully explain, 311
quoted on worthy candidates for going not understood simply by scholarship,
back to Godhead, 96 237-238
quoted on yuga-avataras, 247 omkara as sound form of, 298
term Bhagavan described in, 292 one with and different from His crea-
three phases of Absolute described in, tion, 192
269 order of is all-powerful, 85
Srinivasa Acarya personal features of categorized in
cited on chanting, 64 three cases, 273-274
Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir remains in supreme position in all
verses quoted, 295 circumstances, 229
Saddipta-sattvika See also Absolute Truth, Krsna
described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Susloka-sataka
198 as book of verses by Sarvabhauma, 316
Sadras Sata Gosvami
may be spiritual masters, 57 questioned by sages of Naimisaranya,
Sukadeva Gosvami 308
Caitanya gives evidence from, 312 Svalpam apy asya dharmasya
Sun quoted, 337
Krsna compared to, 158 Svarapa Damodara
Supreme Lord compared to, 68-69 as associate of Caitanya, 249
Vedanta compared to, 268 Svayam eva sphuraty adah
Supersoul , quoted, 238
knows everyone's desire, 149 Svetasvatara Upanisad
not understood by erudite scholarship, impersonal statements about Lord in,
238 270


--- Page 413 ---
General Index 409
Svetasvatara Upanisad Tesam satata-yuktanam
quoted on Absolute Truth as a person, verses quoted, 48
279 Threefold miseries
quoted on multi-potencies of Absolute, living beings suffer, 282
280 Time
quoted on nature of Absolute Truth, material world subject to change by,
273 297
Syamananda Gosvami Transmigration
Rasikananda Prabhu as chief disciple of, under direction of Paramatma, 287
7 Tulasi
garlands of offered to Gopala Deity, 29
T offered by villagers to Gopala Deity, 26
Tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
verses quoted, 35 ৮
Tad aiksata bahu 5৮377 prajayeya
verse quoted, 275 Uddhava
Tad brahma niskalam anantam Caitanya expressed Radharani's emo-
verses quoted, 233 tions on seeing, 101
Tad viddhi prapipatena Ujjvala-nilamani
verses quoted, 279 explanation of mahabhava in, 199
Taittiriya Upanisad Upadeksyanti te jAianam
quoted on Krsna as source of every- verse quoted, 279
thing, 296 Upahrtya balin sarvan
quoted on nature of Absolute Truth, verses quoted, 41
273 Upanisads
quoted on Supreme Brahman as source discussed by Caitanya and Sar-
of everything, 272 vabhauma Bhattacarya, 191-192
Tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa, Vedanta-satra as summary of all, 264
quoted, 37
Tan manye ‘dhitam uttamam Vv
quoted, 148
Tatha ca vyadadhuh sarvair
verses quoted, 41 Vadanti tat tattva-vidas
Tatra “rir vijayo 8000 verses quoted, 230
verses quoted, 37 Vaikuntha
Tat te ‘nukampam susamiksyamanah planets of situated in brahmajyoti, 327
quoted, 96 Vaisnavas
Tattva-sandarbha apparent distress in is actually bliss, 96
cited as reference, 265 as servants of servant of God, 123
Tat tvam asi caste brahmanas not necessarily, 42-43
stressed by Sankaracarya, 299 Deity worshiped only by, 43
Tattva-vadis demons turned into by taking prasada,
Caitanya revealed conclusion of 46
Madhvacarya-sampradaya to, 101 don't eat anything not offered to Deity,
Te dvandva-moha-nirmukta 46
verses quoted, 241, 335 don’t hanker after fame, 77


--- Page 414 ---
410 ও] Caitanya-caritamrta
Vaisnavas Vedanta-sttra
karma-kanda sections of Vedas unnec- first verse of, 272
essary for, 124 Mayavada commentaries on, 293
Krsna pleased by service to, 124 Mayavadis find fault in, 296
observe Caturmasya, 87 quoted on living beings’ oneness with
Puranas especially meant for, 268 and difference from Lord, 288
want everyone to be Krsna conscious, quoted on proper understanding of
215 Vedas, 276
See also Devotees, Pure devotees real commentary on is Bhagavatam, 261
Vaisnavism studied by Mayavadi sannyasis, 257
Bhattacarya fully converted to cult of, theory of transformation described in,
337 294-295
manifest in Sarvabhauma, 358 verses of as clear as sunshine, 262, 263
See also Krsna consciousness Vedantists
Vaisyas consider merging in Brahman suc-
duty of, 46 cessful, 351
Vaitarani River See also Mayavadis
Yajapura situated on, 113 Vedas
Vajra Buddhists don’t recognize authority of,
০০313 Deity originally installed by, 2, 291-292
19 explained through false scriptures by
Vallabhacarya Sankaracarya, 303
Copala Deity under management of de- karma-kanda sections of as unnecess-
scendants of, 2 ary, 124
Vamanadeva Krsna to be known by, 269
as lila-avatara, 246 Lord not understood simply from state-
Varahadeva ments of, 238
Caitanya visited temple of, 113-114 must be studied from spiritual master,
Varpasrama system 279
brahmanas honored first in, 40 proper understanding of, 276
divisions in, 301 purpose of impersonal descriptions in,
Varuna 270
quoted on nature of Absolute Truth, state Absolute has different potencies,
274 239
Vasudeva statements of as self-evident, 267-268
wise man surrenders to, 276 three subject matters described in, 301
Vasudevah sarvam iti ultimate goal of understanding, 302
verses quoted, 275, 331 unlimited energies of Absolute ac-
Vasudeve bhagavati cepted in, 192
verses quoted, 276 See also Sastras
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah Vedesu durlabham adurlabham
quoted, 236, 269, 275, 301 quoted 72, 236
Vedanta-sutra Vedic civilization
as summary of all Upanisads, 264 whole scheme of, 301
devotional service described in, 293 Vedic literature
discussed by Caitanya and Sar- Krsna not understood only by reading,
vabhauma Bhattacarya, 191-192 72


--- Page 415 ---
General Index 411
Vedic literature Vindavana dasa Thakura
See also Vedas pastimes of Caitanya described by, 3-5
Vidyanagara Vyasadeva
story of two brahmanas from, 111 accepts Krsna as God, 232
Saksi-gopala stayed in for a long time, accused of error by Mayavadis, 296
169 as lila-avatara, 246
Visarada compiled Mahabharata for common
Gopinatha Acarya as son-in-law of, 201 man, 276
Visnu presented Vedanta for deliverance of
Caitanya appeared in His form of to Sar- fallen souls, 293
vabhauma, 314 Srimad-Bhagavatam written by, 261
incarnates for two purposes, 243 Sukadeva heard Bhagavatam by mer-
known as Triyuga, 243, 245 cy of, 312
potencies of, 280-283 Sukadeva heard Bhagavatam by mercy
worship of by grhastha-brahmana, 57 of, 312
yogis want to merge into body of, 352 Vydsa-satra
Visnu Purana See Vedanta-satra
especially meant for Vaisnavas, 268
quoted on different potencies of Lord,
280-283 w
quoted on potencies of Lord, 283
Visnu-saktih para prokta
quoted, 284 Women
Visvambhara Misra Mahabharata compiled for, 276
as former name of Caitanya, 216 World, material
Voidism almost everyone in is envious, 77
described by Buddha, 291 as inferior energy of Lord, 297
little difference between impersonalism Caitanya appeared to teach fallen souls
and, 291-292 in, 343
Vrajabhami detachment from by devotional service,
fortune of inhabitants of praised, 276
277-278 Durga as superintendent of, 303
See also Vindavana impersonalists fall again into, 292
Vrajendra-nandana liberated by Copala Deity, 89
Krsna known as; 158 living beings in forgetful of their rela-
Vindavana tionship with God, 281
as ideal place to execute Krsna con- nitya-siddhas within appear to work like
sciousness, 47 ordinary men, 166
Gauda-mandala-bhiami equal to, 166 Mayavadi sannyasis hover in, 330-331
Krsna left to accept kingdom of nothing is inconceivable within, 295
Mathura, 101 pleasure potency existing in, 283
twelve forests of, 117-118 subject to change by influence of time,
See also Goloka Vrndavana 247
Vindavana dasa Thakura sustained by living beings, 289
author offers obeisances to, 6 World, spiritual
described Lord's journey to Kataka, equated with Buddhist voidism bv
178 Mayavadis, 291


--- Page 416 ---
412 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
World, spiritual Yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve
Krsna understood only by those already verse quoted, 302
in, 70 Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-
Lord's stealing as source of bliss in, 68 verses quoted, 233, 272, 351
there are spiritual forms in, 290 Yathorna-nabhih srjate grhanate ca
quoted, 296
Yato ya imani bhatani jayante
Y quoted, 272, 273, 296
Yatra yogesvarah krsnah
Yad yad acarati sresthas verses quoted, 37
quoted, 185 Ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
Yada yada hi dharmasya verses quoted, 292, 351
verses quoted, 342 Yesam tv anta-gatam papam
Yajapura verses quoted, 241, 335
Caitanya passed through, 111, 113 Yoga
Yajia Lord attracts those engaged in activities
as lila-avatara, 246 of, 311
Yamaraja path of more abominable than path of
agnostics subject to be punished by, impersonalists, 352
290 Yoga-maya
Yam evaisa vroute tena labhyas Supreme Lord covered by, 233
verses quoted, 238 Yogis
Yam labdhva capararm labham manyate want to merge in body of Lord, 351-352
quoted, 148 Yudhisthira
Yam tvam 3030 satva-dhrtir vatasi spoke like diplomat to Dronacarya,
verses quoted, 238 134-135
Yamuna Yuga-avataras
forests on banks of, 118 described in Bhagavatam, 247


--- Page 417 ---
Other Books by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Bhagavad-gita As It Is
COMPLETE EDITION
with the original Sanskrit text, Roman transliteration,
English equivalents, translation and elaborate purports
The International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness is pleased to announce the publica-
tion by the Macmillan Company of the long-
awaited Complete Edition of Bhagavad-gita As
22 Is. This most basic and essential of all spiritual
texts is now available in one complete, authori-
tative, beautifully illustrated 1,000-page volume.
Bhagavad-gita has long been appreciated as a
scriptural literature of sublime importance by
thoughtful men throughout the world, for its
eighteen chapters shower upon man the immor-
tal nectar of the wisdom of the Absolute. In
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, the message of this time-
less classic is now transmitted in its purity and
fullness. By reading this book, one can attain
the perfection of human life.
1,000 pages, 44 full-color reproduc tions
hardcover—311.95; paperback—37.95
Srimad Bhagavatam
The science of God is greater than all
other sciences, and this spiritual technology is
rationally and authoritatively explained in the
18,000 verses of Srirmad-Bhagavatarn, India’s
sublime contribution of culture, philosophy,
politics, religion and love. His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada has under-
taken the mighty task of rendering this su-
premely potent work into the English language
along with Sanskrit transliterations, word-for-
word synonyms and elaborate English purports.
Thus in each verse one will find new enlighten-
ment regarding the Absolute Truth, the origin
of all emanations.
$7.95 per vol.
First Canto—3 vols., Second Canto—2 vols.,
Third Canto—4 vols., Fourth Canto—4 vols.
Available from
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
3764 Watseka Ave., Los Angeles,
Calif: 90034


--- Page 418 ---
ডে व क = CS |
2 0 দক 2 XE 4 2, Va ० ८; 2 ६ Ne MADHYA-LILA
9.29. ১ ৮ ys SUT চা ৮ চা a ২] Volume 2
6 AS 8 A AS 5 we
A লি তক il কত A TA
, ५. RG OB ১৬5 © ৷ ५ ১ ৫ भा
+ जै ve oo ४९ ॥ ৪ श
ক কক ক ` কিক &
ও ৮ 6: 3s (1111
ES ते + त † owl, ow
wy (५. ५. - । Ste ৯৫১৬০,
রন (2 ^ AA , चअ ^, Thee
১ 4 “4, # 4 + অস্ত কি ২২ 4 3
x 7५. 8 GRA ag Tustimes of
AA we / এ ৮১৮৯ Gud Cuttarya
~^ ২০ ~ , “ Vy 7 AYO
ROS (५ Sol \ व+ » ig WR Slbigpratite
54 प 4727 ৪) ५ 3 ২ ১২
(५ ॥ ॥ ६ 4 च+ 1 ष
তত A प, hy ঢঙে g # ॐ
(11 ` # Nor ६
১: ১4 ५ । <) A
rad ৷ ছি ১৯৮২
চা Ca # a ++ , + HIS DIVINE GRACE
wr. $A = | ह क AC Bhaktivedanta
ANE " <i” ডে „4 प ge Prabhupada
ACE রে
५ ए 4 py धी
+! ara \ £0
£t क y ^" नन्दे য \
Ya BES वे
Ea mer
TA 4 4 বি
(59 £ क _ ष
wl MES 5 3
=^ > =
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,
the author of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The
Nectar of Devotion and many other spiritual texts, is the
world’s most distinguished teacher of Vedic religion
and thought. He is the present representative of the chain of
holy teachers from Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and it
is he who is directly responsible for bringing the teachings
of Lord Caitanya to the West. He is the founder and spiritual
master of the Intemational Society for Krishna
Consciousness, which has nearly one hundred centers
throughout the world.
THE
BHAKTIVEDANTA
BOOK TRUST =

