
--- Page 1 ---
ae =, = [- os ह. द कन | |
co MEL ৯ a 1 6 Es, 4

र ४ ae ~ ঢল ও |
Xo काः ৯৮


--- Page 2 ---
.
Introduction

Sri Caitanya-caritamta is the principal work on the life and teachings of $i
Krsna Caitanya. 677 Caitanya is the pioneer of a great social and religious move-
ment which began in India a little less than five hundred years ago and which has
directly and indirectly influenced the subsequent course of religious and phi-
losophical thinking not only in India but in the recent West as well.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu is regarded as a figure of great historical significance.
However, our conventional method of historical analysis —that of seeing a man as
a product of his times —fails here. $ri Caitanya is a personality who transcends the
limited scope of historical settings.

At a time when, in the West, man was directing his explorative spirit toward
studying the structure of the physical universe and circumnavigating the world in
search of new oceans and continents, 67 Krsna Caitanya, in the East, was in-
augurating and masterminding a revolution directed inward, toward a scientific
understanding of the highest knowledge of man’s spiritual nature.

The chief historical sources for the life of $ri Krsna Caitanya are the kadacas (di-
aries) kept by Murari Gupta and Svariipa Damodara Gosvami. Murari Gupta, a
physician and close associate of Sri Caitanya’s, recorded extensive notes on the
first twenty-four years of जा Caitanya’s life, culminating in his initiation into the
renounced order, sannyasa. The events of the rest of Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s for-
ty-eight years are recorded in the diary of Svartipa Damodora Gosvami, another of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s intimate associates.

$rf Caitanya-caritamrta is divided into three sections called 11125, which literally
means “pastimes” — Adi-lila (the early period), Madhya-lila (the middle period)
and Antya-lila (the final period). The notes of Murari Gupta form the basis of the
Adi-lila, and Svariipa Damodara’s diary provides the details for the Madhya- and
Antya-lilas.

The first twelve of the seventeen chapters of Adi-lild constitute the preface for
the entire work. By referring to Vedic scriptural evidence, this preface establishes
Sri Caitanya as the avatara (incarnation) of Krsna (God) for the age of Kali—the
current epoch, beginning five thousand years ago and characterized by material-
ism, hypocrisy and dissension. In these descriptions, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
is identical with Lord Krsna, descends to liberally grant pure love of God to the
fallen souls of this degraded age by propagating sankirtana—literally,
“congregational glorification of God” —especially by organizing massive public
chanting of the maha-mantra (Great Chant for Deliverance). The esoteric purpose
of Lord Caitanya’s appearance in the world is revealed, his co-avataras and prin-
cipal devotees are described and his teachings are summarized. The remaining
portion of Adi-lil5 chapters thirteen through seventeen, briefly recounts his
divine birth and his life until he accepted the renounced order. This includes his
childhood miracles, schooling, marriage and early philosophical confrontations, as
well as his organization of a widespread sankirtana movement and his civil disobe-
dience against the repression of the Mohammedan government.

vi


--- Page 3 ---
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

The subject of Madhya-lila, the longest of the three divisions, is a detailed nar-
ration of Lord Caitanya's extensive and eventful travels throughout India as a
renounced mendicant, teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and mystic. Dur-
ing this period of six years, ऽ Caitanya transmits his teachings to his principal dis-
ciples. He debates and converts many of the most renowned philosophers and
theologians of his time, including Sankarites, Buddhists and Muslims, and incor-
porates their many thousands of followers and disciples into his own burgeoning
numbers. A dramatic account of Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s miraculous activities at
the giant Jagannatha Cart Festival in Orissa is also included in this section.

Antya-lila concerns the last eighteen years of $i Caitanya’s manifest presence,
spent in semiseclusion near the famous Jagannatha temple at Jagannatha Puri in
Orissa. During these final years, Sri Caitanya drifted deeper and deeper into
trances of spiritual ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and literary history,
Eastern or Western. Sri Caitanya’s perpetual and ever-increasing religious
beatitude, graphically described in the eyewitness accounts of Svaripa Damodara
Cosvami, his constant companion during this period, clearly defy the investigative
and descriptive abilities of modern psychologists and phenomenologists of
religious experience.

The author of this great classic, Krsnadasa Kavirdgja Gosvami, born in the year
1507, was a disciple of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, a confidential follower of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Raghunatha dasa, a renowned ascetic saint, heard and
memorized all the activities of Caitanya Mahaprabhu told to him by Svariipa
Damodara. After the passing away of $ri Caitanya and Svamipa Damodara,
Raghunatha dasa, unable to bear the pain of separation from these objects of his
complete devotion, traveled to Vrndavana, intending to commit suicide by jump-
ing from Govardhana Hill. In Vrndavana, however, he encountered Ripa Gosvami
and Sanatana Gosvami, the most confidential disciples of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
They convinced him to give up his plan of suicide and impelled him to reveal to
them the spiritually inspiring events of Lord Caitanya’s later life. Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Cosvami was also residing in Vrndavana at this time, and Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami endowed him with a full comprehension of the transcendental life of Sri
Caitanya.

By this time, several biographical works had already been written on the life of
$i Caitanya by contemporary and near-contemporary scholars and devotees.
These included $/1 Caitanya-carita by Murari Gupta, Caitanya-marigala by Locana
dasa Thakura and Caitanya-bhagavata. This latter text, a work by Vrndavana dasa
Thakura, who was then considered the principal authority on Sri Caitanya'’s life,
was highly revered. While composing his important work, Vrndavana dasa, fearing
that it would become too voluminous, avoided elaborately describing many of
the events of $ri Caitanya'’s life, particulary the later ones. Anxious to hear of these
later pastimes, the devotees of Vrndavana requested Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami,
whom they respected as a great saint, to compose a book to narrate these

vii


--- Page 4 ---
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
episodes in detail. Upon this request, and with the permission and blessings of the
Madana-mohana Deity of Vindavana, he began compiling Sri Caitanya-caritamta,
which, due to its biographical excellence and thorough exposition of Lord
Caitanya'’s profound philosophy and teachings, is regarded as the most significant
of biographical works on 51 Caitanya.

He commenced work on the text while in his late nineties and in failing health,
as he vividly describes in the text itself: “I have now become too old and dis-
turbed in invalidity. While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot remember any-
thing, nor can | see or hear properly. Still | write, and this is a great wonder.” That
he nevertheless completed, under such debilitating conditions, the greatest liter-
ary gem of medieval India is surely one of the wonders of literary history.

This English translation and commentary is the work of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of In-
dian religious and philosophical thought. His commentary is based upon two
Bengali commentaries, one by his teacher Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami,
the eminent Vedic scholar who predicted, “The time will come when the people
of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,” and the other by
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta’s father, Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is himself a disciplic
descendant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he is the first scholar to execute
systematic English translations of the major works of $ri Caitanya’s followers. His
consummate Bengali and Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with the
precepts of Sri Krsna Caitanya are a fitting combination that eminently qualifies
him to present this important classic to the English-speaking world. The ease and
clarity with which he expounds upon difficult philosophical concepts lures even a
reader totally unfamiliar with Indian religious tradition into a genuine understand-
ing and appreciation of this profound and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, presented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, represents a contribution of major im-
portance to the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man.

—The Publishers
viii


--- Page 5 ---
CHAPTER 15
The Lord Accepts Prasada
at the House of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya

The following summary of this chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in
his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. After the Ratha-yatra festival, Sri Advaita Acarya
Prabhu worshiped र Caitanya Mahaprabhu with flowers and tulasi. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, in return, worshiped Advaita Acarya with the flowers and tulasi that
remained on the offered plate and said a mantra, yo ‘si so “si (“What You are, You
are”). Then Advaita Acarya Prabhu invited Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu for prasada.
When Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His devotees performed the Nandot-
sava ceremony, the Lord personally dressed Himself as a cowherd boy. Thus the
ceremony was very jubilant. Then the Lord and His devotees observed Vijaya-
dasami, the day of victory when Lord Ramacandra conquered Lanka. The devo-
tees all became soldiers of Lord Ramacandra, and $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in the
ecstasy of Hanuman, manifested various transcendentally blissful activities.
Thereafter, the Lord and His devotees observed various other ceremonies.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then asked all the devotees to return to Bengal. Lord
जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent Nityananda Prabhu to Bengal for preaching and
also sent Ramadasa, Gadadhara dasa and several other devotees with Him. Then
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, with great humility, sent some Jagannatha prasada and
a cloth from Lord Jagannatha to His mother through Srivasa Thakura. When the
Lord bade farewell to Raghava Pandita, Vasudeva Datta, the residents of Kulina-
grama and other devotees, He praised them for their transcendental qualities.
Ramananda Vasu and Satyaraja Khan asked some questions, and Lord ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu instructed them that all householder devotees must engage them-
selves in the service of Vaisnavas exclusively devoted to chanting the holy name
of the Lord. He also directed the Vaisnavas from Khanda, instructed Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya and Vidya-vacaspati, and praised Murari Gupta for his firm faith in the
lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra. Considering the humble prayer of Vasudeva Datta,
He established that Lord $ri Krsna is qualified to deliver all the conditioned souls.

Thereafter, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was accepting prasada at the house
of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Sarvabhauma'’s son-in-law, Amogha, created trouble
in the family with his criticisms. The following morning, he was attacked by the
disease of visacika (cholera). Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very kindly saved him
from death and enlivened him in chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna.

1


--- Page 6 ---
2 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 1
সার্বভৌমগৃহে GOA স্বনিন্দকমমোঘকম্‌ |
অঙীকুর্বন্‌ স্ফুটাং एटव्क ८भौचः FIR ভক্তবশ্যতাম্‌ ॥ > ॥
sarvabhauma-grhe (@/1८17/2/2
sva-nindakam amoghakam
angikurvan sphutam cakre
gaurah 5৮37 bhakta-vasyatam
SYNONYMS

sarvabhauma-grhe—at the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; bhuijan—
while eating; sva-nindakam—a person who was criticizing Him; amoghakam—
named Amogha; angikurvan—accepting; sphutam—manifested; cakre—made;
gaurah—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; svam—His; bhakta-vasyatam—obliga-
tion to His devotees.

TRANSLATION

While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was accepting prasada at the house of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya, Amogha criticized Him. At that time the Lord also
showed how much He was obliged to His devotees.

TEXT 2
জয় জয় ALY জয় निखोनम्त |
ऊ सनादेषरएल्क জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS

jaya jaya—all glories; sri-caitanya—to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—unto Nityananda Prabhu; jaya advaita-candra—all glories to
Advaita Prabhu; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vrnda—to the devotees of Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

TRANSLATION

All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda
Prabhu! All glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to all the devotees of
Lord Caitanya!


--- Page 7 ---
Text 5] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 3
TEXT 3
জয় লরীচৈতন্যচরিতাম্বত-শ্রোতাগণ |
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্বত - যার প্রাণধন ॥ ৩ ॥
jaya $ri-caitanya-caritamrta-srota-gana
caitanya-caritamrta——yanra prana-dhana
SYNONYMS
jaya—all glories; $ri-caitanya-caritamrta-srota-gana—to the listeners of Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta; caitanya-caritamrta— Caitanya-caritamrta; yanra—of whom;
prana-dhana—the life and soul.
TRANSLATION
All glories to the listeners of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta who have accepted it
as their life and soul.
TEXT 4
এইমত মহাপ্রভু ভক্তগণ-সঙ্গে |
নীলাচলে রহি” করে নৃত্যগীত-রঙ্গে ॥ 8 ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana-sange
nilacale rahi’ kare nrtya-gita-range
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-gana-
sange—with His devotees; nilacale rahi’—staying at Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri;
kare—performs; nrtya-gita-range —chanting and dancing with great pleasure.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at Jaganniatha Puri, He constantly
enjoyed chanting and dancing with His devotees.
TEXT 5
প্রথমাবদরে জগন্নাথ-দরশন |
নৃত্যগীত করে দণ্ডপরণাম, BIA ॥ ৫ ॥
prathamavasare jagannatha-darasana
nrtya-gita kare danda-paranama, stavana


--- Page 8 ---
4 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS

prathama-avasare —in the beginning; jagannatha-darasana—seeing the Deity of
Lord Jagannatha; nrtya-gita kare—performs chanting and dancing; danda-
paranama—offering obeisances; stavana—offering prayers.

TRANSLATION

In the beginning, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the Deity of Lord Jagan-
natha in the temple. He offered Him obeisances and prayers and danced and
sang before Him.

TEXT 6
“छेगनटरूौ भे" লাগিলে করে বাহিরে विच्छ ।
হরিদাস মিলি” আইসে আপন নিলয় ॥ ७ ॥
‘upala-bhoga’ lagile kare bahire viyaja
haridasa mili’ aise apana nilaya
SYNONYMS

upala-bhoga lagile—when there is an offering of food known as upala-bhoga;
kare bahire vijaya—He remains outside; haridasa mili’—meeting Haridasa
Thakura; dise—comes back; dpana nilaya—to His residence.

TRANSLATION

After visiting the temple, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would remain outside
during the upala-bhoga offering. He would then go meet Haridasa Thakura
and return to His residence. i

PURPORT

At noon, when there was an upala-bhoga offering in a place called bhoga-
vardhana-khanda, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would go outside the temple. Before
going outside, He used to stand near the Garuda-stambha column and offer His
obeisances and prayers. Afterwards, the Lord would visit Siddha-bakula, where
Haridasa Thakura lived. After visiting with Haridasa Thakura, the Lord would
return to His own place at the abode of Kasi Misra.

TEXT 7
ঘরে वजि' করে প্রভু নাম সন্ধীর্তন |
অদ্বৈত আসিয়| করে প্রভুর FAN ৭ ॥


--- Page 9 ---
Text 9] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 5
ghare vasi’ kare prabhu nama sankirtana
advaita asiya kare prabhura pajana
SYNONYMS
ghare vasi’—sitting in His room; kare —performs; prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nama sarnkirtana—chanting on beads; advaita—Advaita Acarya;
asiya—coming; kare—performs; prabhura pajana—worship of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Sitting in His room, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would chant on His beads,
and Advaita Prabhu would come there to worship the Lord.
TEXT 8
স্থগন্ধি-সলিলে দেন नष, eae |
সর্বাঙ্গে লেপয়ে প্রভুর FUE চন্দন ॥ ৮ ॥
sugandhi-salile dena padya, acamana
sarvange lepaye prabhura sugandhi candana
SYNONYMS
su-gandhi-salile—with scented water; dena—offers; padya—water for wash-
ing the feet; dcamana—washing the mouth; sarva-ange—all over the body;
lepaye —smears; prabhura—of the Lord; su-gandhi candana—fragrant sandal-
wood pulp.
TRANSLATION
While worshiping Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Advaita Acarya would offer
Him scented water to wash His mouth and feet. Then Advaita Acarya would
smear very fragrant sandalwood pulp all over His body.
TEXT 9
গলে মাল৷ দেন, মাথায় তুলসী-মঞ্জরী |
যোড়-হাতে স্তুতি কর্পে পদে নমস্করি” ॥ > ॥
gale mala dena, mathaya (0/951-7797/9/1
yoda-hate stuti kare pade namaskari’


--- Page 10 ---
6 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
gale—on the neck; mala—garland; dena—offers; mathaya—on the head;
tulasi-manjari—flowers of tulasi; yoda-hate —with folded hands; stuti kare —
offers prayers; pade—unto the lotus feet; namaskari’—offering obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sri Advaita Prabhu would also place a flower garland around the Lord’s neck
and tulasi flowers [maiijaris] on His head. Then, with folded hands, Advaita
Acarya would offer obeisances and prayers unto the Lord.
TEXT 10
পুজা-পাত্রে পুষ্প-তুলসী শেষ যে खानि ।
সেই जव লঞ প্রভু আচার্যে পুজিল ॥ ১০ ॥
paja-patre puspa-tulasi sesa ye achila
sei saba lana prabhu acarye puajila
SYNONYMS
paja-patre—on the dish that holds flowers and tulasi; puspa-tulasi—flowers
and tulasi; sesa—remaining; ye achila—whatever there were; sei saba—all of
them; lana—taking; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; acarye pajila—
worshiped Advaita Acarya.
TRANSLATION
After being worshiped by Advaita Acarya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would
take the dish containing flowers and tulasi and, with whatever paraphernalia
remained, would also worship Advaita Acarya.
TEXT 11
“যোইসি সোহুসি নমোইহপত্ত তে” এই मल्ल ATT |
FAY করি' প্রভু হাসায় আচার্যেরে ॥ >> ॥
“yo ’si 50 ‘si namo ‘stu te” ei mantra pade
mukha-vadya kari’ prabhu hasaya acaryere
SYNONYMS
yah asi—whatever You are; sah asi—so You are; namah astu te—I offer My
respects unto You; ei mantra pade—chants this mantra; mukha-vadya kari’—mak-
ing a sound within the mouth; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hasaya—
causes to laugh; acaryere—Advaita Acarya.


--- Page 11 ---
Text 13] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers [35303 to the Lord 7
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would worship Advaita Acarya by chanting the
mantra, ‘‘Whatever You are, You are—but | offer My respects unto You.” In
addition, the Lord would make some sounds within His mouth that would
make Advaita Acarya laugh.
TEXT 12
এইমত SCPC করেন नभच्छ। |
গ্রভুরে নিমন্ত্রণ করে আচার্য বার বার ॥ ১২ ॥
ei-mata anyonye karena namaskara
prabhure nimantrana kare acarya bara bara
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; anyonye—to one another; karena—offer; namaskara—
obeisances; prabhure —unto Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nimantrana—invitation;
kare—does; acarya—Advaita Acarya; bara bara—again and again.
TRANSLATION
In this way both Advaita Acarya and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would offer
Their respectful obeisances unto one another. Then Advaita Acarya would ex-
tend invitations to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again and again.
TEXT 13
আচার্যের নিমন্ত্রণ-_আশম্চর্য-কথন |
বিস্তারি” বর্ণিয়াছেন দাস-বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১৩ ॥
acaryera nimantrana——ascarya-kathana
vistari’ varpiyachena dasa-vrndavana
SYNONYMS
dcaryera nimantrapa—the invitation of Advaita Acarya; ascarya-kathana—
wonderful story; vistari’—very vividly; varpiyachena—described; dasa-
vrndavana—Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, Sri Advaita Acarya’s invitation is another wonderful story. It has
been very vividly described by Vrndavana dasa Thakura.


--- Page 12 ---
8 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 14
পুমরুক্তি হয়, তাহ। ন৷ cg वर्मन |
আর ভক্তগণ করে প্রভুরে নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১৪ ॥
punarukti haya, (303 na kailun varpana
ara bhakta-gana kare prabhure nimantrana
SYNONYMS
punah-ukti—reputation; haya—there is; taha—that; na—not; kailun—I have
done; varpana—description; ara bhakta-gana—other devotees; kare—do;
prabhure—unto Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nimantrana—invitation.
TRANSLATION
Since Advaita Acarya’s invitation has been described by Vrndavana dasa
Thakura, | shall not repeat the story. However, | shall say that other devotees
also extended invitations to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 15
এক এক দিন এক এক ভক্তগৃহে মহোৎসব |
প্রভু-সঙ্গে তা! ভোজন করে ভক্ত जव ॥ ১৫ ॥
eka eka dina eka eka bhakta-grhe mahotsava
prabhu-sange tahan bhojana kare bhakta saba
SYNONYMS
eka eka dina—each and every day; eka eka bhakta-grhe—in the house of one
devotee after another; mahotsava—festival; prabhu-sarige—with Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tahan—there; bhojana—Ilunch; kare—accept; bhakta—
devotees; saba—all.
TRANSLATION
Every day one devotee after another would invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and the other devotees to lunch and would also hold a festival.
TEXT 16
চারিমাস ब्रङिनि। Aca মহাপ্রভু-সঙ্গে ৷
জগন্নাথের নানা যাত্র৷ দেখে মহারঙ্গে ॥ ১৬ ॥


--- Page 13 ---
Text 18] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 9
cari-masa rahila sabe mahaprabhu-sange
jagannathera nana yatra dekhe maha-range
SYNONYMS
cari-masa—four months; rahila—remain; sabe —all the devotees; mahaprabhu-
sange—with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; nana
yatra—many festivals; dekhe —they see; maha-range —with great pleasure.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees remained at Jagannatha Puri for four continuous months,
and they observed all Lord Jagannatha’s festivals with great pleasure.
TEXT 17
কৃষ্ণজন্মযাত্রা-দিনে নম্দ-মহোওসব |
গোপবেশ হৈলা প্রভু লঞ। ভক্ত সব ॥ ১৭ ॥
krsna-janma-yatra-dine nanda-mahotsava
gopa-vesa haila prabhu lana bhakta saba
SYNONYMS
krspa-janma-yatra—observance of the birth of Lord Krsna; dine—on the day
of; nanda-mahotsava—the festival observed by Nanda Maharaja, the father of
Krsna; gopa-vesa haili—dressed Himself as a cowherd boy; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; lana—taking; bhakta saba—all the devotees.
TRANSLATION
The devotees also celebrated the festival of Janmastami, Krsna’s birthday,
which is also called Nanda-mahotsava, the festival of Nanda Maharaja. At that
time Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His devotees dressed themselves as
cowherd boys.
TEXT 18
দধিতুষ্ধ-ভার সবে নিজ-স্কন্ধে করি'।
মহোৎসব-স্থানে আইলা বলি “হরি” “হরি” ॥ ১৮ ॥
dadhi-dugdha-bhara sabe nija-skandhe kari’
mahotsava-sthane aila bali ‘hari’ ‘hari’


--- Page 14 ---
10 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
dadhi-dugdha—of milk and yogurt; bhara—carriers; sabe—all of them; nija-
skandhe —on their shoulders; kari’—keeping; mahotsava-sthane—to the place of
the festival; aila—came; bali hari hari—chanting Hari, Hari.
TRANSLATION
Having dressed up like cowherd boys, all the devotees carried pots of milk
and yogurt balanced on rods over their shoulders. Thus they all arrived at the
festival grounds chanting the holy name of Hari.
TEXT 19
কানাঞ্ঞি-খুটিয়৷ আছেন "नन्न्ः-८वने ধরি”।
জগল্লাথ-মাহাতি হঞাছেন “ত্রজেখ্বরী” ॥ ১৯ ॥
kanani-khutiya achena ‘nanda’-vesa dhari’
jagannatha-mahati hanachena ‘vrajesvari’
SYNONYMS
kanani-khutiya—Kanani Khutiya; achena—is; nanda-vesa dhari’—in the dress
of Nanda Maharaja; jagannatha-mahati—)agannatha Mahati; haiachena—was;
vrajesvari—mother Yasoda.
TRANSLATION
Kanani Khutiya dressed himself like Nanda Maharaja, and Jagannatha
Mahati dressed himself as mother Yasoda.
TEXT 20
আপনে প্রতাপরুদ্বে, আর মিশ্র-কাশী ।
সার্বভৌম, আর পড়িছা-পাত্র তুলসী ॥ ২০ ॥
apane prataparudra, ara misra-kasi
sarvabhauma, ara padicha-patra tulasi
SYNONYMS
apane prataparudra—personally King Prataparudra; ara—and; misra-kasi—Kasi
Misra; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; dara—and; padicha-patra
tulasi—Padichapatra Tulasi, the temple superintendent.


--- Page 15 ---
Text 22] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 11
TRANSLATION
At that time, King Prataparudra was also personally present with Kasi Misra,
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Tulasi Padichapatra.
TEXT 21
ই“হু-সবা লঞ। প্রভু করে নৃত্য-রঙ্গ ৷
लिए হরিদ্রা-জলে ভরে সবার অঙ্গ ॥ ২১ ॥
inha-saba lana prabhu kare nrtya-ranga
dadhi-dugdha haridra-jale bhare sabara anga
SYNONYMS
inha-saba lana—taking all of them; prabhu—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare
nrtya-ranga—performed dancing in jubilation; dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—milk;
haridra—turmeric; jale—with water; bhare—covered; sabara—of all of them;
anga—bodies.
TRANSLATION
As usual, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu danced jubilantly. Everyone was
covered with milk, yogurt and yellow turmeric water.
TEXT 22
ES কহে,-_ সত্য কহি, न। করিহ কোপ ।
AUT ফিরাইতে পার, তবে জানি গোপ ॥ ২২ ॥
advaita kahe, —satya kahi, na kariha kopa
laguda phiraite para, tabe jani gopa
SYNONYMS
advaita kahe—Advaita Acarya says; satya kahi—!| speak the truth; na kariha
kopa—please do not be angry; laguda—stick, staff; phiraite para—if You can
wheel around; tabe jani—then | shall understand; gopa—cowherd boy.
TRANSLATION
It was at this time that Srila Advaita Acarya said, ‘‘Please do not be angry. |
speak the truth. | shall know whether You are a cowherd boy only if You can
wheel this rod about.”


--- Page 16 ---
12 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 23
তবে লগুড় न} প্রভু ফিরাইতে लो गिन्‌। |
ৰার বার আকাশে ८रनि' লুফিয়। ধরিল। ॥ ২৩ ॥
tabe laguda lana prabhu phiraite lagila
bara bara akase pheli’ luphiya dharila
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; laguda—rod; lana—taking; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
phiraite lagila—began to wheel it around; bara bara—again and again; akase —in
the sky; pheli’—throwing; luphiya—tossing; dharila—He captured.
TRANSLATION
Accepting Advaita Acarya’s challenge, ওলা Caitanya Mahaprabhu took a big
rod and began to wheel it around and around. Again and again He threw the
rod into the sky and caught it when it fell.
TEXT 24
শিরের উপরে, পৃষ্ঠে, সম্মুখে, দুই-পাশে |
পাদমধ্যে ফিরায় লৎগুড়,_ দেখি' লোক হাসে ॥ ২৪ ॥
Sirera upare, prsthe, sammukhe, dui-pase
pada-madhye phiraya laguda,—dekhi’ loka hase
SYNONYMS
Sirera upare —over the head; prsthe —behind the back; sammukhe—in front;
dui-pase—on the two sides; pada-madhye —between the two legs; phirdya—
wheels around; laguda—the rod; dekhi’—seeing; loka hase—all the people
began to laugh.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wheeled and threw the rod, sometimes over His
head, sometimes behind His back, sometimes in front of Him, sometimes to
His side and sometimes between His legs. Indeed, all the people laughed to
see this.
TEXT 25
অল৷ত-চক্রের প্রায় न ख़ ফিরায়।
দেখি” সর্বলো ক-চিত্তে চমৎকার পায় ॥ ২৫ ॥


--- Page 17 ---
Text 271 Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 13
alata-cakrera praya laguda phiraya
dekhi’ sarva-loka-citte camatkara paya
SYNONYMS
alata-cakrera—the circle of a firebrand; praya—like; laguda phiraya—wheels
the rod; dekhi’—seeing; sarva-loka—all the people; citte—within the heart;
camatkara padya—became very astonished.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu whirled the rod in a circle like a firebrand,
the heart of everyone who saw it was astonished.
TEXT 26
এইমত নিত্যানম্দ ফিরায় লগ্ডড় |
কে বুঝিবে তাহা gE গোপন্ভাব গুড় ॥ ২৬ ॥
ei-mata nityananda phiraya laguda
ke bujhibe (52/15 dunhara gopa-bhava 80003
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; phirdya laguda—
wheels a rod; ke—who; bujhibe —will understand; tanha—there; durnhara—of
both of Them; gopa-bhava—the ecstasy of the cowherd boys; gadha—very
deep.
TRANSLATION
Nityananda Prabhu also played at whirling the rod. Who can understand
how They were ecstatically immersed in the deep emotions of the cowherd
boys?
TEXT 27
প্রতাপরুদ্দছের আজ্ঞায় পড়িছা-তুলসী |
জগন্নাথের প্রসাদ-বস্ত এক Fel আসি ॥ ২৭ ॥
prataparudrera 3833 padicha-tulasi
jagannathera prasada-vastra eka lana asi
SYNONYMS
prataparudrera—of King Prataparudra; ajidya—on the order; padicha-tulasi—
the temple superintendent named Tulasi; jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha;
prasada-vastra—used cloth; eka—one; lana—taking; asi—came.


--- Page 18 ---
14 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Following the orders of Maharaja Prataparudra, the temple superintendent
named Tulasi brought one of Lord Jagannatha’s used cloths.
TEXT 28
AQT AW প্রভুম खटक বান্ধিল |
আচার্খাদি প্রভুর গণেরে गन्ना टेन ॥ २४. ॥
bahu-malya vastra prabhu-mastake bandhila
acaryadi prabhura ganere paraila
SYNONYMS
bahu-malya—very valuable; vastra—cloth; prabhu-mastake—on the head of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bandhila—wrapped; acarya-adi—headed by Advaita
Acarya; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ganere—on the associates;
paraila—put.
TRANSLATION
This valuable cloth was wrapped around the head of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. The other devotees, headed by Advaita Acarya, also had cloths
wrapped about their heads.
TEXT 29
কানাঞ্জি-খুটিয় জগন্নাথ, দুইজন |
আবেশে বিলাইল ঘরে ছিল যত ধন ॥ ২৯ ॥
kanani-khutiya, jagannatha, —dui-jana
avese bilaila ghare chila yata dhana
SYNONYMS
kanani-khutiya—Kanani Khutiya; jagannatha—)agannatha Mahati; dui-jana—
two persons; avese—in ecstatic love; bilaila—distributed; ghare—at home;
chila—was; yata—all; dhana—riches.
TRANSLATION
In ecstasy, Kanai Khutiya, who was dressed as Nanda Maharaja, and Jagan-
natha Mahati, who was dressed as mother Yasoda, distributed all the riches
they had stocked at home.


--- Page 19 ---
Text 32] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 15
TEXT 30
দেখি” মহা প্রভু বড় जटखांस পাইল৷ |
মাতাপিতা-জ্ঞানে षटं ट নমস্কার কৈল। ॥ ৩০ ॥
dekhi’ mahaprabhu bada santosa paila
mata-pita-jAiane dunhe namaskara kaila
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; mahaprabhu—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bada—very much;
santosa—satisfaction; paila—felt; mata-pita-jhane—accepting as father and
mother; dunhe—unto both of them; namaskara kaila—offered obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was greatly satisfied to see this. Accepting them
both as His father and mother, He offered them obeisances.
TEXT 31
পরম-আবেশে প্রভু खां डेन নিজ-ঘর |
এইমত লীলা করে গৌরাজন্দ্ন্দর ॥ ৩১ ॥
parama-avese prabhu aila nija-ghara
ei-mata lila kare gauranga-sundara
SYNONYMS
parama-avese—in great ecstasy; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 311 --
returned; nija-ghara—to His own residence; ei-mata—in this way; lila—pastimes;
kare —performed; gauranga-sundara—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
In great ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to His residence. In this
way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, known as Gauranga-sundara, performed
various pastimes.
TEXT 32
বিজয়া-দশমী-_লঙ্ক।-বিজয়ের দিনে ।
বানর-সৈন্যয CTE প্রভু লঞ। ভক্তগণে ॥ ৩২ ॥
vijaya-dasami——lanka-vijayera dine
vanara-sainya kaila prabhu 1255 bhakta-gane


--- Page 20 ---
16 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
vijaya—victory; dasami—tenth day; lanka-vijayera dine—on the day celebrat-
ing the conquering of Lanka; vanara-sainya—monkey soldiers; kaila—arranged;
prabhu—5r1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; lana bhakta-gane —taking all the devotees.
TRANSLATION
On the victory day celebrating the conquest of Lanka—a day known as Vi-
jaya-dasami—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu dressed up all His devotees like
monkey soldiers.
TEXT 33
FFATF-ACACH প্রভু বৃচক্ষশাখ৷ Teal |
লঙ্ক।-গড়ে চড়ি' ফেলে গড় ভাজিয়া ॥ ৩৩ ॥
hanuman-avese prabhu vrksa-sakha lana
lanka-gade cadi’ phele gada bhangiya
SYNONYMS
hanuman-avese—in the emotion of being Hanuman; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; vrksa-sakha lana—taking a large branch of a tree; lanka-gade —on
the Lanka fort; cadi’—ascending; phele—breaks down; gada—the fort;
bhangiya —dismantling.
TRANSLATION
Displaying the emotions of Hanuman, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took up a
large tree branch, and, mounting the walls of the Lanka fort, began to disman-
tle it.
TEXT 34
FIRTH AMA প্রভু কহে ক্রোধাবেশে |
“জগন্মাতা হরে পাপী, মারিমু সবংশে ॥' ৩৪ ॥
‘kahanre ravna’ prabhu kahe krodhavese
‘jagan-mata hare papi, marimu savamse’
SYNONYMS
kahanre ravna—where is the rascal Ravana; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kahe —says; krodha-avese—in great anger; jagat-mata—the mother of the uni-
verse; hare—kidnaps; papi—sinful; marimu—I shall kill; sa-vamse —with all his
family.


--- Page 21 ---
Text 36] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 17
TRANSLATION
In the ecstasy of Hanuman, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu angrily said, ‘Where
is the rascal Ravana? He has kidnapped the universal mother, Sita. Now I shall
kill him and all his family.”
TEXT 35
গোসাঞ্জচির আবেশ (णचि, লোকে চমৎকার |
সর্বলোক “জয়” জয়” বলে বার বার ॥ ৩৫ ॥
gosanira avesa dekhi’ loke camatkara
sarva-loka ‘jaya’ ‘jaya’ bale bara bara
SYNONYMS
gosanira—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dvesa—ecstasy; dekhi’—by seeing;
loke —all people; camatkara—astonished; sarva-loka—all people; jaya jaya—all
glories; bale—speak; bara bara—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Everyone became very astonished to see the emotional ecstasy of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and everyone began to chant, ‘All glories! All glo-
ries!” again and again.
TEXT 36
এইমত রাসযাত্রা, আর कतौ नो वनौ ।
छश्थन-कछोफनोया८। দেখিল। সকলি ॥ ৩৬ ॥
ei-mata rasa-yatra, ara dipavali
utthana-dvadasi-yatra dekhila sakali
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; rasa-yatra—rasa dancing of Lord Krsna; ara—and; dipa-
avali—a row of lights, the day of Dipavali; utthana-dvadasi-yatra—the festival of
Utthana-dvadasi; dekhila sakali—participated in all of them.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His devotees participated in all the festivals
known as Rasa-yatra, Dipavali and Utthana-dvadasi.


--- Page 22 ---
18 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
PURPORT
The Dipavali festival takes place on the dark-moon night in the month of Kart-
tika (October-November). The Rasa-yatra, or rasa dancing of Krsna, takes place on
the full-moon night of the same month. Utthana-dvadasi takes place the day after
Ekadasi in the waxing fortnight of the moon in the same month. All the devotees
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu participated in all these festivals.
TEXT 37
একদিন মহাপ্রভু নিত্যানন্দে see |
28 ভাই যুক্তি কৈল forges বসিয়। ॥ ৩৭ ॥
eka-dina mahaprabhu nityanande lana
dui bhai yukti kaila nibhrte vasiya
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; mahaprabhu—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nityanande
lana —taking Lord Nityananda Prabhu; dui bhai —two brothers; yukti kaila—con-
sulted; nibhrte vasiya—sitting in a solitary place.
TRANSLATION
One day the two brothers, Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu and Nityananda
Prabhu, consulted one another, sitting together in a solitary place.
TEXT 38
কিবা যুক্তি কৈল षं टङ, coz নাহি জানে |
ফলে অনুমান পাছে देकन STINTS ॥ ৩৮. ॥
kiba yukti kaila dunhe, keha nahi jane
phale anumana pache kaila bhakta-gane
SYNONYMS
kiba yukti kaila—what consultation They had; durhe —both of Them; keha
nahi jane—no one knows; phale—by the result; anumana—guess; pache—later;
kaila—did; bhakta-gane —all the devotees.
TRANSLATION
No one could understand what the brothers discussed between Them-
selves, but later all the devotees could guess what the subject matter was.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 41] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 19
TEXT 39
ভবে মহাপ্রভু जव ভক্তে' বোলাইল |
গোৌড়দেশে যাহ जटव বিদায় করিল ॥ ৩৯ ॥
(306 mahaprabhu 53063 bhakte bolaila
gauda-dese yaha sabe vidaya karila
SYNONYMS
tabe mahaprabhu—thereafter Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; saba—all; bhakte —
the devotees; bolaila—called; gauda-dese —to Bengal; yaha—return; sabe —all
of you; vidaya karila—bade farewell.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called for all the devotees and asked
them to return to Bengal. In this way, He bade farewell to them.
TEXT 40
সবারে কহিল পুভু- यङएं स जिच] ।
গুণ্ডিচা দেখিয়া যাবে আমারে মিলিয়। ॥ ৪০ ॥
sabare kahila prabhu——pratyabda asiya
gundica dekhiya yabe amare miliya
SYNONYMS
sabare—to all of them; kahila—said; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prati-
abda—every year; asiya—coming; gundica—the function at the Gundica temple;
dekhiya—seeing; yabe —you should go; amare miliya—after meeting Me.
TRANSLATION
Bidding farewell to all the devotees, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested
them to return to Jagannatha Puri every year to see Him and then see the
cleansing of the Gundica temple.
TEXT 41
আচার্যেরে আজ্ঞা দিল করিয়৷ সন্মান ।
“আ-চণ্ডাল আদি কৃষ্ণভক্তি' দিও দান” ॥ ৪১ ॥
3০3৭/৮০/০ ajna dila kariya sammana
‘a-candala adi krsna-bhakti dio dana’


--- Page 24 ---
20 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS

acaryere—unto Advaita Acarya; (तक dila—ordered; kariya sammana—with
great respect; a-candiala—even to the lowest of men, known as the candala;
adi —beginning with; krsna-bhakti—Krsna consciousness, or devotional service to
Lord Krsna; dio —deliver; dana—in charity.

TRANSLATION

With great respect, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested Advaita Acarya,
“Give Krsna consciousness, devotion to Krsna, even to the lowest of men
[candalas].”

PURPORT

This is 6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu's order to all His devotees. Krsna-bhakti, devo-
tion to Krsna, is open to everyone, even low-class men like candalas. One should
follow this order in the disciplic succession stemming from Sri Advaita and Nitya-
nanda Prabhu and distribute Krsna consciousness without discrimination
throughout the world.

There are different kinds of men, beginning with the brahmana and going down
to the lowest platform known as candala. Whatever one’s position, everyone in
this age of Kali needs to be enlightened in Krsna consciousness. That is the
greatest need of the day. Everyone is acutely feeling the pangs of material exis-
tence. Even in the ranks and files of the American Senate, the pinpricks of material
existence are felt, so much so that April 30, 1974, was actually set aside as Prayer
Day. Thus everyone is feeling the resultant pinpricks of Kali-yuga brought about
by human society's indulging in illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication.
Now is the time for the members of the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness to distribute krsna-bhakti all over the world and thus follow the orders
of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord has ordered everyone to become a guru
(Cc. Madhya 7.128): amara ajndya guru hana tara’ ei desa. Everyone in every
town and village should be enlightened by the instructions of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Krsna consciousness should be distributed to everyone in-
discriminately. In this way, the entire world will be peaceful and happy, and
everyone will glorify $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as He desires.

The word candala actually refers to a dog-eater, who is considered the lowest
of men. Even candilas can be enlightened in Krsna consciousness due to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s benedictions. Krsna-bhaktiis not the monopoly of a cer-
tain caste. Everyone is eligible to receive this great benediction given by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Everyone should be given a chance to receive it and be
happy.

The word dana, meaning “charity,” is also significant in this verse. Whoever
engages in the distribution of Krsna consciousness is a charitable person. Profes-


--- Page 25 ---
Text 42] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 21
sional men recite $rimad-Bhagavatam and discuss krsna-bhakti for an exchange of
money. They cannot distribute such exalted transcendental property to everyone
and anyone. Only pure devotees who have no motive other than serving Krsna
can give such transcendentally valuable benedictions out of charity.
TEXT 42

নিত্যানম্দে ass! দিল, are গৌড়দেশে |

অনর্গল প্রেমভক্তি করিহ প্রকাশে ॥ ৪২ ॥

nityanande ajna 01/3, — ‘yaha gauda-dese

anargala prema-bhakti kariha prakase

SYNONYMS

nitydnande—unto  Nityananda Prabhu; -ajna dila—Lord ऽ = Caitanya
Mahaprabhu ordered; yaha gauda-dese —go to Gauda-desa (Bengal); anargala—
without restriction; prema-bhakti —devotional service in love of Godhead; kariha
prakase —manifest.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Nityananda Prabhu, “Go to Bengal and,
without restriction, manifest devotional service to the Lord, Krsna conscious-
ness.”

PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus ordered Nityananda Prabhu to deliver all the
Bengalis to devotional service. In Bhagavad-gita (9.32) it is said:
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 101 syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha sadras
te ‘pi yanti param gatim
“O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower birth —
women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sadras [workers]—can approach the
supreme destination.” Whoever takes to Krsna consciousness and follows the
regulative principles can return home, back to Godhead.

In his Anubhasya, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes: “There is a
class of so-called devotees called prakrta-sahajiyas who think that Nityananda
Prabhu is an ordinary human being. They have spread the news that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu ordered Nityananda Prabhu to return to Bengal from Orissa just to


--- Page 26 ---
22 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
marry and beget children. This is certainly a great offense against Nityananda
Prabhu.”

Such an offense is called pasanda-buddhi, or an atheistic remark. Offenders
consider Nityananda Prabhu to be like one of them, an ordinary human being.
They do not know of Nityananda Prabhu’s identity with the visnu-tattva. Thinking
Nityananda Prabhu to be an ordinary human being is the business of mental
speculators known as kunapatma-vadis. These people accept the material body,
which is a bag of three material elements (kunape tridhatuke), as themselves.
They think that Nityananda Prabhu’s body was similarly material and that it was
meant for sense gratification. Whoever thinks in this way is a candidate for the
darkest regions of hell. Those who hanker after women and money, who are self-
interested and have the mentality of merchants, can certainly discover many
things with their fertile brains and speak against the authorized revealed scrip-
tures. They also engage in some moneymaking businesses to cheat innocent
people, and they try to support their business programs by making such offensive
statements. Actually Nityananda Prabhu, being the expansion of जा Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, is the most munificent incarnation. No one should consider Him an
ordinary human being or an entity like the prajapatis, who were ordered by
Brahma to increase generation. Nityananda Prabhu should not be considered in-
strumental for sense gratification. Although professional so-called preachers sup-
port this, such statements are not found in any authorized revealed scriptures. Ac-
tually there is no support for these statements made by sahajiyas or other profes-
sional distributors of krsna-bhakti.

TEXT 43
রামদাস, গদাধর আদি কত জনে |
তোমার সহায় লাগি” দিল্যু তোমার সনে ॥ ৪৩ ॥
rama-dasa, gadadhara adi kata jane
tomara sahaya lagi’ dilu tomara sane
SYNONYMS

rama-dasa—Ramadasa; gadadhara—Gadadhara dasa; adi—and others; kata
jane —some people; tomara—Your; sahaya—assistants; lagi’—as; dilu—I give;
tomara sane —with You.

TRANSLATION

Nityananda Prabhu was given assistants like Ramadasa, Gadadhara dasa and
several others. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘I give them to You to assist
You.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 46] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 23
TEXT 44
মধ্যে মধ্যে আমি তোমার নিকট যাইব।
অলক্ষিতে রহি” তোমার নৃত্য (न थिव" ॥ 88 ॥
madhye madhye ami tomara nikata yaiba
alaksite rahi’ tomara nrtya dekhiba’
SYNONYMS
madhye madhye —at intervals; ami—I|; tomara nikata—near You; yaiba—shall
go; alaksite rahi’—keeping invisible; tomara nrtya—Your dancing; dekhiba—I
shall see.
TRANSLATION
“I shall also go to see You at intervals. Keeping Myself invisible, 1 shall
watch You dance.”
TEXT 45
শ্রীবাস-পঞণ্ডিতে প্রভু করি” আলিঙ্গন |
कटे ধরি” কহে তরে মধুর বচন ॥ ৪৫ ॥
$rivasa-pandite prabhu kari’ alingana
kanthe dhari’ kahe tanre madhura vacana
SYNONYMS
$rivasa-pandite —unto Srivasa Pandita; prabhu —Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kari’—doing; alingana—embracing; kanthe dhari’—catching his neck; kahe—
says; tarire—unto him; madhura vacana—sweet words.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then embraced Srivasa Pandita and, with His arm
about his neck, began to speak to him in sweet words.
TEXT 46
তোমার ঘরে কীর্তনে আমি নিত্য নাচিব।
তুমি দেখা পাবে, আর কেহ না৷ দেখিব ॥ ৪৬ ॥
tomara ghare kirtane ami nitya naciba
tumi dekha pabe, ara keha na dekhiba


--- Page 28 ---
24 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
tomara ghare—in your house; kirtane—in the performance of congregational
chanting; ami—I; nitya—daily; naciba—shall dance; tumi—you; dekha pabe—
will be able to see; ara—else; keha—anyone; na dekhiba—will not see.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested Srivasa Thiakura, ‘‘Perform congrega-
tional chanting daily, and be assured that | shall also dance in your presence.
You will be able to see this dancing, but not others.
TEXT 47
এই यच्च মাতাকে किङ, এই जव প্রসাদ |
দণ্ডবৎ করি” আমার ক্ষমাইহ অপরাধ ॥ 8१ ॥
ei vastra matake diha’, ei saba prasada
dandavat kari’ amara ksamaiha aparadha
SYNONYMS
ei vastra—this cloth; matake diha’—deliver to My mother, Sacidevi; ei saba
prasada—all these remnants of the food of Jagannatha; dandavat kari’— offering
obeisances; amara—My; ksamaiha—cause to be excused; aparadha—offenses.
TRANSLATION
‘Take this prasada of Lord Jagannatha’s and this cloth and deliver them to
My mother, Sacidevi. After offering her obeisances, please request her to ex-
cuse My offenses.
TEXT 48
ভার সেবা ছাড়ি” আমি করিয়াছি wom ।
ধর্ম নহে, করি অমি নিজ ধর্ম-নাশ ॥ 8४ ॥
tanra 5০৮3৭ chadi’ ami kariyachi sannyasa
dharma nahe, kari ami nija dharma-nasa
SYNONYMS
tanra seva chadi’—giving up her service; ami—I; kariyachi—accepted; san-
nyasa—the renounced order of life; dharma nahe—it is not My religion; kari—
perform; ami—I; nija dharma-nasa—destruction of My religious principles.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 50] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 25
TRANSLATION
“1 have given up the service of My mother and have accepted the sannyasa
order. Actually | should not have done this, for by so doing, | have destroyed
My religious principles.
TEXT 49
ভার প্রেমবশ আমি, তার সেবা- अर्य ।
তাহা ছাড়ি” করিয়াছি বাতুলের কর্ম ॥ ৪৯ ॥
tanra prema-vasa ami, tarnra 56০৮3--_003/773
taha chadi’ kariyachi vatulera karma
SYNONYMS
tanra prema-vasa—subordinate to her love; ami—I; tanra seva—her service;
dharma—My religion; taha chadi’—giving up that; kariyachi—| performed;
vatulera karma—the acts of a madman.
TRANSLATION
‘1 am subordinate to the love of My mother, and it is My duty to serve her in
return. Instead of doing so, | have accepted this renounced order. Certainly
this is the act of a madman.
TEXT 50
वान वलट कन्न মাতা নাহি লয় দোষ।
এই জানি' মাতা মোরে না করয় রোব ॥ ৫০ ॥
vatula balakera mata nahi laya dosa
ei jani’ mata more na karaya rosa
SYNONYMS
vatula balakera—of a mad son; mata—mother; nahi—does not; laya—accept;
dosa—fault; ei jani’—knowing this; mata—mother; more—unto Me; na karaya
rosa—is not at all angry.
TRANSLATION
‘A mother is not offended by her mad son, and, knowing this, My mother is
not offended by Me.


--- Page 30 ---
26 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 51
कि কায সন্ল্যাসে মোর, প্রেম নিজ-ধন ।
যে-কালে ARTA CT, छन्न CZF মন ॥ ৫১ ॥
ki kaya sannyase mora, prema nija-dhana
ye-kale sannyasa kailun, channa haila mana
SYNONYMS
ki kaya—what business; sannyase—in the renounced order; mora—of Me;
prema—love; nija-dhana—My real wealth; ye-kale—at which time; sannyasa
kailun—I| accepted the renounced order; channa—deranged; haila—was;
mana—mind.
TRANSLATION
‘‘l had no business in accepting this renounced order and sacrificing My
love for My mother, which is My real property. Actually | was in a crazy state
of mind when I accepted sannyasa.
TEXT 52
নীলাচলে আছে” गूः ভঁাহার আজ্ঞাতে |
মধ্যে মধ্যে আলসিমু তার চরণ দেখিতে ॥ ৫২ ॥
nilacale achon muni tanhara ajnate
madhye madhye asimu tarnra carana dekhite
SYNONYMS
nilacale achon—stay at Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala; munii—I; tanhara ajnate—
under her order; madhye madhye —at intervals; asimu—I shall go; tarnra—her;
carana dekhite—to see the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
‘‘l am staying here at Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala, to comply with her orders.
However, at intervals | shall go see her lotus feet.
TEXT 53
নিত্য যাই” দেখি गूर তঁহার চরণে |
স্ফুতি-জ্ঞানে (Stal তাহ। সত্য নাহি মানে ॥ ৫৩ ॥


--- Page 31 ---
Text 55] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 27
nitya yai’ dekhi muni tanhara carane
spharti-jaiane tenho (303 satya nahi mane
SYNONYMS
nitya yai’—going daily; dekhi—see; munii—I; tanhara carane—her lotus feet;
spharti-jnane —feeling My appearance; tenho—she; taha—that; satya nahi
mane —does not accept as true.
TRANSLATION
‘Indeed, | go there daily to see her lotus feet. She is able to feel My pres-
ence, although she does not believe it to be true.
TEXTS 54-55
একদিন শাল্যন্ন, चान পঁ।চ-সাত |
শাক, মোচা-ঘণ্ট, ভূষ্ট-পটোল-নিজ্ছবপ।ত ॥ ৫৪ ॥
(नष -खां ना य, দথি, দুগ্ধ, খণ্ড-লার ।
শালগ্রামে সমপিলেন বহু উপহার ॥ ৫৫ ॥
eka-dina salyanna, vyanjana panca-sata
Saka, moca-ghanta, bhrsta-patola-nimba-pata
lembu-ada-khanda, dadhi, dugdha, khanda-sara
salagrame samarpilena bahu upahara
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; sali-anna—cooked rice made of sali paddy; vyaijana—
vegetables; panca-sata—five to seven different kinds; saka—spinach; moca-
ghanta—curry made from banana flowers; bhrsta—fried; patola—patola vegeta-
bles; nimba-pata—with leaves of the nimba tree; lembu—lemon; ada-khanda—
pieces of ginger; dadhi—yogurt; dugdha—milk; khanda-sara—sugar candy;
Salagrame —unto Lord Visnu in the form of the salagrama; samarpilena—offered;
bahu upahara—many other varieties of food.
TRANSLATION
“One day My mother, Saci, offered food to Silagrama Visnu. She offered
rice cooked from $311 paddies, various kinds of vegetables, spinach, curry
made of banana flowers, fried patola with nimba leaves, pieces of ginger with
lemon, and also yogurt, milk, sugar candy and many other foods.


--- Page 32 ---
28 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 56
SAA FR কোলে করেন कम्कन |
নিমাইর প্রিয় মোর- এসব चान ॥ ৫৬ ॥
prasada lana kole karena krandana
nimaira priya mora——e-saba vyaijana
SYNONYMS
prasada lana —taking the remnants of food; kole—on her lap; karena kran-
dana—was crying; nimaira—of Nimai; priya—favorite; mora—My; e-saba
vyanjana—all these varieties of cooked food.
TRANSLATION
“Taking the food upon her lap, Mother was crying to think that all that food
was very dear to her Nimai.
TEXT 57
নিমাঞ্ঞি নাহিক এথা, কে করে ভোজন |
মোর ধ্যানে खलैन्बटन ভরিল নয়ন ॥ ৫৭ ॥
nimani nahika etha, ke kare bhojana
mora dhyane asru-jale bharila nayana
SYNONYMS
nimani—Nimai; nahika etha—is not present here; ke kare bhojana—who will
eat them; mora dhyane —on meditation upon Me; asru-jale —with tears; bharila
nayana—eyes become filled.
TRANSLATION
“My mother was thinking, ‘Nimai is not here. Who will accept all this
food?’ As she meditated upon Me in this way, her eyes filled with tears.
TEXT 58
শীঘ্র যাই” यूय जव किक ভক্ষণ |
শুল্যপাত্র দেখি” खलै করিয়। মার্জন ॥ ৫৮ ॥
sighra yai’ muni 5303 karinu bhaksana
sanya-patra dekhi’ asru kariya marjana


--- Page 33 ---
Text 60] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 29
SYNONYMS
sighra—very soon; yai’—going; 177८171 --1; saba—all; karinu bhaksana—ate;
Sanya-patra dekhi’—seeing the dish empty; asru—tears; kariya marjana—smear-
ing with her hands.
TRANSLATION
“While she was thus thinking and crying, | immediately went there with
great haste and ate everything. Seeing the dish empty, she wiped her tears
away.
TEXT 59
“কে TR-BY খাইল, শুন্য কেনে পাত ?
বালগোপাল কিবা খাইল जव ভাত ? ৫৯ ॥
‘ke anna-vyanjana khaila, sanya kene pata?
balagopala kiba khaila saba bhata?
SYNONYMS
ke—who; anna-vyarijana khaila—has eaten all this food; Sanya kene pata—
why is the dish empty; bala-gopala—the Deity Bala-gopala; kiba khaila—did He
eat; saba bhata—all the rice.
TRANSLATION
‘‘She then began to wonder who had eaten all that food. ‘Why is the plate
empty?’ she wondered, doubting that Bila-gopala had eaten it all.
TEXT 60
কিবা মোর কথায় মনে व्यम হুঞ। গেল |
কিবা কোন खख আসি” সকল খাইল ? ৬০ ॥
kiba mora kathaya mane bhrama hana gela!
kiba kona jantu asi’ sakala khaila?
SYNONYMS
kiba—or; mora kathaya—when | was thinking like that; mane —in the mind;
bhrama hana gela—l was mistaken; kiba—or; kona jantu—some animal; asi’—
coming; sakala khaila—ate everything.


--- Page 34 ---
30 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
‘‘She began to wonder whether there was actually anything on the plate in
the first place. Then again she thought that some animal might have come and
eaten everything.
TEXT 61
কিবা আমি অন্লপাত্রে sca না বাড়িল !”
এত চিস্তি” পাক-পাত্র যাঞ! দেখিল ॥ ৬১ ॥
kiba ami anna-patre bhrame na 2301/91
eta cinti’ paka-patra yana dekhila
SYNONYMS
kiba—or; ami—I; anna-patre—on the plate for food; bhrame —by mistake; na
badila—did not put anything; eta cinti’—thinking this; paka-patra—the kitchen
pots; yana dekhila—went and saw.
TRANSLATION
‘‘She thought, ‘Perhaps by mistake I did not put any food on the plate.” So
thinking, she went into the kitchen and saw the pots.
TEXT 62
অন্লব্যগুনপুর্ণ দেখি” जकन ভাজনে।
দেখিয়া সংশয় হৈল কিছু চমৎকার মনে ॥ ৬২
anna-vyanjana-parna dekhi’ sakala bhajane
dekhiya sarnsaya haila kichu camatkara mane
SYNONYMS
anna-vyanjana-parna—filled with rice and vegetables; dekhi’—seeing; sakala
bhajane—all the cooking pots; dekhiya—seeing; sarhsaya haila—there was
doubt; kichu—some; camatkara—wonder; mane —in the mind.
TRANSLATION
“When she saw that all the pots were still filled with rice and vegetables,
there was some doubt in her mind, and she was astonished.
TEXT 63
ঈশানে বোলাঞ পুনঃ স্থান লেপাইল |
পুলরপি গোপালকে खन्न সমপ্িপিল ॥ ৬৩ ॥


--- Page 35 ---
Text 65] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 31
isane bolana punah sthana lepaila
punarapi gopalake anna samarpila
SYNONYMS
isane—to Téana, the servant; bolana—calling; punah—again; sthana—the
place; lepaila—cleaned; punarapi—again; gopalake—unto Copala; anna—
cooked rice and vegetables; samarpila—offered.
TRANSLATION
“Thus wondering, she called T$ana, the servant, and had the place cleaned
again. She then offered another plate to Gopala.
TEXT 64
सेमर যবে করেন উত্তম तक्षन |
মোরে খাওয়াইতে করে উৎকণ্টায় রোদন ॥ ७8 ॥
ei-mata yabe karena uttama randhana
more khaoyaite kare utkanthaya rodana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; yabe—when; karena—does; uttama randhana—first-
class cooking; more—Me; khaoyaite—to feed; kare—does; utkanthaya—with
great anxiety; rodana—crying.
TRANSLATION
‘Now whenever she prepares some good cooked food and wants to feed it
to Me, she cries in great anxiety.
TEXT 65
SA প্রেমে আমি” আমায় করায় ভোজনে |
অন্তরে মানয়ে FY, বাহে! নাহি মানে ॥ ৬৫ ॥
tanra preme ani’ amaya karaya bhojane
antare manaye sukha, bahye nahi mane
SYNONYMS
tanra preme—by her love; ani’—bringing; amaya—Me; karaya bhojane—
causes to eat; antare—within herself; manaye—she feels; sukha—happiness;
bahye —externally; nahi mane —does not accept.


--- Page 36 ---
32 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
‘‘Being obliged by her love, | am brought there to eat. Mother knows all
these things internally and feels happiness, but externally she does not accept
them.
TEXT 66
এই বিজ্ঞয়া-দশমীতে হৈল এই রীতি ।
তাঁহাকে Hem তার করাইহ SASS ॥ ৬৬ ॥
ei vijaya-dasamite haila ei riti
tanhake puchiya tanra karaiha pratiti
SYNONYMS
ei vijaya-dasamite—on the previous Vijaya-dasami day; haila—there was; ei
riti—such an incident; tanhike—unto her; puchiya—asking; tanra—her;
karaiha—make; pratiti—belief.
TRANSLATION
“Such an incident took place on the last Vijaya-dasami day. You can ask her
about this incident and thus make her believe that I actually go there.”
TEXT 67
এতেক কহিতে প্রভু विच्छछन হইলা |
লোক বিদায় করিতে প্রভু ধৈর্য ধরিল। ॥ ৬৭ ॥
eteka kahite prabhu vihvala ha-ila
loka vidaya karite prabhu dhairya dharila
SYNONYMS
eteka kahite—saying this; prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vihvala ha-
ila—became overwhelmed; loka vidaya karite—to bid farewell to the devotees;
prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dhairya dharila—maintained patience.
TRANSLATION
While describing all this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was a little over-
whelmed, but just to finish bidding farewell to the devotees, He remained
patient.


--- Page 37 ---
Text 70] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers [35303 to the Lord 33
TEXT 68
রাঘৰ পঞণ্ডিতে কহেন বচন সরস |
তোমার শুদ্ধ CATH আমি হই” তোমার বশ” ॥৬৮৭
raghava pandite kahena vacana sarasa
‘tomara suddha preme ami ha-i’ tomara vasa’
SYNONYMS
raghava pandite —unto Raghava Pandita; kahena—says; vacana—words; sa-
rasa—very relishable; tomara—your; suddha preme —by pure devotional service;
ami ha-i’—| become; tomara—your; vasa—under obligation.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu next spoke some relishable words to Raghava
Pandita. He said, “| am obliged to you due to your pure love for Me."’
TEXT 69
TET কুষ্ণসেবার কথা শুন, সর্বজন |
পরম-পবিত্র সেব। অতি সর্বোত্তম ॥ ৬৯ ॥
inhara krsna-sevara katha suna, sarva-jana
parama-pavitra seva ati sarvottama
SYNONYMS
inhara—of him; krsna-sevara—of service to Lord Krsna; katha —stories; suna—
hear; sarva-jana—all people; parama-pavitra—supremely pure; seva—service;
ati—very much; sarva-uttama—well accomplished.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then informed everyone, ‘Just hear about the
pure devotional service rendered to Krsna by Raghava Pandita. Indeed,
Raghava Pandita’s service is supremely pure and highly accomplished.
TEXT 70
আর खव] TC _ শুন নারিকেলের কথা ।
পাচ গণ্ড! করি” নারিকেল বিকায় তথা ॥ ৭০ ॥


--- Page 38 ---
34 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
ara dravya rahu——suna narikelera katha
panca ganda kari’ narikela vikaya tatha
SYNONYMS
ara dravya rahu —apart from the other commodities; suna—just hear; narikelera
katha—the incident of offering coconuts; parca ganda kari’—at the price of five
gandas; narikela—coconut; vikaya—is sold; tatha—there.
TRANSLATION
“Apart from other commodities, just hear about his coconut offering. A
coconut is sold at the rate of five gandas each.
TEXT 71
বাটিতে কত শত বৃক্ষে লক্ষ লক্ষ कन ।
তথাপি শুনেন যথা মিষ্ট নারিকেল ॥ ৭১ ॥
vatite kata sata vrkse laksa laksa phala
tathapi sunena yatha mista narikela
SYNONYMS
vatite—in his garden; kata sata—how many hundreds of; vrkse —trees; laksa
laksa phala—millions of fruits; tathapi—still; sunena—hears; yatha—where; mista
narikela—sweet coconut.
TRANSLATION
‘Although he already has hundreds of trees and millions of fruits, he is still
very eager to hear about the place where sweet coconut is available.
TEXT 72
এক এক ফলের মুল্য দিয়৷ চারিচারি পণ ।
দশক্রোশ হৈতে আনায় করিয়। যতন ॥ ৭২ ॥
eka eka phalera malya diya cari-cari pana
dasa-krosa haite anaya kariya yatana
SYNONYMS
eka eka phalera—of each and every fruit; malya—price; diya—giving; cari-cari
pana—four panas each (one pana equals twenty gandas); dasa-krosa—twenty
miles away; haite—from; anaya—brings; kariya yatana—with great endeavor.


--- Page 39 ---
Text 75] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 35
TRANSLATION
‘‘He collects coconut with great endeavor from a place twenty miles away,
and he gives four panas each for them.
TEXT 73
প্রতিদিন পঁচ-সাত ফল ছোলাঞা |
Fee করিতে রাখে জলে ডুবাইএ ॥ ৭৩ ॥
prati-dina panca-sata phala cholana
susitala karite rakhe jale dubaina
SYNONYMS
prati-dina—each day; panca-sata—five to seven; phala—fruits; cholana—clip-
ping; su-itala karite—to make it very cool; rakhe —keeps; jale—in water;
0८102175 —immersing.
TRANSLATION
“Every day five to seven coconuts are clipped and put into water to keep
cool.
TEXT 74
ভোগের সময় পুনঃ চুলি” সংস্করি” ।
কৃষ্ণে সমর্পণ করে মুখ ছিদ্রে করি” ॥ ৭৪ ॥
bhogera samaya punah chuli’ samskari’
krsne samarpana kare mukha chidra kari’
SYNONYMS
bhogera samaya—at the time of offering bhoga; punah—again; chuli’—clip-
ping; sariskari’—cleansing; krsne—unto Lord Krsna; samarpana —offering; kare —
makes; mukha—at the top; chidra kari’—making a hole.
TRANSLATION
“At the time of offering bhoga, the coconuts are again clipped and
cleansed. After holes are made in them, they are offered to Lord Krsna.
TEXT 75
কৃষ্ণ সেই নারিকেল-জল পান করি”!
কভু শুন্য ফল রাখেন, TZ জল ভরি” ॥ ৭৫ ॥


--- Page 40 ---
36 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 15
krsna sei narikela-jala pana kari’
kabhu sanya phala rakhena, kabhu jala bhari’
SYNONYMS
krsna—Lord Krsna; sei—that; narikela-jala—water of the coconut; pana kari’—
drinking; kabhu—sometimes; Sanya—vacant; phala rakhena—leaves the fruit;
kabhu—sometimes; jala bhari’—being filled with water.
TRANSLATION
“Lord Krsna used to drink the juice from these coconuts, and sometimes the
coconuts were left drained of juice. At other times the coconuts were filled
with juice.
TEXT 76
जनन्य ফল দেখি” পণ্ডিত _হরষিত ।
ফল ভাঙ্গি” sity করে সংপাত্র AES ॥ ৭৬ ॥
jala-sanya phala dekhi’ pandita— harasita
phala bhangi’ sasye kare sat-patra parita
SYNONYMS
jala-sanya—without water; phala—fruit; dekhi’—by seeing; pandita—
Raghava Pandita; harasita—very pleased; phala bharngi’—breaking the fruit;
sasye—with the pulp; kare—makes; sat-patra—another plate; parita—filled.
TRANSLATION
“When Raghava Pandita saw that the juice had been drunk from the
coconuts, he was very pleased. He would then break the coconut, take out the
pulp and put it on another plate.
TEXT 77
गच्छ সমর্পণ করি” বাচ্ছিরে ধেয়ান ।
শব্ত৷ খাঞা কৃষ্ণ করে YP ভাজন ॥ ৭৭ ॥
Sasya samarpana kari’ bahire dheyana
Sasya khana krsna kare sanya bhajana
SYNONYMS
Sasya—the pulp; samarpana kari’—offering; bahire —outside the temple room;
dheyana—meditates; sasya khana—eating the pulp; krsna—Lord Krsna; kare —
makes; $anya—vacant; bhajana—the plate.


--- Page 41 ---
Text 80] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 37
TRANSLATION
‘‘After offering the pulp, he would meditate outside the temple door. In the
meantime, Lord Krsna, having eaten the pulp, would leave the plate empty.
TEXT 78
Tg =P খাঞা পুনঃ পাত্র ভরে শশসে |
শ্রদ্ধা বাড়ে পণ্ডিতের, প্রেমসিদ্ধু ভাসে ॥ ৭৮ ॥
kabhu sasya khana punah patra bhare sarnse
sraddha bade panditera, prema-sindhu bhase
SYNONYMS
kabhu —sometimes; sasya khana—eating the pulp; punah—again; patra—the
plate; bhare—fills; sarmhse —with pulp; sraddha—faith; bade—increases; pan-
ditera—of Raghava Pandita; prema-sindhu—in the ocean of love; bhase —floats.
TRANSLATION
‘Sometimes, after eating the pulp, Krsna would fill the plate again with new
pulp. In this way, Raghava Pandita’s faith increases, and he floats in an ocean
of love.
TEXT 79
এক দিন ফল দশ সংস্কার করিয়। ৷
ভোগ লাগাইতে সেবক আইল नयग ॥ ৭৯ ॥
eka dina phala dasa sarmskara kariya
bhoga lagaite sevaka ila lana
SYNONYMS
eka dina—one day; phala—fruits; dasa—ten; sarskara kariya—after cleansing;
bhoga lagaite —to offer bhoga; sevaka—servant; dila—came; laia—taking.
TRANSLATION
‘One day it so happened that about ten coconuts were properly clipped
and brought by a servant to offer to the Deity.
TEXT 80
অবসর নাহি হয়, বিলম্ব হইল ।
ফল-পাত্র-হাতে সেবক দ্বারে ত” রহিল ॥ ৮০ ॥


--- Page 42 ---
38 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
avasara nahi haya, vilamba ha-ila
phala-patra-hate sevaka dvare ta’ rahila
SYNONYMS
avasara nahi haya—there was little time; vilamba ha-ila—it was late; phala-
patra—the pot of fruits; hate—in the hands; sevaka—the servant; dvare—at the
door; ta’—indeed; rahila—remained.
TRANSLATION
“When the coconuts were brought, there was little time to offer them be-
cause it was already late. The servant, holding the container of coconuts,
remained standing at the door.
TEXT 81
ত্বারের উপর fers ভেঁহো হাত দিল!
সেই হাতে ফল ছু ইল, পণ্ডিত দেখিল ॥ ৮১ ॥
dvarera upara bhite tenho hata dila
sei hate phala chunila, pandita dekhila
SYNONYMS
dvarera upara—above the door; bhite—on the ceiling; teriho—he; hata dila—
brushed his hand; sei hate—with that hand; phala chunila—touched the fruit;
pandita—Raghava Pandita; dekhila—saw.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Raghava Pandita then saw that the servant touched the ceiling above the
door and then touched the coconuts with the same hand.
TEXT 82
পণ্ডিত কহে,-_ দ্বারে লোক করে গতভায়।তে |
তার পদধুলে উড়ি' লাগে উপর ভিতে ॥ ৮২ ॥
pandita kahe, —dvare loka kare gatayate
tara pada-dhali udi’ lage upara bhite
SYNONYMS
pandita kahe —Raghava Pandita said; dvare—through the door; loka—people
in general; kare—do; gatayate —coming and going; tara—their; pada-dhali—dust


--- Page 43 ---
Text 83] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 39
of the feet; udi’—being blown; lage —touches; upara—upward; bhite—the ceil-
ing.
TRANSLATION

‘‘Raghava Pandita then said, ‘People are always coming and going through

that door. The dust from their feet blows up and touches the ceiling.
TEXT 83
সেই fers হাত fami ফল न॑न्रनिन।।
FR-CA নহে, ফল खग विल হৈল। ॥ ৮৩ ॥
sei bhite hata diya phala parasila
krspna-yogya nahe, phala apavitra haila
SYNONYMS

sei bhite—on that ceiling; hata diya—touching your hand; phala—the fruit;
parasila—touched; krspa-yogya nahe —is not fit to be offered to Krsna; phala—
the fruit; apavitra haila —has become contaminated.

TRANSLATION

“ ‘After touching the ceiling above the door, you have touched the
coconuts. Now they are no longer fit to be offered to Krsna because they are
contaminated.’

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura states that Raghava Pandita was not
simply a crazy fellow suffering from some cleansing phobia. He did not belong to
the mundane world. In lower consciousness, accepting something to be spiritual
when it is actually material is called bhauma-ijya-dhih. Raghava Pandita was an
eternal servant of Krsna, and everything he saw was related to the service of the
Lord. He was always absorbed in the transcendental thought of how he could al-
ways serve Krsna with everything. Sometimes neophytes, devotees on the lower
platform, try to imitate Raghava Pandita on the platform of material purity and im-
purity. Such imitation will not help anyone. As explained in Caitanya-caritamrta,
(Antya-lila 4.174): bhadrabhadra-vastu-jiana nahika ‘prakrte’. On the transcen-
dental platform there is no higher or lower, pure or impure. On the material plat-
form, distinction is made between good and bad, but on the spiritual platform
everything is of the same quality.

‘dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jiana, saba—— ‘manodharma’
‘ei bhala, ei manda’,—ei saba ‘bhrama’


--- Page 44 ---
40 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 15
“In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental speculations.
Therefore, saying, ‘This is good, and this is bad, is all a mistake."(Cc. Antya 4.176)
TEXT 84
এত afer कन ফেলে প্র।চীর afew |
এঁছে नं विज প্রেম-সেবা জগৎ জি!নয়| ॥ ৮৪ ॥
eta bali’ phala phele pracira langhiya
aiche pavitra prema-seva jagat jiniya
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; phala phele —throws away the fruits; pracira langhiya—
across the boundary wall; aiche—such; pavitra—pure; prema-seva—service in
love; jagat jiniya—conquering all the world.
TRANSLATION
‘Such was the service of Raghava Pandita. He did not accept the coconuts
but threw them over the wall. His service is purely based on unalloyed love,
and it conquers the whole world.
TEXT 85
তবে আর নারিকেল সংস্কার কর।ইল |
পরম ण॑चिल कत्रि" ভোগ লাগাইল ॥ ৮৫ ॥
tabe ara narikela sarskara karaila
parama pavitra kari’ bhoga lagaila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; ara—other; narikela—coconuts; samskara karaila—made
clipped and cleaned; parama pavitra kari’—with great attention to keep them
pure; bhoga lagaila—offered for eating.
TRANSLATION
‘Thereafter, Raghava Pandita had other coconuts gathered, cleansed and
clipped, and with great attention he offered them to the Deity to eat.
TEXT 86
এইমত কলা, सोढ, নারঙ্গ, কাঠাল |
যাহা যাহা দুর-গ্র।মে শুনিয়াছে ভাল ॥ ৮৬ ॥


--- Page 45 ---
Text 88] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 41
ei-mata kala, amra, naranga, kanthala
yaha yaha ddara-grame suniyache bhala
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; kala—bananas; amra—mangoes; maranga—oranges;
kanthala—jackfruit; yaha yaha—whatever; dara-grame—in distant villages;
suniyache —he heard; bhala—good.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘In this way he collected excellent bananas, mangoes, oranges, jackfruits
and whatever first-class fruits from distant villages he had heard about.
TEXT 87
বহুমুল্য দিয়। আনি” করিয়। যতন ।
পবিত্র সংস্ক।র করি” করে নিবেদন ॥ ৮৭ ॥
bahu-malya diya ani’ kariya yatana
pavitra sarnskara kari’ kare nivedana
SYNONYMS
bahu-malya—high price; diya—offering; ani’—bringing; kariya yatana—with
great attention; pavitra—purified; sariskara kari’—trimming; kare nivedana—
offers to the Deity.
TRANSLATION
“All these fruits were collected from distant places and were bought at a
high price. After trimming them with great care and purity, Raghava Pandita
offered them to the Deity.
TEXT 88
এই মত [RC শাক, यूल, कन |
এই মত চিড়, छ.ग, সম্দেশ সকল ॥ ৮৮ ॥
ei mata vyanjanera Saka, mala, phala
ei mata cida, huduma, sandesa sakala
SYNONYMS
ei mata—in this way; vyaijanera—of vegetables; saka—spinach; mala—
radishes; phala—fruits; ei mata—in this way; cida—chipped rice; huduma—
powdered rice; sandesa—sweetmeats; sakala—all.


--- Page 46 ---
42 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
“Thus with great care and attention Raghava Pandita would prepare
spinach, other vegetables, radishes, fruits, chipped rice, powdered rice and
sweetmeats.
TEXT 89
এইমত পিঠ।-প।ন) ক্ষার-ওদন |
পরম পবিত্র, আর করে সর্বেত্তম ॥ ৮৯ ॥
ei-mata pitha-pana, ksira-odana
parama pavitra, ara kare sarvottama
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; pitha-pana—cakes and sweet rice; ksira-odana—con-
centrated milk; parama pavitra—highly purified; dra—and; kare —he makes; sar-
va-uttama —first class, tasteful.
TRANSLATION
‘’He prepared cakes, sweet rice, concentrated milk and everything else with
great attention, and the cooking conditions were purified so that the food was
first class and tasteful.
TEXT 90
কাশম্দি, আচার আদি অনেক প্রকার ।
গন্ধ, वश्च, অলঙ্কার, সর্ব দ্রেব্য-সার ॥ >° ॥
1(3937701, acara adi aneka prakara
gandha, vastra, alankara, sarva dravya-sara
SYNONYMS
kasamdi—a kind of pickle; acara—other pickles; adi—and so on; aneka pra-
kara—of many varieties; gandha—scents; vastra—clothing; alarikara—orna-
ments; sarva—all; dravya—of things; sara—best.
TRANSLATION
‘’Raghava Pandita would also offer all kinds of pickles, such as kasamdi. He
offered various scents, garments, ornaments and the best of everything.


--- Page 47 ---
Text 93] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 43
TEXT 91
এইমত প্রেমের সেব। করে TFA |
ষাহ। দেখি” সর্বলোকের জুড়ান নয়ন ॥ >> ॥
ei-mata premera seva kare anupama
yaha dekhi’ sarva-lokera judana nayana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; premera seva—service in love; kare—performs;
anupama—without comparison; yaha dekhi’—seeing which; sarva-lokera—of all
people; judana—become pleased; nayana—the eyes.
TRANSLATION
“Thus Raghava Pandita would serve the Lord in an incomparable way.
Everyone was very satisfied just to see him.”
TEXT 92
এত বলি” রাঘবেরে टेकन আলিঙ্গনে ।
এইমত সম্ম।নিল সর্ব ভক্তগণে ॥ ৯২ ॥
eta bali’ raghavere kaila alingane
ei-mata sammanila sarva bhakta-gane
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; raghavere—Raghava Pandita; kaila alingane—He
embraced; ei-mata—in this way; sammanila—showed respect; sarva—all; bhak-
ta-gane—to the devotees.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then mercifully embraced Raghava Pandita. The
Lord also offered all the other devotees a reception with similar respect.
TEXT 93
শিবানন্দ (नटन কহে TF সম্মান ।
বাস্তুদেব-দত্তের তুমি করিহু সমাধান ॥ ৯৩ ॥
sivananda sene kahe kariya sammana
vasudeva-dattera tumi kariha samadhana


--- Page 48 ---
44 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
Sivananda sene—unto Sivananda Sena; kahe—says; kariya sammana—with
great respect; vasudeva-dattera—of Vasudeva Datta; tumi—you; kariha—take;
samadhana—care.
TRANSLATION
The Lord also respectfully told Sivananda Sena, “Take care of Vasudeva
Datta very nicely.
TEXT 94
পরম উদার Bez, যে দিন যে আইসে |
সেই দিনে ব্যয় করে, নাহি রাখে শেষে ॥ ৯৪ ॥
parama udara 1700, ye dina ye aise
sei dine vyaya kare, nahi rakhe sese
SYNONYMS
parama udara—very liberal; inho—he; ye dina—every day; ye aise —whatever
he gets; sei dine—on that very day; vyaya kare—spends; nahi—does not;
rakhe —keep; sese—any balance.
TRANSLATION
‘““Vasudeva Datta is very liberal. Every day, whatever income he receives, he
spends. He does not keep any balance.
TEXT 95
“গৃহস্থ” হয়েন 8 হো, চাহিয়ে সঞ্চয়।
সঞ্চয় न] কৈলে কুটুদ্ব-ভরণ নাহি হয় ॥ ৯৫ ॥
‘grhastha’ hayena inho, cahiye sancaya
sancaya na kaile kutumba-bharana nahi haya
SYNONYMS
grhastha—householder; hayena—is; inho—he (Vasudeva Datta); cahiye
saficaya—requires to save some money; saficaya na kaile—without saving
money; kutumba-bharana—maintenance of a family; nahi haya—is not possible.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Being a householder, Vasudeva Datta needs to save some money. Because
he is not doing so, it is very difficult for him to maintain his family.


--- Page 49 ---
Text 97] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 45
TEXT 96
ইহার ঘরের আয়-ব্যয় जव-- তোমার স্থানে |
“সরণখেল” হঞ। ভুমি করিহ সমাধানে ॥ ৯৬ ॥
ihara gharera aya-vyaya saba——tomara sthane
‘sara-khela’ (125 tumi kariha samadhane
SYNONYMS
ihara—of Vasudeva Datta; gharera—of household affairs; aya-vyaya—income
and expenditures; saba—all; tomara sthane—at your place; sara-khela hana —
being the manager; tumi—you; kariha samadhane —arrange.
TRANSLATION
‘Please take care of Vasudeva Datta’s family affairs. Become his manager
and make the proper adjustments.
PURPORT
Both Vasudeva Datta and Sivananda Sena were living in the same neighbor-
hood, which is presently called Kumarahatta or Halisahara.
TEXT 97
প্রতিবর্ধে আমার जव ভক্তগণ FAP |
শুষ্তিচার আসিবে সবায় পালন করিয়। ॥ ৯৭ ॥
prati-varse amara saba bhakta-gana lana
gundicaya asibe sabaya palana kariya
SYNONYMS
prati-varse—each and every year; amara—My; saba—all; bhakta-gana lana—
accompanied by the devotees; gundicdya—to perform the Gundica cleansing
festival; asibe—you will come; sabaya—to everyone; palana kariya—providing
maintenance.
TRANSLATION
“Come every year and bring all My devotees with you to the Gundica
festival. I also request you to maintain all of पीला.“


--- Page 50 ---
46 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 98
কুলীনগ্রামীরে কহে সন্মান করিয়। ।
প্রত্যন্দ আসিবে যাত্রায় “AFLG Teel ॥ ৯৮ ॥
kulina-gramire kahe sammana kariya
pratyabda asibe yatraya patta-dori 1278
SYNONYMS
kulina-gramire —unto the inhabitants of Kulina-grama; kahe —says; sammana
kariya—with great respect; prati-abda—each year; asibe—please come;
yatraya—during the Ratha-yatra festival; patta-dori—silken rope; lafa—taking.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then with great respect extended an invitation to all the inhab-
itants of Kulina-grama, asking them to come every year and bring silken rope
to carry Lord Jagannatha during the Ratha-yatra festival.
TEXT 99
গুণরাজ-খাঁন टेकन्‌ AFwiaw |
তাহ একবাক্য SIT আছে প্রেমময় ॥ >> ॥
gunaraja-khanna kaila sri-krsna-vijaya
tahan eka-vakya tanra ache premamaya
SYNONYMS
gunaraja-khanna—Gunaraja Khan; kaila —compiled; sri-krsna-vijaya—the book
named Sri Krspa-vijaya; tahan—there; eka-vakya—one sentence; tanra—of it;
ache—is; prema-maya—full of love of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, ‘‘Gunaraja Khan of Kulina-grama com-
piled a book named Sri Krsna-vijaya in which there is a sentence revealing the
author’s ecstatic love of Krsna.”
PURPORT
Sri Krspa-vijaya is a book of poems considered to be the first poetry book writ-
ten in Bengal. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura states that this book was
compiled in the Bengali sakabda year 1395. After seven years, it was completed
(1402 sakabda). This book was written in plain language, and even half-educated


--- Page 51 ---
Text 100] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 47
Bengalis and women could read it very clearly. Even ordinary men with little
knowledge of the alphabet could read this book and understand it. Its language is
not very ornamental, and sometimes the poetry is not very sweet to hear. Al-
though according to the sonnet style each line should contain fourteen syllables,
there are sometimes sixteen, twelve and thirteen syllables in his verse. Many
words used in those days could be understood only by local inhabitants, yet this
book is still so popular that no book store is complete without it. It is very valuable
for those who are interested in advancing in Krsna consciousness.

Sri Gunaraja Khan was one of the topmost Vaisnavas, and he has translated the
Tenth and Eleventh Cantos of Srimad-Bhagavatam for the understanding of the
common man. The book $ri Krspa-vijaya was highly praised by € Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and it is very valuable for all Vaisnavas. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura gives a genealogical table and family history of Gunaraja Khan.
When a Bengali emperor named Adisara first came from Kanyakubja, or Kanowj,
he brought with him five brahmanas and five kayasthas. Since the king is sup-
posed to be accompanied by his associates, the brahmanas accompanied the King
to help him in higher spiritual matters. The kayasthas were to render other ser-
vices. In the northern Indian high country, the kayasthas are accepted as sadras,
but in Bengal the kayasthas are considered among the higher castes. It is a fact
that the kayasthas came to Bengal from northern India, specifically from
Kanyakubja, or Kanowj. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that the
kayasthas who came from Kanyakubja were high-class men. Of them, Dasaratha
Vasu was a great personality, and the thirteenth generation of his family included
Gunaraja Khan.

His real name was Maladhara Vasu, but the title Khan was given to him by the
Emperor of Bengal. Thus he became known as Gunaraja Khan. Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura gives the following genealogical table of Gunaraja Khan: (1)
Dasaratha Vasu; (2) Kusala; (3) Subhasankara; (4) Harhsa; (5) Saktirama (Baganda),
Muktirama (Mainagara) and Alankara (Bangaja); (6) Damodara; (7) Anantarama;
(8) Guninayaka and Vinanayaka. The twelfth generation included Bhagiratha, and
the thirteenth Maladhara Vasu, or Gunaraja Khan. $ri Gunaraja Khan had fourteen
sons, of whom the second son, Laksminathavasu, received the title Satyaraja
Khan. His son was 5 Ramananda Vasu; therefore Ramananda Vasu belonged to
the fifteenth generation. Gunaraja Khan was a very well known and wealthy man.
His palace, fort and temples are still existing, and from these we can deduce that
the opulence of Gunaraja Khan was certainly very great. उ Gunaraja Khan never
cared for the artificial aristocracy introduced by Ballal Sena.

TEXT 100
“IMAM FP — মোর Sei” |
এই res বিকাইন্দু সার বংশের হাত ॥ ১০০ ॥


--- Page 52 ---
48 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
“nandanandana krspna——mora prana-natha”
ei vakye vikainu tanra varmsera hata
SYNONYMS
nanda-nandana krsna—Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja; mora prana-natha—
my life and soul; ei vakye—because of this statement; vikainu—I became sold;
tanra—of him; vamsera hata—in the hands of the descendants.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘ ‘Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, is my
life and soul.’ By this statement | am sold into the hands of the descendants of
Gunaraja Khan.
PURPORT
The full verse referred to here is:
eka-bhave vanda hari yoda kari’ hata
nandanandana krsna——mora prana-natha
“With folded hands | offer my prayers unto Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja,
who is my life and soul.”
TEXT 101
তোমার कि কথা, তোমার গ্রামের F871
(मङ्‌ মোর यञ्च, অন্যজন AG দূর ॥ ১০১ ॥
tomara ki katha, tomara gramera kukkura
sei mora priya, anya-jana rahu dara
SYNONYMS
tomara—of you; ki katha—what to speak; tomara—of your; gramera—village;
kukkura—a dog; sei—that; mora—to Me; priya—very dear; anya-jana—others;
rahu dara—apart from.
TRANSLATION
‘To say nothing of you, even a dog living in your village is very dear to Me.
What, then, to speak of others?”
TEXT 102
তবে রামানন্দ, আর সত্যরাজ H+ ।
প্রভুর চরণে কিছু কৈল নিবেদন ॥ ১০২ ॥


--- Page 53 ---
Text 104] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 49
tabe ramananda, ara satyaraja kharina
prabhura carane kichu kaila nivedana
SYNONYMS
tabe —after this; ramananda—Ramananda Vasu; ara—and; satyaraja khanna —
Satyaraja Khan; prabhura carane—at the lotus feet of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kichu—some; kaila—made; nivedana—submission.
TRANSLATION
After this, Ramananda Vasu and Satyardja Khan both submitted questions at
the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 103
Jz বিষয়ী আমি, कि মোর সাধনে ।
Bay আজ্ঞা কর প্রভু-_ নিবেদি চরণে ॥১০৩ ॥
grhastha ৮/53)%1 ami, ki mora sadhane
sri-mukhe ajna kara prabhu ——nivedi carane
SYNONYMS
grhastha—householder; visayi—materialistic man; ami—I; ki—what; mora
sadhane—the process of my advancement in spiritual life; sri-mukhe —from Your
own mouth; 3jAa kara—please order; prabhu—my Lord; nivedi carane—! submit
unto Your lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Satyaraja Khan said, “My dear Lord, being a householder and a materialistic
man, 1 do not know the process of advancing in spiritual life. I therefore sub-
mit myself unto Your lotus feet and request You to give me orders.”
TEXT 104
2G কহেন, _কৃষ্ণসেবা, “বৈষ্ণব-সেবন” 1
“নিরস্তর কর কৃষ্ণনাম-সংকীর্তন” ॥ ১০৪ ॥
prabhu kahena, — ‘krsna-seva’, ‘vaisnava-sevana’
‘nirantara kara krsna-nama-sarikirtana’


--- Page 54 ---
50 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—the Lord replied; krsna-seva—serving Krsna; vaisnava-
sevana—abiding by the orders of Vaisnavas; nirantara—without cessation; kara—
do; krsna-nama-sankirtana—chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, “Without cessation continue chanting
the holy name of Lord Krsna. Whenever possible, serve Him and His devotees,
the Vaisnavas.”
TEXT 105
ASIANS বলে, বৈষ্ণব চিনিব কেমনে ?
কে বৈষ্ণব, কহ ভার ANY লক্ষণে ॥ ১০৫ ॥
satyardja bale, —vaispava ciniba kemane?
ke vaisnava, kaha tanra samanya laksane
SYNONYMS
satyardja bale—Satyaraja Khan said; vaisnava—a Vaisnava; ciniba kemane—
how shall | recognize; ke vaisnava—who is a Vaisnava; kaha—please say; tanra—
of him; samanya laksane —common symptoms.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this, Satyaraja said, “How can | recognize a Vaisnava? Please
let me know what a Vaisnava is. What are his common symptoms?”’
TEXT 106
প্রভু কহে,-_“যীার মুখে শুনি একবার ।
FRA, সেই পুজ্য,_ শ্রেষ্ঠ সবাকার ॥” ১০৬ ॥
prabhu kahe,— “yanra mukhe suni eka-bara
krsna-nama, sei ptjya,——srestha sabakara”
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —Lord तां Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; yarra mukhe —in whose
mouth; suni—I hear; eka-bara—once; krsna-nama—the holy name of Lord Krsna;
sei pujya—he is worshipable; srestha sabakara—the best of all human beings.


--- Page 55 ---
Text 106] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 51
TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahiprabhu replied, “Whoever chants the holy name of Krsna

just once is worshipable and is the topmost human being.
PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that simply by chanting the holy
name of Krsna once, a person becomes perfect. Such a person is understood to be
a Vaisnava. With such faith and belief, one may begin a life of Krsna conscious-
ness, but an ordinary person cannot chant the holy name of Krsna with such faith.
This is confirmed by Srila Rapa Gosvami in his Upadesamrta: krsneti yasya giri tar
manasadriyeta. One should accept the holy name of Krsna to be identical with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Transcendence Himself. The holy name of Krsna
is also identical with Krsna and is also cintamani. The name Krsna is the per-
sonification of sound perfectly transcendental and eternally liberated from ma-
terial contamination. One should understand that the name Krsna and Krsna are
identical. Having such faith, one must continue to chant the holy name. When
one is situated on the neophyte platform, one cannot understand the devotional
ingredients of a pure, unalloyed devotee. However, when the novice engages in
devotional service—especially in Deity worship—and follows the order of a bona
fide spiritual master, he becomes a pure devotee. Anyone can take advantage of
hearing about Krsna consciousness from a pure devotee and thus gradually be-
come purified.

A devotee who believes that the holy name of the Lord is identical with the
Lord is a pure devotee, even though he may be in the neophyte stage. By his
association, others may also become Vaisnavas.

One is known as a materialistic devotee if he simply worships the Deity of Hari
with faith but does not show proper respect to the devotees and to others. This
is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.47):

arcayam eva haraye
yah pajam sraddhayehate
na tad-bhaktesu canyesu
sa bhaktah prakrtah smrtah
“Anyone who engages with faith in the worship of the Deity of Hari but does not
show proper respect to the devotees and to others is known as a materialistic
devotee.” However, by associating with a neophyte devotee who believes that
the holy name of the Lord is identical with the Lord, one can become a devotee
also. When Lord Caitanya was teaching Sanatana Gosvami, He said:


--- Page 56 ---
52 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15

sraddhavan jana haya bhakti-adhikari

‘uttama’, ‘'madhyama’, ‘kanistha’——sraddha-anusari

yahara komala-sraddha, se ‘kanistha’ jana

krame krame tenho bhakta ha-ibe ‘uttama’

rati-prema-taratamye bhakta-taratama
“A person who has attained firm faith is a real candidate for advancing in Krsna
consciousness. According to the faith, there are first-class, second-class and
neophyte devotees. One who has preliminary faith is called kanistha, or a
neophyte. The neophyte, however, can become an advanced devotee if he
strictly follows the regulative principles set down by the spiritual master. The pure
devotee whose faith advances becomes a madhyama-adhikari and uttama-
adhikari.” (Cc. Madhya 22.64,69-70)

It is thus concluded that even a neophyte devotee is superior to the karmis and
73/15 because he has full faith in chanting the holy name of the Lord. A karmior a
jAani, regardless of his greatness, has no faith in Lord Visnu, His holy name or His
devotional service. One may be advanced religiously, but if he is not trained in
devotional service, he has very little credit on the transcendental platform. Even a
neophyte devotee engaged in Deity worship in accordance with the regulations
set forth by the spiritual master is in a position superior to that of the fruitive
worker and speculative philosopher.

TEXT 107
“এক কৃষ্ণনামে করে ALA ক্ষয় |
नवविधा ভক্তি পূর্ণ নাম হৈতে ZH ॥ ১০৭ ॥
“eka krsna-name kare sarva-papa ksaya
nava-vidha bhakti 00103 nama haite haya
SYNONYMS

eka krsna-name—one holy name of Krsna; kare—can do; sarva-papa—of all
sinful reactions; ksaya—destruction; nava-vidha—nine processes; bhakti—of
devotional service; piarna—complete; nama haite —simply by chanting the holy
name; haya—are.

TRANSLATION

“Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna, one is relieved from all the
reactions of a sinful life. One can complete the nine processes of devotional
service simply by chanting the holy name.


--- Page 57 ---
Text 108] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 53
PURPORT
The nine types of devotional service are mentioned in $rimad-Bhagavatam
(7.5.23):
Sravanam kirtanari visnoh
smaranam pada-sevanam
arcanarh vandanarm dasyarn
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
iti purhsarpita visnau
bhaktis cen nava-laksana
kriyeta bhagavaty addha
tan manye ‘dhitam uttamam
These are the activities of hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping,
praying, obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything. As far as
chanting the holy name of Krsna is concerned, one can be freed from all sinful
reactions by chanting the holy name without committing offenses. If one chants
offenselessly, he may be saved from all sinful reactions. It is very important in
devotional service to chant the holy name of the Lord without committing
offenses. The nine devotional processes such as sravana and kirtana can all be
attained at once if one simply chants the holy name of the Lord offenselessly.
In this regard, Srila Jiva Gosvami states in his book Bhakti-sandarbha (173):
yadyapi anya bhaktih kalau kartavya, tada kirtanakhya-bhakti-samyogenaiva. Out
of the nine processes of devotional service, kirtana is very important. Srila Jiva
Gosvami therefore instructs that the other processes, such as arcana, vandana,
dasya and sakhya, should be executed, but they must be preceded and
followed by kirtana, the chanting of the holy name. We have therefore in-
troduced this system in all of our centers. Arcana, arati, bhoga offering, Deity
dressing and decoration are all preceded and followed by the chanting of the holy
name of the Lord—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 108
দীক্ষা-পুরশ্চর্যা-বিধি অপেক্ষা না করে ।
জিহ্বা-স্পর্শে আ-চণ্ডাল সবারে উদ্ধারে ॥ ১০৮ ॥
diksa-purascarya-vidhi apeksa na kare
jihva-sparse a-candala sabare uddhare
SYNONYMS
diksa—initiation; purascarya—activities before initiation; vidhi—regulative
principles; apeksa—reliance on; na—not; kare—does; jihva—the tongue;


--- Page 58 ---
54 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
sparse —by touching; a-candala—even to the lowest of men, the candala;
sabare —everyone; uddhare —delivers.
TRANSLATION
““One does not have to undergo initiation or execute the activities required
before initiation. One simply has to vibrate the holy name with his lips. Thus
even a man in the lowest class [candalal can be delivered.
PURPORT
Srila Jiva Gosvami explains diksa in his Bhakti-sandarbha (283):
divyam jAanarm yato dadyat
kuryat papasya sanksayam
tasmat dikseti sa prokta
desikais tattva-kovidaih
“Diksa is the process by which one can awaken his transcendental knowledge
and vanquish all reactions caused by sinful activity. A person expert in the study
of the revealed scriptures knows this process as diksa.” The regulative principles
of diksa are explained in the Hari-bhakti-vilasa (Vilasa 2.3,4) and in Bhakti-san-
darbha (283). As stated:
dvijanam anupetanar svakarmadhyayanadisu
yathadhikaro nastiha syac copanayanad anu
tathatradiksitanar tu mantra-devarcanadisu
nadhikaro ‘sty atah kuryad atmanam siva-sarnstutam
“Even though born in a brahmana family, one cannot engage in Vedic rituals with-
out being initiated and having a sacred thread. Although born in a brahmana
family, one becomes a brahmana after initiation and the sacred thread ceremony.
Unless one is initiated as a brahmana, he cannot worship the holy name properly.”
According to the Vaisnava regulative principles, one must be initiated as a
brahmana. The Hari-bhakti-vilasa (2.6) quotes the following injunction from the
Visnu-yamala:
adiksitasya vamoru
krtarn sarvari nirarthakam
pasu-yonim avapnoti
diksa-virahito janah
“Unless one is initiated by a bona fide spiritual master, all his devotional activities
are useless. A person who is not properly initiated can descend again into the
animal species.”


--- Page 59 ---
Text 108] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 55

Hari-bhakti-vilasa (2.10) further quotes:

ato gurum pranamyaivam
sarva-svarn vinivedya ca
grhniyad vaisnavar mantram
diksa-parvarir vidhanatah
“It is the duty of every human being to surrender to a bona fide spiritual master.
Giving him everything—body, mind and intelligence —one must take a Vaisnava
initiation from him.”

The Bhakti-sandarbha (298) gives the following quotation from the Tattva-

sagara:
yatha kancanatarn yati
kasyam rasa-vidhanatah
tatha diksa-vidhanena
dvijatvarh jayate nrnam
“By chemical manipulation, bell metal is turned into gold when touched by mer-
cury; similarly, when a person is properly initiated, he can acquire the qualities of
a brahmana.”
The Hari-bhakti-vilasa (17.11,12) in discussing the purascarya process, quotes
the following verses from Agastya-sambhita:
paja traikaliki nityam
japas tarpanam eva ca
homo brahmana-bhuktis ca
purascaranam ucyate
guror labdhasya mantrasya
prasadena yatha-vidhi
pancangopasana-siddhyai
puras caitad vidhiyate
“In the morning, afternoon and evening, one should worship the Deity, chant the
Hare Krsna mantra, offer oblations, perform a fire sacrifice, and feed the
brahmanas. These five activities constitute purascarya. To attain full success when
taking initiation from the spiritual master, one should first perform these
purascarya processes.”

The word purah means “before” and carya means “activities.” Due to the
necessity of these activities, we do not immediately initiate disciples in the Inter-
national Society for Krishna Consciousness. For six months, a candidate for initia-
tion must first attend arati and classes in the sastras, practice the regulative prin-


--- Page 60 ---
56 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 15
ciples and associate with other devotees. When one is actually advanced in the
purascarya-vidhi, he is recommended by the local temple president for initiation.
It is not that anyone can be suddenly initiated without meeting the requirements.
When one is further advanced by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra sixteen rounds
daily, following the regulative principles and attending classes, he receives the
sacred thread (brahminical recognition) after the second six months.
In the Hari-bhakti-vilasa (17.4,5,7) it is stated:
vind yena na siddhah syan
mantro varsa-satair api
krtena yena labhate
sadhako vanchitam phalam
purascarana-sampanno
mantro hi phala-dhayakah
atah puraskriyam kuryat
mantravit siddhi-kanksaya
puraskriya hi mantranarm
pradhanarh viryam ucyate
virya-hino yatha dehi
sarva-karmasu na ksamah
purascarana-hino hi
tatha mantrah prakirtitah
“Without performing the purascarya activities, one cannot become perfect even
by chanting this mantra for hundreds of years. However, one who has undergone
the purascarya-vidhi process can attain success very easily. If one wishes to per-
fect his initiation, he must first undergo the purascarya activities. The purascarya
process is the life-force by which one is successful in chanting the mantra. With-
out the life-force, one cannot do anything; similarly, without the life force of
purascarya-vidhi, no mantra can be perfected.”
In his Bhakti-sandarbha (283), Srila Jiva Gosvami states:
yadyapi sri-bhagavata-mate pafcaratradi-vat arcana-margasya
avasyakatvarn nasti, tad vinapi
Saranapattyadinam ekatarenapi purusartha-siddher
abhihitatvat, tathapi sri-naradadi-vartmanusaradbhih
$ri-bhagavata saha sambandha-visesari diksa-vidhanena
$ri-guru-carana-sampaditarn cikirsadbhih krtayarm
diksayam arcanam avasyari kriyetaiva.


--- Page 61 ---
Text 108] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 57
Of similar importance is diksa, which is explained as follows in Bhakti-sandarbha
(284):

yadyapi svarapato nasti, tathapi prayah svabhavato
dehadi-sambandhena kardaya-silanarm viksipta-cittanam
jananam tat-tat-sankoci-karanaya srimad-rsi-prabhrtibhir
atrarcana-marge kvacit kvacit kacit kacin maryada sthapitasti.

Similarly in the Ramarcana-candrika it is stated:

vinaiva diksarm viprendra
purascaryam vinaiva hi

vinaiva nyasa-vidhina
japa-matrena siddhida

In other words, the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is so powerful that it
does not depend on official initiation, but if one is initiated and engages in
paicaratra-vidhi (Deity worship), his Krsna consciousness will awaken very soon,
and his identification with the material world will be vanquished. The more one is
freed from material identification, the more one can realize that the spirit soul is
qualitatively as good as the Supreme Soul. At such a time, when one is situated on
the absolute platform, he can understand that the holy name of the Lord and the
Lord Himself are identical. At that stage of realization, the holy name of the Lord,
the Hare Krsna mantra, cannot be identified with any material sound. If one ac-
cepts the Hare Krsna maha-mantra as a material vibration, he falls down. One
should worship and chant the holy name of the Lord by accepting it as the Lord
Himself. One should therefore be initiated properly according to revealed scrip-
tures under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master. Although chanting the
holy name is good for both the conditioned and liberated soul, it is especially
beneficial to the conditioned soul because by chanting it one is liberated. When a
person who chants the holy name is liberated, he attains the ultimate perfection
by returning home, back to Godhead. In the words of $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
(Adi 7.73):

krspa-mantra haite habe sarmsara-mocana
krsna-nama haite pabe krsnera carana

“Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna one can obtain freedom from ma-
terial existence. Indeed, simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one will be able
to see the lotus feet of the Lord.”

The offenseless chanting of the holy name does not depend on the initiation
process. Although initiation may depend on purascarya or purascarana, the actual


--- Page 62 ---
58 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
chanting of the holy name does not depend on purascarya-vidhi, or the regulative
principles. If one chants the holy name once without committing an offense, he
attains all success. During the chanting of the holy name, the tongue must work.
Simply by chanting the holy name, one is immediately delivered. The tongue is
sevonmukha-jihva—it is controlled by service. One whose tongue is engaged in
tasting material things and also talking about them cannot use the tongue for ab-
solute realization.
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
According to Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 17.134):
ataeva krsnera ‘nama’, ‘deha’, ‘vilasa’
prakrtendriya-grahya nahe, haya sva-prakasa
“With these material senses, one cannot understand the transcendental holy
name of the Lord or His form, activities and pastimes. However, when one ac-
tually engages in devotional service, utilizing the tongue, the Lord is revealed.”
TEXT 109
অনুষঙ্গ-কলে করে সংসারের TH |
চিত্ত আকর্িয়। করায় Fae CATH ॥ ১০৯ ॥
anusanga-phale kare samsarera ksaya
citta akarsiya karaya krsne premodaya
SYNONYMS
anusanga-phale—as a simultaneous result; kare—does; sarisarera ksaya—an-
nihilation of entanglement in the material world; citta—thought; akarsiya—at-
tracting; kardya—causes; krspe—unto Lord Krsna; prema-udaya—arousal of tran-
scendental love.
TRANSLATION
‘‘By chanting the holy name of the Lord, one dissolves his entanglement in
material activities. After this, one becornes very attracted to Krsna, and thus
dormant love for Krsna is awakened.


--- Page 63 ---
Text 111] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 59
TEXT 110
WFR: কৃতচেতমাং স্থমনসামুচ্চাটনং FIRE A
মাচগডলমমূকলোকসতলভে৷ 396 মুক্তি শ্রিয়ঃ |
নো ITIL न চ সংক্রিয়াং ন চ পুরশ্চযাৎ মনাগীক্ষতে
মন্ত্রোহয়ং রসনাস্পৃগেব ফলতি শরুষ্ণ-নামাত্মকঃ ॥ ১১০ ॥
akrstih krta-cetasam sumanasam uccatanam carnhasam
acandalam amaka-loka-sulabho vasyas ca mukti-sriyah
no diksari na ca sat-kriyarih na ca purascaryarn manag iksate
mantro ‘yarn rasana-sprg eva phalati $ri-krsna-namatmakah
SYNONYMS
akrstih—attraction; krta-cetasam—of saintly persons; su-manasam—of the
most liberal-minded; wuccatanam—annihilator; ca—also; arhasam—of sinful
reactions; a-candalam—even to the candalas; amaka—except the dumb; loka-
sulabhah—very easy to achieve for all persons; vasyah —full controller; ca—and;
mukti-sriyah —of the opulence of liberation; no—not; diksam—initiation; na—
not; ca—also; sat-kriyam—pious activities; na—not; ca—also; purascaryam—
regulative principles before initiation; manak —slightly; iksate—depends upon;
mantrah—mantra; ayam—this; rasana—tongue; sprk —touching; eva—simply;
phalati—is fruitful; $ri-krsna-nama-atmakah —consisting of the holy name of Lord
Krsna.
TRANSLATION
^ ‘The holy name of Lord Krsna is an attractive feature for many saintly,
liberal people. It is the annihilator of all sinful reactions and is so powerful
that save for the dumb who cannot chant it, it is readily available to everyone,
including the lowest type of man, the candala. The holy name of Krsna is the
controller of the opulence of liberation, and it is identical with Krsna. Simply
by touching the holy name with one’s tongue, immediate effects are pro-
duced. Chanting the holy name does not depend on initiation, pious activities
or the purascarya regulative principles generally observed before initiation.
The holy name does not wait for all these activities. It is self-sufficient.’ ^“
PURPORT
This verse is found in the Padyavali (29) by Srila Rapa Gosvami.
TEXT 111
“অতএব HF মুখে এক FRAT |
সেই ত' বৈষ্ণব, করিহ তাহার সম্মান ॥” ১১১ ॥


--- Page 64 ---
60 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
“ataeva yanra mukhe eka krspa-nama
sei ta’ vaispava, kariha tanhara sammana”
SYNONYMS

ataeva—therefore; yarnra mukhe —in whose mouth; eka—one; krspa-nama—
the holy name of Krsna; sei ta’ vaispava—he is a Vaisnava; kariha—offer;
tanhara—to him; sammana—respect.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then finally advised, “One who is chanting the
Hare Krsna mantra is understood to be a Vaisnava; therefore you should offer
all respects to him.”

PURPORT

In his Upadesamrta, Srila Rapa Gosvami states: krsneti yasya giri tam
manasadriyeta diksasti cet. An advanced devotee should respect a person who
has been initiated by a bona fide spiritual master and who is situated on the tran-
scendental platform, chanting the holy name with faith and obeisances and
following the instructions of the spiritual master. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura com-
ments that serving Vaisnavas is most important for householders. Whether a
Vaisnava is properly initiated or not is not a subject for consideration. One may be
initiated and yet contaminated by the Mayavada philosophy, but a person who
chants the holy name of the Lord offenselessly will not be so contaminated. A
properly initiated Vaisnava may be imperfect, but one who chants the holy name
of the Lord offenselessly is all-perfect. Although he may apparently be a
neophyte, he still has to be considered a pure unalloyed Vaisnava. It is the duty of
the householder to offer respects to such an unalloyed Vaisnava. This is Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s instruction.

TEXT 112
খণ্ডের মুকুন্দদাস, প্রীরঘুনন্দন |
জ্লীনরহরি,--এই মুখ্য তিন জন ॥ ১১২ ॥
khandera mukunda-dasa, sri-raghunandana
sri-narahari, —ei mukhya tina jana
SYNONYMS

khandera—of the place known as Khanda; mukunda-disa—Mukunda dasa;
sri-raghunandana —$r Raghunandana; sri-narahari -6ा Narahari; ei—these;
mukhya—chief; tina—three; jana—persons.


--- Page 65 ---
Text 115] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasida to the Lord 61
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu then turned His attention to three persons—
Mukunda dasa, Raghunandana and $ri Narahari—inhabitants of the place
called Khanda.
TEXT 113
মুকুন্দ দাসেরে পুছে শচীর নন্দন |
তুমি _পিতা, পুজ্র তোমার - প্রীরঘুনন্দন ? ১১৩ ॥
mukunda dasere puche sacira nandana
‘tumi ——pitd, putra tomara—sri-raghunandana?
SYNONYMS
mukunda dasere —unto Mukunda dasa; puche —inquired; sacira nandana—the
son of mother Sact; tumi —you; pita—father; putra—son; tomara—your; Sri-
raghunandana—Sri Raghunandana.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of mother Saci, next asked Mukunda
dasa, “You are the father, and your son is Raghunandana. Is that so?
TEXT 114
foal agama _ পিতা, তুমি —s তনয় ?
নিশ্চয় করিয়। কহ, যাউক সংশয় ॥” ১১৪ ॥
kiba raghunandana— pita, tumi——tara tanaya?
niscaya kariya kaha, yauka sarsaya’
SYNONYMS
kiba—or; raghunandana—Raghunandana; pita—father; tumi—you; tara—his;
tanaya—son; niscaya kariya—making certain; kaha —just speak; yauka sarsaya—
let My doubts be dissipated.
TRANSLATION
“Or is Srila Raghunandana your father whereas you are his son? Please let
Me know the facts so that My doubts will go away.’’
TEXT 115
YF কহে,- ALTA মোর “পিতা” হয় ।
আমি তার शूल, - दे আমার নিশ্চয় ॥ ১১৫ ॥


--- Page 66 ---
62 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
mukunda kahe,—raghunandana mora ‘pita’ haya
ami tara ‘putra’,—— ei amara niscaya
SYNONYMS
mukunda kahe —Mukunda dasa replied; raghunandana—my son Raghunan-
dana; mora—my; pita—father; haya—is; ami—I; tara—his; putra—son; ei —this;
amadara—my; niscaya—decision.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda replied, ‘‘Raghunandana is my father, and 1 am his son. This is my
decision.
TEXT 116
আম। সবার কৃষ্ণভক্তি রঘুলম্দন হৈতে।
অতএব [AS] _রযুনন্দন আমার নিশ্চিতে ॥ ১১৬ ॥
ama sabara krsna-bhakti raghunandana haite
ataeva pita——raghunandana amara niscite
SYNONYMS
ama sabara—of all of us; krspa-bhakti—devotion to Krsna; raghunandana
haite—because of Raghunandana; ataeva—therefore; pita—father; raghunan-
dana—Raghunandana; amara niscite—my decision.
TRANSLATION
‘All of us have attained devotion to Krsna due to Raghunandana. Therefore
in my mind he is my father.”
TEXT 117
खनि ङ्टर्ष কহে প্রভু FHC নিশ্চয় ।
যাহা হৈতে কৃষ্ণতক্তি' সেই গুরু হয়” ॥ ১১৭ ॥
Suni’ harse kahe prabhu——"kahile niscaya
yanha haite krspa-bhakti sei guru haya”
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; harse—in great jubilation; kahe prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said; kahile niscaya—you have spoken correctly; yanha haite—from
whom; krsna-bhakti—devotion to Krsna; sei—that person; guru haya—is the
spiritual master.


--- Page 67 ---
Text 119] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 63
TRANSLATION
Hearing Mukunda dasa give this proper decision, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
confirmed it, saying, ‘Yes, it is correct. One who awakens devotion to Krsna is
certainly a spiritual master.”
TEXT 118
ভক্তের মহিমা প্রভু কহিতে পায় खश ।
ভক্তের মহিমা কহিতে হয় পঞ্চমুখ ॥ ১১৮ ॥
bhaktera mahima prabhu kahite paya sukha
bhaktera mahima kahite haya panca-mukha
SYNONYMS
bhaktera mahima—the glories of a devotee; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kahite—to speak; paya sukha—gets happiness; bhaktera
mahima—the glories of a devotee; kahite—to speak; haya—becomes; paiica-
mukha—five faced.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became very happy just to speak of the glories of
His devotees. Indeed, when He spoke of their glories, it was as if He had five
faces.
TEXT 119
ভক্তগণে TLR, — শুন মুকুন্দের প্রেম ।
নিগুঢ় নির্মল প্রেম, যেন দগ্ধ হেম ॥ >>> ॥
bhakta-gane kahe, —suna mukundera prema
nigadha nirmala prema, yena dagdha hema
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gane kahe—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu informed His devotees; suna—
please hear; mukundera prema—Mukunda’s love of Godhead; nigadha—very
deep; nirmala—pure; prema—ecstatic love; yena—as if; dagdha—clarified;
hema—gold.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then informed all His devotees, ‘‘Please hear
about Mukunda’s love of Godhead. It is a very deep and pure love and can
only be compared with purified gold.


--- Page 68 ---
64 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 120
বান্ধে রাজবৈত্য ই "হো করে রাজ-সেবা।
অন্তরে কৃষ্ণ-প্রেম ইহার জানিবেক কেবা ॥ ১২০ ॥
bahye raja-vaidya inho kare raja-seva
antare krspa-prema inhara janibeka keba
SYNONYMS
bahye—externally; raja-vaidya—royal physician; inho—he; kare —performs;
rdja-seva—government service; antare —within the heart; krspa-prema—love of
Krsna; inhara—of Mukunda dasa; janibeka—can know; keba—who.
TRANSLATION
“Mukunda dasa externally appears to be a royal physician engaged in
governmental service, but internally he has a deep love for Krsna. Who can
understand his love?
PURPORT
Unless $ri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu discloses the fact, no one can under-
stand who is actually a great devotee of the Lord engaged in His service. It is
therefore said in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 23.39), tanra vakya, kriya, mudra
vijAieha na bujhaya: even the most perfect and learned scholar cannot understand
a Vaisnava’s activities. A Vaisnava may be engaged in governmental service or in a
professional business so that externally one cannot understand his position. Inter-
nally, however, he may be a nitya-siddha Vaisnava—that is, an eternally liberated
Vaisnava. Externally Mukunda dasa was a royal physician, but internally he was
the most liberated paramaharisa devotee. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu knew this
very well, but ordinary men could not understand it, for the activities and plans of
a Vaisnava cannot be understood by ordinary men. However, जा Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and His representative understand everything about a devotee,
even though the devotee may externally pretend to be an ordinary householder
and professional businessman.
TEXT 121
এক দিন ম্লেচ্ছ-রাজার উচ্চ-টুঙ্িতে |
চিকিওসার বাত. কহে তাহার WATS ॥ ১২১ ॥
eka dina mleccha-rajara ucca-tungite
cikitsara vat kahe tanhara agrete


--- Page 69 ---
Text 123] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 65
SYNONYMS
eka dina—one day; mleccha-rajara—of the Mohammedan King; ucca-
tungite—on a high platform; cikitsara vat—talk of medical treatment; kahe —was
speaking; tarnhara agrete—before him.
TRANSLATION
‘One day Mukunda dasa, the royal physician, was seated with the Moham-
medan King on a high platform and was telling the King about medical treat-
ment.
TEXT 122
ছেলকালে এক ময়ুত্র-পুচ্ছের আড়ানী |
রাজ-শিরোপরি ধরে এক সেবক আনি” ॥ ১২২ ॥
hena-kale eka mayara-pucchera adani
raja-siropari dhare eka sevaka ani’
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; eka—one; maydra-pucchera—of peacock feathers;
adani—fan; raja-sira-upari—above the head of the King; dhare—holds; eka—
one; sevaka—servant; ani’—bringing.
TRANSLATION
‘While the King and Mukunda dasa were conversing, a servant brought a
fan made of peacock feathers to shade the head of the King from the sun. Con-
sequently he held the fan above the King’s head.
TEXT 123
শিখিপিচ্ছ দেখি” মুকুন্দ প্রেমাবিষ্ট হৈল৷ ।
অতি-উচ্চ টুঙ্গি হৈতে ভূমিতে পড়িল ॥ ১২৩ ॥
Sikhi-piccha dekhi” mukunda premavista haila
ati-ucca tungi haite bhamite padila
SYNONYMS
Sikhi-piccha—peacock feathers; dekhi’—seeing; mukunda—Mukunda dasa;
prema-avista haila—became ecstatic in love of Godhead; ati-ucca—very high;
tungi—platform; haite —from; bhamite—on the ground; padila—fell down.


--- Page 70 ---
66 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
“Just by seeing the peacock-feathered fan, Mukunda dasa became ab-
sorbed in ecstatic love of Godhead and fell from the high platform onto the
ground.
TEXT 124
রাজ।র জ্ঞান, র।জ-বৈদ্যের হইল মরণ |
আপনে নামিয়৷ তবে করাইল চেতন ॥ ১২৪ ॥
rajara 03/12, ——raja-vaidyera ha-ila marana
apane namiya tabe karaila cetana
SYNONYMS
rajara jiana—the King thought; raja-vaidyera—of the royal physician; ha-ila
marana—there was death; apane—personally; namiya—getting down; tabe—
thereupon; karaila cetana—brought him to consciousness.
TRANSLATION
“The King, fearing that the royal physician was killed, personally de-
scended and brought him to his consciousness.
TEXT 125
রাজ৷ বলে — वथ] তুমি পাইলে কোন Sifae ?
ATW कट, অতিবড় ব্যথা পাই নাই ॥ ১২৫ ॥
raja bale —vyatha tumi paile kona thani?
mukunda kahe, —ati-bada vyatha pai nai
SYNONYMS
raja bale—the King said; vyatha—pain; tumi paile—you have gotten; kona
thani—where; mukunda kahe —Mukunda replied; ati-bada vyatha—very much
pain; pai nai—I have not gotten.
TRANSLATION
“When the King asked Mukunda, ‘Where is it paining you?’ Mukunda
replied, ‘l am not very much pained.’
TEXT 126
রাজ। কহে, - PFW, তুমি পড়িল। কি লাগি” ?
YF কহে, রাজা, মোর ব্যাধি আছে FA ॥ ১২৬ ॥


--- Page 71 ---
Text 129] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 67
raja kahe, — mukunda, tumi padila ki lagi’?
mukunda kahe, raja, mora vyadhi ache mrgi
SYNONYMS
raja kahe —the King inquired; mukunda—O Mukunda; tumi padila—you fell; ki
lagi’—for what reason; mukunda kahe —Mukunda replied; raja—my dear King;
mora—of me; vyadhi—disease; ache —is; mrgi—epilepsy.
TRANSLATION
“The King then inquired, ‘Mukunda, why did you fall down?’ Mukunda
replied, ‘My dear King, | have a disease that is like epilepsy.’
TEXT 127
মহাবিদদষ্ধ রাজ, সেই जव জানে |
মুকুন্দেরে হৈল তার “মহাসিজ্ধ-ভ্ঞানে ॥ ১২৭ ॥
maha-vidagdha raja, sei saba jane
mukundere haila tanra ‘maha-siddha’-jnane
SYNONYMS
maha-vidagdha—highly intelligent; raja—the King; sei—he; saba jane —knows
everything; mukundere —upon Mukunda; haila—was; tanra—his; maha-siddha-
jnane —calculation as the most perfect devotee.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Being extraordinarily intelligent, the King could understand the whole
affair. In his estimation, Mukunda was a most uncommon, exalted, liberated
personality.
TEXTS 128-129
রঘুনন্দন (जव) করে FCA মন্দিরে ।
দ্বারে পুস্করিণী, তার ঘাটের উপরে ॥ ১২৮ ॥
TACHA এক বৃক্ষে ফুটে বারমাসে |
নিত্য দুই ফুল হয় রুষ্ণ-অবতংসে ॥ ১২৯ ॥
raghunandana seva kare krsnera mandire
dvare puskarini, tara ghatera upare
kadambera eka vrkse phute bara-mase
nitya dui phula haya krspa-avatamse


--- Page 72 ---
68 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
raghunandana—Raghunandana; seva kare—serves; krsnera mandire—in the
temple of Lord Krsna; dvare—near the door; puskarini—a lake; tara—of it;
ghatera upare—on the bank; kadambera—of kadamba flowers; eka vrkse—on
one tree; phute —blossom; bara-mase —all year around; nitya—daily; dui phala—
two flowers; haya—become; krsna-avatarise —decoration for Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Raghunandana is constantly engaged in serving the temple of Lord Krsna.
Beside the entrance of the temple is a lake, and on its banks is a kadamba tree,
which daily delivers two flowers to be used for Krsna’s service.”
TEXT 130
YPC কহে পুনঃ মধুর বচন |
“তোমার কার্য ধর্মে ধন-উপাজ্জন ॥ ১৩০ ॥
mukundere kahe punah madhura vacana
‘tomara karya——dharme dhana-uparjana
SYNONYMS
mukundere —to Mukunda; kahe—Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu says; punah—
again; madhura vacana—sweet words; tomara karya—your duty; dharme dhana-
updarjana—to earn both material and spiritual wealth.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again spoke to Mukunda with sweet words: ‘Your
duty is to earn both material and spiritual wealth.
TEXT 131
রঘুনন্দনের কার্য-_-কৃষ্ঞের সেবন |
কৃষ্ণ-সেবা বিন৷ ইহার অন্য নাহি মন ॥ ১৩১ ॥
raghunandanera karya——krsnera sevana
krsna-seva vina inhara anya nahi mana
SYNONYMS
raghunandanera karya—the duty of Raghunandana; krsnera sevana—worship-
ing Lord Krsna; krsna-seva vina—except for worshiping Krsna; inhara—of him;
anya—other; nahi—there is not; mana—intention.


--- Page 73 ---
Text 133] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 69
TRANSLATION
‘Furthermore it is the duty of Raghunandana to always engage in Lord
Krsna’s service. He has no other intention but the service of Lord Krsna.”
TEXT 132
নরহরি व्र আমার ভক্তগণ-সমে।
এই তিন কার্য সদ। করহ তিন জনে ॥' ১৩২ ॥
narahari rahu amara bhakta-gana-sane
ei tina karya sada karaha tina jane’
SYNONYMS
narahari—Narahari; rahu—let him remain; amara—My; bhakta-gana-sane—
along with other devotees; ei tina karya—these three divisions of duty; sada —al-
ways; karaha—execute; tina jane—you three persons.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then ordered Narahari: “| wish you to remain here
with My devotees. In this way the three of you should always execute these
three duties for the service of the Lord.”
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu set forth three duties for three different people.
Mukunda was to earn money and follow the religious principles, whereas Narahari
was to remain with the Lord's devotees, and Raghunandana was to engage in the
[0105 service in the temple. Thus one person worships in the temple, another
earns money honestly by executing his professional duty, and yet another
preaches Krsna consciousness with the devotees. Apparently these three types of
service appear separate, but actually they are not. When Krsna or $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is the center, everyone can engage in different activities for the ser-
vice of the Lord. That is the verdict of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 133
সার্বভৌম, বিদ্যাবাচস্পতি,-_ দুই ভাই ৷
দুইজনে FA করি” কহেন গোসাঞ্ি ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
sarvabhauma, vidya-vacaspati, — dui bhai
dui-jane krpa kari’ kahena gosani


--- Page 74 ---
70 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; vidya-vacaspati—Vidya-vacaspati;
dui bhai—two brothers; dui-jane —unto the two; krpa kari’—out of His causeless
mercy; kahena—says; gosani—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Out of His causeless mercy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave the following
directions to the brothers Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Vidya-vacaspati.
TEXT 134
“দারু”-জল)-রূপে কৃষ্ণ প্রকট সম্প্রতি ।
“দরশন-স্মানে” করে জীবের মুকতি ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
‘daru’-‘jala’-rape krsnpa prakata samprati
‘darasana’-‘snane’ kare jivera mukati
SYNONYMS
daru—wood; jala—water; rape —in the forms of; krsna—Lord Krsna; prakata—
manifested; samprati—at the present moment; darasana—by seeing; snane—by
bathing; kare —does; jivera mukati—the deliverance of the conditioned souls.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “‘In this age of Kali, Krsna is manifest in two
forms —wood and water. Thus He helps conditioned souls to become liber-
ated by seeing the wood and bathing in the water.
TEXT 135
“দারুত্রম্ম-রূপে-_সাক্ষাৎ লীপুতুষোত্তম |
ভাগীরথাী হন সাক্ষাৎ “জলব্রন্ম-সম ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
‘daru-brahma’-rape —saksat sri-purusottama
bhagirathi hana saksat ‘jala-brahma’-sama
SYNONYMS
daru-brahma-rape—in the form of Brahman as wood; saksat—directly; sri-
purusottama—Lord Jagannatha; bhagirathi—the River Ganges; hana—is; saksat—
directly; jala-brahma-sama—the Supreme in the form of water.


--- Page 75 ---
Text 136] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 71
TRANSLATION

‘Lord Jagannatha is the Supreme Lord Himself in the form of wood, and the

River Ganges is the Supreme Lord Himself in the form of water.
PURPORT

The Vedas enjoin, sarvarm khalv idam brahma: everything is the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brahman or Pararn Brahman.
Parasya brahmanah Saktis tathedam akhilam jagat: everything is a manifestation of
the energy of the Supreme Brahman. Since the energy and energetic are identical,
actually everything is Krsna, Pararn Brahman. Bhagavad-gita (9.4) confirms this:

maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-martina
mat-sthani sarva-bhatani
na caharn tesv avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are
in Me, but | am not in them.”

Krsna is spread throughout the whole universe in His impersonal form. Since
everything is a manifestation of the Lord's energy, the Lord can manifest Himself
through any energy. In this age, the Lord is manifest through wood as Lord Jagan-
natha, and He is manifest through water as the River Ganges. Therefore Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered the two brothers —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and
Vidya-vacaspati—to worship Lord Jagannatha and the River Ganges.

TEXT 136
সার্বভৌম, কর “দারুত্রহ্ম-আরাধন |
বাচস্পতি, কর জলতব্রঙ্মের সেবন ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
sarvabhauma, kara ‘daru-brahma’-aradhana
vacaspati, kara jala-brahmera sevana
SYNONYMS

sarvabhauma—QO Sarvabhauma; kara—be engaged in; daru-brahma—of
wooden Brahman; aradhana—worship; vacaspati—and you, Vacaspati; kara—
do; jala-brahmera—of Pararn Brahman manifested in water; sevana—worship.

TRANSLATION

‘‘Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, you should engage in the worship of Lord

Jagannatha Purusottama, and Vacaspati should worship mother Ganges.’’


--- Page 76 ---
72 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 137
মুরারি-গুপ্তেরে Ag করি” আলিঙ্গন |
তার ভক্তিনিষ্ঠা৷ কহেন, শুনে ভক্তগণ ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
murari-guptere prabhu kari’ alingana
tanra bhakti-nistha kahena, Sune bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
murari-guptere —Murdari Gupta; prabhu—Lord जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kari’
alingana—embracing; tanra—his; bhakti-nistha—faith in devotional service;
kahena—says; sune bhakta-gana—all the devotees hear.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then embraced Murari Gupta and began to speak
about his firm faith in devotional service. This was heard by all the devotees.
TEXT 138
পূর্বে আমি ই"হারে criss বার বার ।
পরম মধুত্ল, YY, ত্রজেন্দ্রকুম।ার ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
[001৮০ ami inhare lobhaila bara bara
parama madhura, gupta, vrajendra-kumara
SYNONYMS
parve —previously; ami—I; inhare —him; lobhaila—induced to be allured; bara
bara—again and again; parama madhura—very sweet; gupta—O Gupta; vra-
jendra-kumara—Lord Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘Previously | induced Murari Gupta again
and again to be allured by Lord Krsna. | said to him, ‘My dear Gupta, Lord Sri
Krsna, Vrajendra-kumara, is the supreme sweetness.
TEXT 139
স্বয়ং खनेवान्‌ কৃষ্ণ — সর্বাংশী, সর্বাশ্রয় |
বিশুদ্ধ-নির্মল-প্রেম, সর্বরসময় ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
svayam bhagavan krspna——sarvarmsi, sarvasraya
visuddha-nirmala-prema, sarva-rasamaya


--- Page 77 ---
Text 141] Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 73
SYNONYMS
svayam bhagavan krspa—Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sarva-amsi—the source of all others; sarva-asraya—the reservoir of all energies;
visuddha—transcendental; nirmala—free from all material contamination;
prema—Ilove; sarva-rasa-maya—the reservoir of all pleasure.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin of all incarna-
tions and the source of everything. He is pure transcendental love itself, and
He is the reservoir of all pleasure.
TEXT 140
সকল-সদ্‌গুণ-বৃন্দ-রত্ন-রত্নাকর |
विक्र, চতুর, ধীর, রসিক-শেখর ॥ ১৪০ ॥
sakala-sadguna-vrnda-ratna-ratnakara
vidagdha, catura, dhira, rasika-sekhara
SYNONYMS
sakala—all; sat-gupa—transcendental qualities; vrnda—multitude; ratna—of
gems; ratna-akara—the mine; vidagdha—intelligent; catura—expert; dhira—
sober; rasika-sekhara—master of all humor.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Krsna is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. He is like a mine of
gems. He is expert at everything, very intelligent and sober, and He is the
summit of all humors.
TEXT 141
মধুর-চরিত্র কৃষ্ণের মধুর-বিলাস।
চাতুর্য-বৈদম্ধয করে খার লীলারস ॥ ১৪১ ॥
madhura-caritra krsnera madhura-vilasa
caturya-vaidagdhya kare yanra lila-rasa
SYNONYMS
madhura-caritra—pleasing character; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; madhura-vilasa—
melodious pastimes; caturya—expertise; vaidagdhya—intelligence; kare—
manifests; yarira—whose; lila—of pastimes; rasa—mellows.


--- Page 78 ---
74 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
^ ‘His character is very sweet, and His pastimes are melodious. He is expert
in intelligence, and thus He enjoys all His pastimes and mellows.’
TEXT 142
সেই কৃষ্ণ ভজ তুমি, হও FRI |
কৃষ্ণ विन। অন্য-উপাসন৷ মনে নাহি লয় ॥ ১৪২ ॥
sei krsna bhaja tumi, hao krspasraya
krsna vina anya-upasana mane nahi laya
SYNONYMS
sei krspa—that Lord Krsna; bhaja tumi—engage yourself in His service; hao
krsna-asraya—take shelter of Krsna; krsna vina—except for Krsna; anya-
upasana—any other worship; mane nahi laya—does not appeal to the mind.
TRANSLATION
“1 then requested Murari Gupta, ‘Worship Krsna and take shelter of Him.
But for His service, nothing appeals to the mind.’
TEXT 143
(प
এইমত বার বার শুনিয়া বচন |
আমার গৌরবে কিছু ফিরি” গেল মন ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
ei-mata bara bara suniya vacana
amara gaurave kichu phir’ gela mana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; bara bara—again and again; suniya vacana—hearing
these words; amara gaurave —because of My influence; kichu—somewhat; phiri’
gela—transformed; mana—his mind.
TRANSLATION
‘In this way, he heard from Me again and again. By My influence, his mind
was a little converted.
TEXT 144
আমারে कटङन, खानि তোমার কিন্ছুর ।
তোমার আজ্ঞাকারী আমি নহি স্বতস্তর ॥ ১৪৪ ॥


--- Page 79 ---
Text 146] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 75
amare kahena,——ami tomara kinkara
tomara ajnakari ami nahi svatantara
SYNONYMS
amare kahena—he said unto Me; ami—I; tomara kinkara—Your servant;
tomadra ajna-kari— Your order carrier; ami —I; nahi—am not; svatantara—indepen-
dent.
TRANSLATION
“Murari Gupta then replied, ‘1 am Your servant and Your order carrier. 1
have no independent existence.’
TEXT 145
এত বলি” ঘরে গেল, চিস্তি' রাত্রিকালে ।
রখুন।থ-ত্যাগ-চিন্তায় হুইল বিকলে ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
eta bali’ ghare gela, cinti’ ratri-kale
raghunatha-tyaga-cintaya ha-ila vikale
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; ghare gela—went to his house; cinti’—thinking; ratri-
kale—at night; raghunatha—Lord Ramacandra; tyaga—giving up; cintdaya—by
thoughts of; ha-ila vikale—became overwhelmed.
TRANSLATION
‘‘After this, Murari Gupta went home and spent the whole night thinking
how he would be able to give up the association of Raghunatha, Lord Rama-
candra. Thus he was overwhelmed.
TEXT 146
কেমনে ছাড়িব রঘুনাথের চরণ ।
আজি ACE; প্রভু মোর করাহ মরণ ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
kemane chadiba raghunathera carana
aji ratrye prabhu mora karaha marana
SYNONYMS
kemane chadiba—how shall | give up; raghunathera carana—the lotus feet of
Lord Raghunatha; &ji ratrye—this night; prabhu —O Lord Raghunatha; mora—my;
karaha marana—please cause death.


--- Page 80 ---
76 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
‘Murari Gupta then began to pray at the lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra. He
prayed that death would come that night because it was not possible for him
to give up the service of the lotus feet of Raghunatha.
TEXT 147
এই মত সর্ব-রাত্রি করেন FHA |
মনে সোয়াস্তি নাহি, রাত্রি কৈল জাগরণ ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
ei mata sarva-ratri karena krandana
mane soyasti nahi, ratri kaila jagarana
SYNONYMS
ei mata—in this way; sarva-ratri—the whole night; karena krandana—cried;
mane —in the mind; soyasti nahi—there is no rest; ratri—the whole night; kaila—
kept; jagarana—awake.
TRANSLATION
“Thus Murari Gupta cried the entire night. There was no rest for his mind;
therefore he could not sleep but stayed awake the entire night.
TEXT 148
প্রাতঃকালে আসি” মোর ধরিল চরণ |
কান্দিতে wifes কিছু করে নিবেদন ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
pratah-kale asi’ mora dharila carana
kandite kandite kichu kare nivedana
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; asi’—coming; mora—My; dharila—caught hold
of; carana—feet; kandite kandite—continuously crying; kichu kare nivedana—
submits some appeals.
TRANSLATION
‘In the morning Murari Gupta came to see Me. Catching hold of My feet
and crying, he submitted an appeal.


--- Page 81 ---
Text 151] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 77
TEXT 149
রঘুনাথের পায় fap বেচিয়াছেঁ। মাথা ।
কাড়িতে না পারি মাথা, মনে পাই वाथ] ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
raghunathera paya muni veciyachon matha
kadhite na pari matha, mane pai vyatha
SYNONYMS
raghunathera paya—unto the lotus feet of Lord Raghunatha; 1711671 - 1;
veciyachon—sold; matha—head; kadhite—to cut off; na pari—| am unable;
matha—my head; mane —in my mind; pai vyatha—I get too much pain.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Murari Gupta said, “1 have sold my head to the lotus feet of Raghunatha. |
cannot withdraw my head, for that would give me too much pain.
TEXT 150
লীরঘুনাথ-চরণ ছাড়ান না FF |
তব আজ্ঞা-ভঙ্গ হয়, কি করে৷ উপায় ॥ ১৫০ ॥
$ri-raghunatha-carana chadana na yaya
tava ajna-bhanga haya, ki karon upaya
SYNONYMS
$ri-raghunatha-carana—the lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra; chadana na yaya—
cannot be given up; tava—Your; ajAa—order; bharga—broken; haya—is; ki—
what; karon—shall | do; updaya—remedy.
TRANSLATION
^“ “It is not possible for me to give up the service of Raghunatha’s lotus feet.
At the same time, if | do not do so | shall break your order. What can 1 do?’
TEXT 151
SITS মোরে এই Fo কর দয়াময়।
তোমার আগে JPY ZF, TTT সংশয় ॥ ১৫১ ॥
tate more ei krpa kara, dayamaya
tomadra age mrtyu ha-uka, yauka sarmsaya


--- Page 82 ---
78 5 Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
tate —therefore; more —unto me; ei—this; krpa—mercy; kara—bestow; daya-
maya—O merciful one; tomara age —before You; mrtyu ha-uka—let me die;
yauka samsaya—and let all doubts go away.
TRANSLATION
‘In this way Murari Gupta appealed to Me, saying, ‘Kindly grant me this
mercy because You are all-merciful. Let me die before You so that all my
doubts will be finished.’
TEXT 152
এত শুনি” আমি বড় মনে श्ये नीलं |
zien উঠাঞা তবে আলিঙ্গন কৈন্দু' ॥ ১৫২ ॥
eta suni’ ami bada mane sukha pailun
inhare uthana tabe alingana kailun
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; ami—I|; bada—very great; mane —in the mind; sukha—
happiness; pailun—got; inhare—him; uthana—raising; tabe—at that time;
alingana kailuri—| embraced.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Hearing this, | became very happy. | then raised Murari Gupta and
embraced him.
TEXT 153
সাধু AY, গুপ্ত, তোমার IGP ভজন |
আমার বচনেহ তোমার না টলিল মন ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
sadhu 53070, gupta, tomara sudrdha bhajana
amdra vacaneha tomara na talila mana
SYNONYMS
sadhu sadhu—all glories unto you; gupta—Murari Gupta; tomara—your; su-
drdha—firmly fixed; bhajana—method of worship; amara—My; vacaneha—even
on the request; tomara—your; na talila—did not budge; mana—mind.


--- Page 83 ---
Text 154] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 79
TRANSLATION
‘I said to him, ‘All glories to you, Murari Gupta! Your method of worship is
very firmly fixed —so much so that even upon My request your mind did not
turn.
TEXT 154
এইমত সেবকের প্রীতি চাহি প্রভু-পায় |
व्यद ছাড়াইলেহ, পদ ছাড়ান न। যায় ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
ei-mata sevakera priti cahi prabhu-paya
prabhu chadaileha, pada chadana na yaya
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—like this; sevakera—of the servitor; priti—love; cahi—is wanted;
prabhu-paya—unto the lotus feet of the Lord; prabhu chadaileha—even thoGgh
the Lord causes separation; pada—the lotus feet of the Lord; chadana na yaya—
cannot be given up.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘The servitor must have love and affection for the lotus feet of the Lord ex-
actly like this. Even if the Lord wants separation, a devotee cannot abandon
the shelter of His lotus feet.
PURPORT
The word prabhu, or master, indicates that the Lord is to be continuously
served by His devotee. The original prabhu is the Lord, Sri Krsna. Nonetheless,
there are many devotees attached to Lord Ramacandra, and Murari Gupta is a
vivid example of such unalloyed devotion. He never agreed to give up Lord Rama-
candra’s worship, not even upon Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s request. Such is the
chastity of devotional service, as stated in the Antya-lila of Caitanya-caritamrta
(4.46-47):
sei bhakta dhanya, ye na chade prabhura carana
sei prabhu dhanya, ye na chade nija-jana
durdaive sevaka yadi yaya anya sthane
sei thakura dhanya tare cule dhari’ ane
In a firm relationship with the Lord, the devotee does not give up the Lord's ser-
vice under any circumstance. As far as the Lord Himself is concerned, if the devo-
tee chooses to leave, the Lord brings him back again, dragging him by the hair.


--- Page 84 ---
80 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 15
TEXT 155
এইমত তোমার निर] জানিবার ea ।
তোমারে আগ্রহ আমি [5 § বারে বারে ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
ei-mata tomadra nistha janibara tare
tomare agraha ami kailury bare bare
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; tomara—your; nistha—firm faith; janibara tare—to
understand; tomare—unto you; agraha—persistence; ami kailun—I did; bare
bare —again and again.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Just to test your firm faith in your Lord, | requested you again and again to
change your worship from Lord Ramacandra to Krsna.’
TEXT 156
সাক্ষাৎ zg ভুমি জ্রীরাম-কিন্কর |
তুমি কেনে ছাড়িবে Sta চরণ-কমল ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
saksat hanuman tumi sri-rama-kirnkara
tumi kene chadibe tanra carapa-kamala
SYNONYMS
saksat—directly; hanuman—Hanuman; tumi—you; sri-rama-kinkara—the ser-
vant of जा Rama; tumi—you; kene—why; chadibe —should give up; tanra—His;
carana-kamala —lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
‘In this way, | congratulated Murari Gupta, saying, ‘Indeed, you are the in-
carnation of Hanuman. Consequently you are the eternal servant of Lord
Ramacandra. Why should you give up the worship of Lord Ramacandra and
His lotus feet?’ ’’
TEXT 157
সেই মুরারি-গুপ্ত এই-_মোর প্রাণ जम |
ইহার tr শুনি” মোর ফাটয়ে জীবন ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
sei murdri-gupta ei——mora prana sama
inhara dainya suni’ mora phataye jivana


--- Page 85 ---
Text 159]  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 81
SYNONYMS
sei murari-gupta—that Murari Gupta; ei—this; mora prana sama—not different
from My life and soul; irnhara—of him; dainya—humility; suni’—hearing; mora—
My; phataye—perturbs; jivana—life.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, “1 accept this Murari Gupta as My life
and soul. When 1 hear of his humility, it perturbs My very life.”
TEXT 158
তবে বাস্থদেবে AY করি” আলিঙ্গন |
তার গুণ কহে হঞ। সহজ্র-বদন ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
tabe vasudeve prabhu kari’ alingana
{0/2 guna kahe hana sahasra-vadana
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; vasudeve —Vasudeva; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kari’
alingana—embracing; tanra guna—his good qualities; kahe —began to explain;
hana —becoming; sahasra-vadana—possessing thousands of mouths.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then embraced Vasudeva Datta and began to
speak of his glories as if He had a thousand mouths.
TEXT 159
নিজ-গণ শুনি” দত্ত मटन লজ্জা न† 9] |
নিবেদন করের প্রভুর চরণে ধরিয়। ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
nija-guna suni’ datta mane lajja pana
nivedana kare prabhura carane dhariya
SYNONYMS
nija-guna—his personal qualities; Suni’—hearing; datta—Vasudeva Datta;
mane—in the mind; lajja pana—being ashamed; nivedana kare —submits;
prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carane dhariya—catching the lotus
feet.


--- Page 86 ---
82 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
When Caitanya Mahaprabhu glorified him, Vasudeva Dattaimmediately be-
came very embarrassed and shy. He then submitted himself, touching the
Lord’s lotus feet.
TEXT 160
জগৎ তারিতে প্রভু তোমার অবতার |
মোর নিবেদন এক করহু অঙ্গীকার ॥ ১৬০ ॥
jagat tarite prabhu tomara avatara
mora nivedana eka karaha angikara
SYNONYMS
jagat tarite—to deliver the whole world; prabhu—my Lord; tomara—Your;
avatara—incarnation; mora—my; nivedana—petition; eka—one; karaha
angikara—please accept.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva Datta told Caitanya Mahaprabhu, “My dear Lord, You incarnate
just to deliver all conditioned souls. | have now one petition, which | wish You
would accept.
TEXT 161
করিতে সমর্থ তুমি হও, দয়াময় ।
তুমি মন কর, टव অনায়াসে ZH ॥ ১৬১ ॥
karite samartha tumi hao, dayamaya
tumi mana kara, tabe anayase haya
SYNONYMS
karite —to execute; samartha—capable; tumi—You; hao—are; daya-maya—O
merciful one; tumi mana kara—if You so desire; tabe—then; anayase —without
difficulty; haya—it becomes possible.
TRANSLATION
‘‘My Lord, You are certainly capable of doing whatever You like, and You are
indeed merciful. If You so desire, You can very easily do whatever You want.


--- Page 87 ---
Text 163]  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 83
TEXT 162
জীবের দুঃখ দেখি” মোর গুদয় विक्तटन्न |
সর্বজীবের পাপ প্রভু দেহ' মোর শিরে ॥ ১৬২ ॥
jivera duhkha 0610011 mora hrdaya bidare
sarva-jivera papa prabhu deha’ mora sire
SYNONYMS
jivera—of all conditioned souls; duhkha dekhi’—by seeing the sufferings;
mora—my; hrdaya—heart; bidare—breaks; sarva-jivera—of all living entities;
papa —the sinful reactions; prabhu—My dear Lord; deha’—just put; mora sire —
upon my head.
TRANSLATION
“My Lord, my heart breaks to see the sufferings of all conditioned souls;
therefore | request You to transfer the karma of their sinful lives upon my
head.
TEXT 163
জীবের পাপ नयश lap করে৷ নরক তোগ |
সকল জীবের, প্রভু, ঘুচাহ ভবরোগ ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
jivera papa lana muni karon naraka bhoga
sakala jivera, prabhu, ghucaha bhava-roga
SYNONYMS
jivera—of all conditioned souls; papa lafia—accepting the sinful reactions;
171८491 --1; karon—do; naraka—hellish life; bhoga—suffering; sakala jivera—of all
living entities; prabhu—my dear Lord; ghucaha—please finish; bhava-roga—the
material disease.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Lord, let me suffer perpetually in a hellish condition, accepting all
the sinful reactions of all living entities. Please finish their diseased material
life.”
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives the following commentary on this
verse. In the Western countries, Christians believe that Lord Jesus Christ, their


--- Page 88 ---
84 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 15
spiritual master, appeared in order to eradicate all the sins of his disciples. To this
end, Lord Jesus Christ appeared and disappeared. Here, however, we find Sri
Vasudeva Datta Thakura and 5112 Haridasa Thakura to be many millions of times
more advanced even when compared to Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ relieved
only his followers from all sinful reactions, but Vasudeva Datta is here prepared to
accept the sins of everyone in the universe. A Vaisnava is so liberal that he is pre-
pared to risk everything to rescue conditioned souls from material existence. Srila
Vasudeva Datta Thakura is universal love itself, for he was willing to sacrifice
everything and fully engage in the service of the Supreme.

Srila Vasudeva Datta knew very well that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the
original Personality of Godhead. He was transcendence itself, above the material
conception of illusion and maya. Lord Jesus Christ certainly finished the sinful
reactions of his followers by his mercy, but that does not mean that he com-
pletely delivered them from the pangs of material existence. A person may be
relieved from sins once, but it is a practice among Christians to confess sins and
yet commit them again. By getting freed from sins and again engaging in them,
one cannot attain freedom from the pangs of material existence. A diseased per-
son may go to a physician for relief, but after he leaves the hospital he may again
be infected due to his unclean habits. Thus material existence continues. Srila
Vasudeva Datta wanted to completely relieve the conditioned souls from ma-
terial existence so that they would no longer have an opportunity to commit sin-
ful acts. This is the difference between Srila Vasudeva Datta and Lord Jesus Christ.
It is a great offense to receive pardon for sins and then commit the same sins
again. Such an offense is more dangerous than the sinful activity itself. Vasudeva
Datta was so liberal that he requested Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to transfer all
offensive activity upon him so the conditioned souls might be purified. This
prayer was certainly without duplicity.

Vasudeva Datta’s example is unique not only within this world but within the
universe. It is beyond the conception of fruitive actors or the speculation of mun-
dane philosophers. Due to being illusioned by the external energy and due to a
poor fund of knowledge, people tend to envy one another. Because of this they
are entangled in fruitive activity, and they try to escape this fruitive activity by
mental speculation. Consequently neither karmis nor {73075 are purified. In the
words of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Thakura, they are kukarmis and kujiaanis—bad ac-
tors and bad speculators. The Mayavadis and karmis should therefore turn their
attention to the magnanimous Vasudeva Datta, who wanted to suffer for others
in a hellish condition. Nor should one consider Vasudeva Datta a mundane
philanthropist or welfare worker. He was not interested in merging into the Brah-
man effulgence, nor was he interested in material honor or reputation. He was far
above philanthropists, philosophers and fruitive actors. He was a most exalted
personality who wanted to show mercy upon conditioned souls. This is not an ex-
aggeration of his transcendental qualities. It is perfectly true. Actually there can-


--- Page 89 ---
Text 164]  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 85
not be any comparison to Vasudeva Datta. He was a Vaisnava— para-duhkha-
duhkhi—very much aggrieved to see others suffer. The entire world is purified
simply by the appearance of such a great devotee. By his presence the whole
world is glorified, and all conditioned souls—due to his transcendental pres-
ence—are also glorified. As Narottama dasa Thakura confirms, Vasudeva Datta is
the ideal devotee of ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
gadrangera sangi-gane, nitya-siddha kari’ mane,
se ydya vrajendrasuta-pasa
One who executes Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mission must be considered to be
eternally liberated. He is a transcendental person and does not belong to this ma-
terial world. Such a devotee engaging in the deliverance of the total population is
as magnanimous as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself.
namo maha-vadanyaya
krspa-prema-praddya te
krspndya krspa-caitanya-
namne gaura-tvise namah
Such a personality factually represents Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu because his heart
is always filled with compassion for conditioned souls.
TEXT 164
এত শুনি” মহাপ্রভুর চিত্ত দ্রেবিল। |
অশ্রু কম্প-স্বরভঙ্গে কহিতে লাগিলা ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
eta Suni’ mahaprabhura citta dravila
asru-kampa-svarabhange kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; citta—
heart; dravili—became softened; asru—tears; kampa—trembling; svara-
bharige —with faltering of the voice; kahite —to speak; lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard Vasudeva Datta’s statement, His
heart became very soft. Tears flowed from His eyes, and He began to tremble.
In a faltering voice He spoke as follows.


--- Page 90 ---
86 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 165
“তোমার বিচিত্র নহে, ङनि--जाच्रा< প্রহলাদ |
তোমার উপরে কৃষ্ণের সম্পুর্ণ প্রসাদ ॥ ১৬৫ ॥
“tomdra vicitra nahe, tumi— saksat prahlada
tomara upare krsnera samparna prasada
SYNONYMS
tomara—in you; wvic¢itra nahe—this is not extraordinary; tumi—you; saksat
prahlada—incarnation of Prahlada Maharaja; tomara upare —upon you; krsnera—
of Lord Krsna; sampurna—complete; prasada—mercy.
TRANSLATION
Accepting Vasudeva Datta as a great devotee, the Lord said, “Such a state-
ment is not at all astonishing because you are the incarnation of Prahlada
Maharaja. It appears that Lord Krsna has bestowed complete mercy upon you.
There is no doubt about it.
TEXT 166
কৃষ্ণ সেই সত্য করে, যেই মাগে ভূত্য |
ভূত্য-বাঞ্ছা-পূর্তি বিন্দু নাহি অন্ত कुड} ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
krsna sei satya kare, yei mage bhrtya
bhrtya-vancha-parti vinu nahi anya krtya
SYNONYMS
krsna—Lord Krsna; sei—that; satya kare—fulfills as true; yei—whatever;
mage —wants; bhrtya—servant; bhrtya-vancha—the desire of His servant; parti-
—fulfilling; vinu—without; nahi—there is not; anya—other; krtya—duty.
TRANSLATION
“Whatever a pure devotee wants from his master, Lord Krsna doubtlessly
grants because He has no duty other than to fulfill the desire of His devotee.
TEXT 167
wie জীবের তুমি বাষ্ছিলে নিস্তার ।
বিনা পাপ-ভোগে হবে সবার উদ্ধার ॥ ১৬৭ ॥


--- Page 91 ---
Text 169] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 87
brahmanda jivera tumi vanchile nistara
vind papa-bhoge habe sabara uddhara
SYNONYMS
brahmanda—of the universe; jivera—of all living entities; tumi varchile—if you
desire; nistara—deliverance; vina—without; papa-bhoge—undergoing tribula-
tions of sinful activities; habe —there will be; sabara—everyone's; uddhara—
liberation.
TRANSLATION
‘If you desire the deliverance of all living entities within the universe, then
all of them can be delivered even without your undergoing the tribulations of
sinful activity.
TEXT 168
অসমর্থ নহে কৃষ্ণ, ধরে সর্ব दन |
তোমাকে বা কেনে ভুঞ্জ।ইবে পাপ-ফল ? ১৬৮ ॥
asamartha nahe krsna, dhare sarva bala
tomake va kene bhunjaibe papa-phala?
SYNONYMS
asamartha nahe—is not unable; krsna—Lord Krsna; dhare —possesses; sarva
bala—all potencies; tomake—you; va—then; kene—why; bhuijaibe —would
cause to suffer; papa-phala—results of sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
‘Krsna is not incapable, for He has all potencies. Why would He induce you
to suffer the sinful reactions of other living entities?
TEXT 169
তুমি যার হিত AR, সে হৈল “বৈষ্ণব” ।
বৈষ্ণপের भं [ग FW দূর করে সব ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
tumi yanra hita vancha’, se haila ‘vaisnava’
vaispavera papa krsna dara kare saba
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; yanra—of whom; hita vancha’—desire the welfare; se—such a
person; haila—immediately becomes; vaispava—a devotee; vaisnavera—of a


--- Page 92 ---
88 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
Vaisnava; papa—the accidental sinful life; krspa—Lord Krsna; dara kare—van-
quishes; saba—all.

TRANSLATION

‘“Whosever welfare you desire immediately becomes a Vaisnava, and Krsna
delivers all Vaisnavas from the reactions of their past sinful activities.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu here informed Vasudeva Datta that since Krsna is all-
powerful, He can immediately deliver all conditioned souls from material exis-
tence. In essence, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “You desire the liberation of all
kinds of living entities without discrimination. You are very anxious for their good
fortune, and 1 say that simply by your prayer all living entities within the universe
can be liberated. You do not even have to take up the burden of their sinful ac-
tivities. Thus there is no need for you to suffer for their sinful lives. Whoever
receives your compassion becomes a Vaisnava immediately, and Krsna delivers all
Vaisnavas from the reactions to their past sinful activities.” This is also promised in
Bhagavad-gita (18.66):

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekarn saranarn vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. | shall deliver you
from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.”

As soon as one fully surrenders to Krsna, he becomes a Vaisnava. In this verse
from Bhagavad-gita, Krsna promises to relieve His devotee from all the reactions
to sinful life. It is a fact that a fully surrendered Vaisnava is completely out of the
range of material infection. This is to say that he does not suffer the results of
pious or impious actions. Unless one is freed from a sinful life, he cannot become a
Vaisnava. In other words, if one is a Vaisnava, his sinful life is certainly ended. Ac-
cording to Padma Purana:

aprarabdha-phalari papam
katam bijarh phalonmukham
kramenaiva praliyeta
visnu-bhakti-ratatmanam
“There are different stages of dormant reactions to sinful activities to be observed
in a sinful life. Sinful reactions may be just waiting to take effect [phalonmukhal,
reactions may be still further dormant [katal, or the reactions may be in a seedlike


--- Page 93 ---
Text 171]  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 89
state [bijal. In any case, all types of sinful reactions are vanquished one after
another if a person engages in the devotional service of Lord Visnu.”
TEXT 170
যস্িস্তরগে।প মথবেন্দ্রম। कर्म
বন্ধ।স্রূণফলভাজ্নমাতনোরতি ।
কর্মাণি নির্দহতি কিন্তু চ ভক্তিভাজাং
(ता चिन्मय] দিপুরুষৎ তমহং ভজামি ॥ ১০
yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-
bandhanurapa-phala-bhajanam atanoti
karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajarn
govindam adi-purusari tam aharh bhajami
SYNONYMS
yah—He who (Govinda); tu—but; indra-gopam —to the small red insect called
indra-gopa; athava—or even; indram—to Indra, King of heaven; aho—oh; sva-
karma—of one’s own fruitive activities; bandha—bondage; anuripa—according
to; phala—of reactions; bhajanam —enjoying or suffering; atanoti—bestows; kar-
mani—all fruitive activities and their reactions; nirdahati—destroys; kintu—but;
ca—certainly; bhakti-bhajam —of persons engaged in devotional service; govin-
dam—unto Lord Covinda; adi-purusam—the original person; tam—unto Him;
aham—l; bhajami—offer my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the original Personality of
Godhead, Govinda, who regulates the sufferings and enjoyments of fruitive
activity for everyone —from the heavenly King Indra down to the smallest in-
sect l[indra-gopal. That very Personality of Godhead destroys the fruitive
karma of one engaged in devotional service.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Brahma-sarmhita (5.54).
TEXT 171
তোমার ইচ্ছা-মাত্রে হবে ত্রনহ্মাগু-মোচন |
সর্ব মুক্ত করিতে কৃষ্ণের নাহি কিছু द्म ॥ ১৭১ ॥


--- Page 94 ---
90 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
tomara iccha-matre habe brahmanda-mocana
sarva mukta karite krspera nahi kichu srama
SYNONYMS

tomara iccha-matre—simply by your desire; habe—there will be; brahmanda-
mocana—deliverance of the universe; sarva—everyone; mukta karite—to liber-
ate; krspera—of Lord Krsna; nahi—there is not; kichu—even a little; srama—
labor.

TRANSLATION

‘Because of your honest desire, all living entities within the universe will be
delivered, for Krsna does not have to do anything to deliver all the living en-
tities of the universe.

TEXT 172
এক উড়ুজ্বর JL লাগে কোটি-ফলে |
কোটি যে लक्ता ७ ভাসে বিরজার জলে ॥ ১৭২ ॥
eka udumbara vrkse lage koti-phale
koti ye brahmanda bhase virajara jale
SYNONYMS

eka udumbara vrkse—in one udumbara tree; lage—there are; koti-phale —
millions of fruits; koti—millions; ye—which; brahmanda—of universes; bhase—
float; virajara—of the Viraja River; jale—in the water.

TRANSLATION

‘‘Just as there are millions of fruits on the udumbara tree, millions of uni-

verses float on the waters of the River Viraja.
PURPORT

Viraja is a river that divides the material world from the spiritual world. On one
side of the River Viraja is the effulgence of Brahmaloka and innumerable
Vaikuntha planets, and on the other side is this material world. It is to be under-
stood that this side of the Viraja River is filled with material planets floating in the
Causal Ocean. The name Viraja indicates a marginal position between the spiritual
and material worlds, but this Viraja River is not under the control of material en-
ergy. Consequently it is devoid of the three gunas.


--- Page 95 ---
Text 175]  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 91
TEXT 173
তার এক ফল ATE যদি নষ্ট হয়।
তথাপি 3% নাহি জানে নিজ-অপচয় ॥ ১৭৩ ॥
tara eka phala padi’ yadi nasta haya
tathapi vrksa nahi jane nija-apacaya
SYNONYMS
tara—of the tree; eka phala—one fruit; padi’—falling down; yadi—if; nasta
haya—becomes destroyed; tathapi—still; vrksa—the tree; nahi jane —does not
know; nija-apacaya—its loss.
TRANSLATION
“The udumbara tree is filled with millions of fruits, and if one falls down
and is destroyed, the tree does not even consider the loss.
TEXT 174
তৈছে এক व्वच्का ९ यकि মুক্ত =H |
তবু অন্ত্র-হানি কৃষ্ণের মনে নাহি লয় ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
taiche eka brahmanda yadi mukta haya
tabu alpa-hani krsnera mane nahi laya
SYNONYMS
taiche—similarly; eka brahmanda—one universe; yadi—if; mukta haya—be-
comes liberated; tabu —still; alpa-hani—very little loss; krsnera—of Lord Krsna;
mane —the mind; nahi laya—does not take it very seriously.
TRANSLATION
‘In the same way, if one universe is vacated due to the living entities’ hav-
ing been liberated, that is a very little thing for Krsna. He does not take it very
seriously.
TEXT 175
नख এস্বর্য কৃষ্ণের বৈকুণ্ঠাদি-ধাম |
তার গড়খাই _কারণান্কি যার নাম ॥ ১৭৫ ॥


--- Page 96 ---
92 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
ananta aisvarya krsnera vaikunthadi-dhama
tara gada-khai——karanabdhi yara nama
SYNONYMS

ananta—unlimited; aisvarya—opulence; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; vaikuntha-
adi-dhama —innumerable Vaikuntha planets; tara—of Vaikunthaloka; gada-
khai—surrounding water; karana-abdhi—Causal Ocean; yara—of which; nama—
name.

TRANSLATION

“The entire spiritual world constitutes the unlimited opulence of Krsna, and
there are innumerable Vaikuntha planets there. The Causal Ocean is con-
sidered the surrounding waters of Vaikunthaloka.

TEXT 176
তাতে ভাসে AIT লঞ অনন্ত व्वच्त ॐ |
গড়খাইতে ভাসে যেন রাই-পূর্ণ खं ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
tate bhase maya lana ananta brahmanda
gada-khaite bhase yena rai-parna bhanda
SYNONYMS

tate—in that water; bhase —floats; maya—the material energy; lana—taking;
ananta—unlimited; brahmanda—universes; gada-khaite—in the surrounding
water; bhase—floats; yena—as if; rai-parna bhanda—a pot filled with mustard
seeds.

TRANSLATION

‘“Maya and her unlimited material universes are situated in that Causal
Ocean. Indeed, maya appears to be floating like a pot filled with mustard
seeds.

TEXT 177
তার এক রাই-নাশে হানি নাহি मानि।
এঁছে এক অগু-নাশে কৃষ্ণের নাহি হানি ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
tara eka rai-nase hani nahi mani
aiche eka anda-nase krsnera nahi hani


--- Page 97 ---
Text 179] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 93
SYNONYMS
tara—of it; eka—one; rai-nase—loss of a mustard seed; hani—loss; nahi—
does not; mani—notice; aiche—in that way; eka—one; anda—universe; nase —
being lost; krsnera—of Krsna; nahi hani—there is no loss.
TRANSLATION
“Of the millions of mustard seeds floating in that pot, if one seed is lost, the
loss is not at all significant. Similarly, if one universe is lost, it is not significant
to Lord Krsna.
TEXT 178
সব क्क সহ যদি “মায়া”র হয় WW |
তথাপি না মানে কৃষ্ণ fer অপচয় ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
saba brahmanda saha yadi ‘maya‘’ra haya ksaya
tathapi na mane krsna kichu apacaya
SYNONYMS
saba brahmanda—all the universes; saha—with; yadi—if; mayara—of the ma-
terial energy; haya ksaya—there is destruction; tathapi—still; na—not; mane —
considers; krsna—Lord Krsna; kichu—any; apacaya—lost.
TRANSLATION
‘To say nothing of one universal mustard seed, even if all the universes and
the material energy [mayal are destroyed, Krsna does not even consider the
loss.
TEXT 179
ক্োটি-কামধ্য্ে-পতির ছাগী যৈছে ca |
বড়ৈশ্বর্ষপতি কৃষ্ণের wml किव। করে ? ১৭৯ ॥
koti-kamadhenu-patira chagi yaiche mare
sad-aisvarya-pati krsnera maya kiba kare?
SYNONYMS
koti—of millions; kama-dhenu—of desire cows; patira—of the master; chagi—
one she-goat; yaiche—as; mare—dies; sat-aisvarya-pati—the master of six opu-
lences; krsnera—of Krsna; maya—external energy; kiba—what; kare—can do.


--- Page 98 ---
94 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
‘If a person possessing millions of wish-fulfilling cows loses one she-goat,
he does not consider the loss. Krsna owns all six opulences in full. If the entire
material energy is destroyed, what does He lose?”
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, in clarifying verses 171-179, states that the meaning
of these stanzas is very simple but that the purport is a little difficult to under-
stand. Generally, conditioned souls forget Krsna when they are enticed by the
material, external energy. Consequently they are called krsna-bahirmukha—
bereft of their relationship with Krsna. When such a living entity comes under the
jurisdiction of the material energy, he is sent into one of the innumerable material
universes created by the material energy to give a chance to conditioned souls to
enjoy their desires in the material world. Being very eager to enjoy the fruits of
their activities, conditioned souls become involved in the actions and reactions of
material life. Consequently one has to enjoy and suffer the results of karma.
However, if a conditioned soul becomes Krsna conscious, the karma of his pious
and impious activities is completely destroyed. Simply by becoming a devotee,
one is bereft of all the reactions of karma. Similarly, simply by the desire of a devo-
tee, a conditioned soul can attain liberation and transcend the results of karma. If
everyone is liberated in this way, one may conclude that according to the sweet
will of the devotee, the material world exists or does not exist. Ultimately,
however, it is not the sweet will of the devotee but the will of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who, if He so desires, can completely annihilate the material
creation. There is no loss on His part. The owner of millions of cows does not con-
sider the loss of one she-goat. Similarly, Lord Krsna is the proprietor of both ma-
terial and spiritual universes. The material world constitutes only one-fourth of His
creative energy. If, according to the desire of the devotee, the Lord completely
destroys the creation, He is so opulent that He will not mind the loss.
TEXT 180

জয় জয় खश्लागक्िर দেোষগৃভী তগুণাং

अनि যদাজ্মনা সমবরুদ্ধসমস্তভগঃ |

অগজগদোকলসামথিলশক্ত্যববোধক তে

ক্বচিদজয়াত্মন৷ চ চরতোইনুচরেন্িগমঃ 177 ১৮০ ॥

jaya jaya jahy ajam ajita dosa-grbhita-gunam
tvam asi yad atmana samavaruddha-samasta-bhagah
aga-jagad-okasam akhila-sakty-avabodhaka te
kvacid ajayatmana ca carato ‘nucaren nigamah”


--- Page 99 ---
Text 181] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers 35303 to the Lord 95
SYNONYMS

jaya jaya—kindly exhibit Your glory; jahi—please conquer; ajam—nescience,
maya; ajita—O unconquerable one; dosa—faulty; grbhita-gunam—by which the
qualities are accepted; tvam —You; asi—are; yat—because; atmana—by Your in-
ternal potency; samavaruddha—possessing; samasta-bhagah—all kinds of opu-
lences; aga—nonmoving; jagat—moving; okasam—of the embodied living en-
tities; akhila—all; Sakti—of potencies; avabodhaka—master; te—You; kvacit—
sometimes; ajaya—by the external energy; atmana—of Your self; ca—also;
caratah —manifesting pastimes (by Your glance); anucaret—confirm; nigamah —
all the Vedas.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, ˆ“ ‘O my Lord, O unconquerable one,
O master of all potencies, please exhibit Your internal potency to conquer the
nescience of all moving and inert living entities. Due to nescience, they ac-
cept all kinds of faulty things, thus provoking a fearful situation. O Lord,
please show Your glories! You can do this very easily, for Your internal po-
tency is beyond the external potency, and You are the reservoir of all opu-
lence. You are also the demonstrator of the material potency. You are also al-
ways engaged in Your pastimes in the spiritual world. You exhibit Your
reserved internal potency and sometimes exhibit the external potency by
glancing over it. Thus You manifest Your pastimes. The Vedas confirm Your
two potencies and accept both types of pastimes due to them.’ ^“

PURPORT

This verse is taken from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.14). It is from the prayers of
the sruti-gana, the personified Vedas who glorify the Lord.

The almighty Personality of Godhead has three potencies —internal, external
and marginal. When the conditioned souls are condemned due to forgetfulness,
the external potency creates the material world and puts the living entities under
its control. The three modes of material nature keep the living entity in a constant
state of fear. Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah. The controlled conditioned soul is al-
ways fearful due to being controlled by the external potency; therefore the con-
ditioned soul should always pray to the almighty Lord to conquer the external
potency (maya) so that she will no longer manifest her powers, which bind all liv-
ing entities, moving and inert.

TEXT 181
এই মত সর্বভক্তের TF সব গুণ |
সবারে বিদায় দিল করি” আলিঙ্গন ॥ ১৮১ ॥


--- Page 100 ---
96 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
ei mata sarva-bhaktera kahi’ saba guna
sabre vidaya dila kari’ alingana
SYNONYMS
ei mata—in this way; sarva-bhaktera—of all the devotees; kahi’—describing;
saba guna—all the good qualities; sabare—unto everyone; viddya dila—bade
farewell; kari’ alingana—embracing.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu described the good qualities of His
devotees one after the other. He then embraced them and bade them farewell.
TEXT 182
প্রভুর বিচ্ছেদে ভক্ত করেন রোদন |
ভক্তের বিচ্ছেদে প্রভুর বিষ হৈল মন ॥ ১৮২ ॥
prabhura vicchede bhakta karena rodana
bhaktera vicchede prabhura visanna haila mana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—from Lord जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vicchede—by separation;
bhakta—all the devotees; karena—do; rodana—crying; bhaktera—of the devo-
tees; vicchede—by the separation; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
visanpa—morose; haila—became; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Due to the impending separation from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the
devotees began to cry. The Lord was also morose due to separation from the
devotees.
TEXT 183
গদাধর-পণ্ডিত রহিল। প্রভুর नटनं ।
যমেশ্বরে প্রভু যারে করাইল। আবাসে ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
gadadhara-pandita rahila prabhura pase
yamesvare prabhu yanre karaila avase
SYNONYMS
gadadhara-pandita—Cadadhara Pandita; rahila—remained; prabhura pase—
along with 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yamesvare—at Yames$vara; prabhu—Sri


--- Page 101 ---
Text 186] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 97
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yarire —unto whom; karaila—made to take; avase —resi-
dence.
TRANSLATION
Gadadhara Pandita remained with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he was
given a place to live at Yamesvara.
PURPORT
Yamesvara is on the southwest side of the Jagannatha temple. Gadadhara Pan-
dita resided there, and there was a small garden and a sandy beach known as
Yamesvara-tota.
TEXTS 184-185
পুরী-গোসাঞ্জিঃ, জগদ।নন্দ, স্বরূপ-দামোদর |
দামোদর-পণ্ডিত, আর গোবিন্দ, কাশীশ্বর ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
এইসব-সঙ্গে প্রভু বৈসে নীলাচলে |
জগন্নাথ-দরশন নিত্য করে প্রাতঃকালে ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
puri-gosani, jagadananda, svarapa-damodara
damodara-pandita, ara govinda, kasisvara
ei-saba-sange prabhu vaise nilacale
jagannatha-darasana nitya kare pratah-kale
SYNONYMS
puri-gosani —Paramananda Puri; jagadananda —Jagadananda; svardapa-
damodara—Svarapa Damodara; damodara-pandita—Damodara Pandita; ara—
and; govinda—Govinda; kasisvara—Kasisvara; ei-saba—all these personalities;
sarge —accompanied by; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vaise —stays;
nilacale—at Jagannatha Puri; jagannatha-darasana—seeing Lord Jagannatha;
nitya—daily; kare—does; pratah-kale—in the morning.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained at Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala, with
Paramananda Puri, Jagadananda, Svaripa Damodara, Damodara Pandita,
Govinda and Kasisvara. It was Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s daily business to see
Lord Jagannatha in the morning.
TEXT 186
व्थङ्ू-नै)ग्न আসি” সার্বভৌম এক किम |
যোড়হাত করি” কিছু কৈল নিবেদন ॥ ১৮৬ ॥


--- Page 102 ---
98 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 15
prabhu-pasa asi’ sarvabhauma eka dina
yoda-hata kari’ kichu kaila nivedana
SYNONYMS
prabhu-pasa—in the presence of ৩11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asi’—coming; sar-
vabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; eka dina—one day; yoda-hata kari’—
with folded hands; kichu—some; kaila—did; nivedana—submission.
TRANSLATION
One day Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya came before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
with folded hands and submitted a request.
TEXT 187
এবে जव বৈষ্ণব গৌড়দেশে চলি” গেল |
এবে প্রভুর নিমপ্ত্রণে অবসর হৈল ॥ ১৮৭ ॥
ebe saba vaisnava gauda-dese cali’ gela
ebe prabhura nimantrane avasara haila
SYNONYMS
ebe—now; saba—all; vaispava—devotees; gauda-dese—to Bengal; cali’
gela—have returned; ebe—now; prabhura—of Lord Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
nimantrane —for invitations; avasara haila—there is a chance.
TRANSLATION
Since all the Vaisnavas had returned to Bengal, there was a good chance that
the Lord would accept an invitation.
TEXT 188
टव মোর ঘরে fowl করহ “মাস” ভরি”।
প্রভু কহে, धर्म নহে, করিতে না পারি ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
ebe mora ghare bhiksa karaha ‘masa’ bhari’
prabhu kahe,—— dharma nahe, karite na pari
SYNONYMS
ebe—now; mora ghare—at my place; bhiksa—lunch; karaha—accept; masa
bhari’—for one month; prabhu kahe—$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; dhar-
ma —religious principle; nahe—it is not; karite—to do; na pari—I am unable.


--- Page 103 ---
Text 190] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 99
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said, “Please accept my invitation for lunch for
one month.” The Lord replied, “That is not possible because it is against the
religious principles of a sannyasi.”
TEXT 189
সার্বভৌম কহে,- ভিক্ষা করহ বিশ দিন ।
প্রভু कट, ङ নহে যতিধর্ম-চিহ্ন ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
sarvabhauma kahe, ——bhiksa karaha visa dina
prabhu kahe,——eha nahe yati-dharma-cihna
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma kahe —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said; bhiksa karaha—accept
lunch; visa dina—for twenty days; prabhu kahe —Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
said; eha nahe —this is not; yati-dharma-cihna—the symptom of a person in the
renounced order of life.
TRANSLATION
र Sarvabhauma then said, “Please accept the invitation for twenty 03%5,/ but
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, “1019 not a religious principle of the
renounced order.”
TEXT 190
সার্বভৌম কহে পুনঃ,-_ দিন “পঞ্চদশ” |
প্রভু कटक, তোমার ভিক্ষা “এক” দিবস ॥ ১৯০ ॥
sarvabhauma kahe punah,——dina ‘panca-dasa’
prabhu kahe, —tomara bhiksa ‘eka’ divasa
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma kahe —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said; punah—again; dina
pafica-dasa—fifteen days; prabhu kahe —the Lord replied; tomara bhiksa—lunch
at your place; eka. divasa—only one day.
TRANSLATION
When Sarvabhauma requested Caitanya Mahaprabhu to accept lunch for
fifteen days, the Lord said, “I shall accept lunch at your place for one day
only.”


--- Page 104 ---
100 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 191
তবে সার্বভৌম প্রভুর চরণে ধরিয়া |
“দশদিন ভিক্ষা কর” কহে বিনতি कविश्च ॥ ১৯১ ॥
tabe sarvabhauma prabhura carane dhariya
‘dasa-dina bhiksa kara’ kahe vinati kariya
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prabhura—of Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carane dhariyd—catching the lotus feet; dasa-dina—
for ten days; bhiksa kara—accept lunch; kahe—says; vinati kariya—with great
submission.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya then caught hold of the Lord’s lotus feet and sub-
missively begged, “Please accept lunch for at least ten days.”
TEXT 192
প্রভু ক্রমে कनटम পঁ।চ-দিন ঘাটাইল ।
পাচ-দিন ভার ভিক্ষা নিয়ম করিল ॥ ১৯২ ॥
prabhu krame krame panca-dina ghataila
panca-dina tanra bhiksa niyama karila
SYNONYMS
prabhu—$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krame krame—gradually; panca-dina—to
five days; ghataila—reduced; parnca-dina—for five days; tanra—his; bhiksa—in-
vitation for lunch; niyama karila—accepted regularly.
TRANSLATION
In this way, by and by, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu reduced the duration to
five days. Thus for five days He regularly accepted the invitation to lunch.
TEXT 193
তবে সার্বভৌম করে আর নিবেদন |
তোমার সঙ্গে সন্ন্যাসী আছে দশজন ॥ ১৯৩ ॥
tabe sarvabhauma kare ara nivedana
tomara sange sannyasi ache dasa-jana


--- Page 105 ---
Text 195] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 101
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kare —does; dra—
another; nivedana—submission; tomdara sange—with You; sannyasi—in the
renounced order of life; ache—there are; dasa-jana—ten persons.
TRANSLATION
After this, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said, ‘My Lord, there are ten sannyasis
with You.”
PURPORT
A sannyasi should not cook food for himself or accept an invitation to eat at a
devotee’s house continuously for many days. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very
kind and affectionate toward His devotees, yet He would not accept a long invita-
tion at Sarvabhauma’s house. Out of affection, He accepted only five days in the
month. The ten sannyasis living with the Lord were (1) Paramananda Puri, (2)
Svarapa Damodara, (3) Brahmananda Puri, (4) Brahmananda Bharati, (5) Visnu Puri,
(6) Kesava Puri, (7) Krsnananda Puri, (8) Nrsirmha Tirtha, (9) Sukhananda Puri and
(10) Satyananda Bharati.
TEXT 194
পুবী-গোসাঞ্জির few পাঁচদিন মোর ঘরে।
পূর্বে আমি কহিয়াছেঁ৷ তোমার গোচরে ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
puri-gosanira bhiksa panca-dina mora ghare
parve ami kahiyachon tomara gocare
SYNONYMS
puri-gosanira—of Paramananda Puri; bhiksa—invitation for lunch; panca-
dina—five days; mora ghare—at my home; parve—previously; ami—I;
kahiyachorn—mentioned; tomara gocare—it is known to you.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya then submitted that Paramananda Puri Gosvami
should accept a five-day invitation at his place. This was settled before the
Lord.
TEXT 195
দামোদর-স্বরূপ, এই বান্ধব আমার |
FP CONF সঙ্গে যাবে, TF একেশ্বর ॥ ১৯৫ ॥


--- Page 106 ---
102 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [{Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
damcdara-svarapa,—ei bandhava amara
kabhu tomara sange yabe, kabhu ekesvara
SYNONYMS
damodara-svarapa—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami; ei—this; bandhava amara—
my very intimate friend; kabhu—sometimes; tomara sange—with You; yabe—
will come; kabhu—sometimes; ekesvara—alone.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said, ‘‘Damodara Svarapa is my intimate friend.
He will come sometimes with You and sometimes alone.
TEXT 196
আর oR সল্ল্যাসীর खिष्छ দুই দুই দিবসে |
এক একদিন, এক এক জনে পূর্ণ হইল মাসে ॥১৯৬॥
ara asta sannyasira bhiksa dui dui divase
eka eka-dina, eka eka jane parna ha-ila mase
SYNONYMS
ara—other; asta—eight; sannyasira—of sannyasis; bhiksa—invitation for
lunch; dui dui divase—two days each; eka eka-dina—on each day; eka eka
jane —one person; parna—filled; ha-ila—will be; mase—the month.
TRANSLATION
‘The other eight sannyasis will accept invitations for two days each. In this
way there will be engagements for each and every day during the entire
month.
PURPORT
For the entire month consisting of thirty days, जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu would
visit five days, Paramananda 2011 Gosvami five days, Svarapa Damodara four days,
and the eight other sannyasis two days each. In this way the thirty days of the
month were completed.
TEXT 197
Ags ARI যদি আইসে এক ঠাণি |
সম্মান করিতে নারি, অপরাধ পাই ॥ ১৯৭ ॥


--- Page 107 ---
Text 199] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 103
bahuta sannyasi yadi aise eka thani
sammana karite nari, aparadha pai
SYNONYMS
bahuta sannyasi—many sannyasis; yadi—if; aise—come; eka thani—together;
sammana karite nari—| cannot receive them properly; aparadha pai—I shall be an
offender.
TRANSLATION
“If all the sannyasis come together, it would not be possible for me to pay
them proper respects. Therefore | would be an offender.
TEXT 198
তুমিহ নিজ-ছায়ে আসিবে মোর ঘর ।
কভু সঙ্গে আসিবেন স্বক্ূপ-দামোদর ॥ ১৯৮ ॥
tumiha nija-chaye asibe mora ghara
kabhu sange asibena svarapa-damodara
SYNONYMS
tumiha—You; nija-chaye —alone; asibe —will come; mora ghara—to my place;
kabhu—sometimes; sarige —with You; asibena—will come; svarapa-damodara—
Svartipa Damodara Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Sometimes You will come alone to my place, and sometimes You will be
accompanied by Svaripa Damodara.”
TEXT 199
প্রভুর ইজিত शन} 4] আনন্দিত मन |
সেই निन মহাপ্রভুর কৈল নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১৯৯ ॥
prabhura ingita pana anandita mana
sei dina mahaprabhura kaila nimantrana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of जाग Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ingita—acceptance; pafa—receiving;
anandita—very happy; mana—mind; sei dina—on that day; mahaprabhura—of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—made; nimantrana—invitation.


--- Page 108 ---
104 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Having this arrangement confirmed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Bhat-
tacarya became very glad and immediately invited the Lord to his house on
that very day.
TEXT 200
wa মাতা” নাম, ভট্টাচার্যের গৃহিণী |
প্রভুর মহ।ভক্ত (SCF, স্মেহেতে জননী ॥ ২০০ ॥
‘sathira mata’ nama, bhattacaryera grhini
prabhura maha-bhakta tenho, snehete janani
SYNONYMS
sathira mata—the mother of Sathi; ndma—named; bhattacaryera grhini—the
wife of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; maha-
bhakta—a great devotee; tenho —she; snehete—in affection; janani—just like a
mother.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’s wife was known as the mother of Sathi. She was
a great devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and she was affectionate like a
mother.
TEXT 201
ঘরে আসি” ভট্টাচার্য ভারে আজ্ঞা দিল ।
আনন্দে বাঠীর মাতা পাক চড়াইল ॥ ২০১ ॥
ghare asi’ bhattacarya tanre ajna dila
anande sathira mata paka cadaila
SYNONYMS
ghare asi’—coming home; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; tanre—
her; jaa dila—ordered; anande—with great satisfaction; sathira mata—the
mother of Sathi; paka cadaila—began cooking.
TRANSLATION
After returning to his home, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya gave orders to his
wife, and his wife, known as Sathira Mita, the mother of Sathi, began cooking
with great pleasure.


--- Page 109 ---
Text 204] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 105
TEXT 202
ভট্টাচার্যের গৃহে সব দ্রেব্য আছে SH |
যেবা শাকফলাদিক, আনাইল AEA ॥ ২০২ ॥
bhattacaryera grhe saba dravya ache bhari’
yeba saka-phaladika, anaila ahari’
SYNONYMS
bhattacaryera grhe —at the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; saba dravya—
all kinds of ingredients; ache —there are; bhari’—filling; yeba—whatever; saka—
spinach; phala-adika—fruits and so on; anaila—he brought; ahari’—collecting.
TRANSLATION
At Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’s house, there was always a full stock of food.
Whatever spinach, vegetables, fruit and so on were required, he collected and
brought back home.
TEXT 203
আপনি ভট্টাচার্য করে পাকের जव कर्म |
ষাঠীর মাত - বিচক্ষণ জানে পাক-মর্ম ॥ ২০৩ ॥
apani bhattacarya kare pakera 53039 karma
sathira mata—-vicaksana, jane paka-marma
SYNONYMS
apani—personally; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kare —arranges;
pakera—of cooking; saba karma—all activities; sathira mata—the mother of
Sathi; vicaksana—very experienced; jane—knows; paka-marma—how to cook.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya personally began to help his wife cook. His wife,
the mother of Sathi, was very experienced, and she knew how to cook nicely.
TEXT 204
পাকশালার দক্ষিণে- দুই ভোগালয় |
এক-ঘরে শালগ্রামের ভোগ-সেবা হুয় ॥ ২০৪ ॥
paka-salara daksine——dui bhogalaya
eka-ghare salagramera bhoga-seva haya


--- Page 110 ---
106 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
paka-salara daksine —on the southern side of the kitchen; dui bhoga-alaya—
two rooms for offering food; eka-ghare—in one room; salagramera—of Lord
Salagrama; bhoga-seva—offering of food; haya—there is.
TRANSLATION
On the southern side of the kitchen were two rooms for offering food, and
in one of them the food was offered to Salagrama Narayana.
PURPORT
Among the followers of the Vedic way, salagrama-sila, the vigraha of Narayana,
is worshiped in the form of a stone ball. In India, every brahmana still worships the
salagrama-sila in his home. The vaisyas and ksatriyas may also engage in this wor-
ship, but it is compulsory in the house of a brahmana.
TEXT 205
আর খর মহাপ্রভুর Fora লাগিয়া ।
forges করিয়াছে ভট্ট নুতন করিয়। ॥ ২০৫ ॥
ara ghara mahaprabhura bhiksara lagiya
nibhrte kariyache bhatta natana kariya
SYNONYMS
ara ghara—the other room; mahaprabhura—of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhik-
sara lagiya—for taking lunch; nibhrte kariyache —constructed in a solitary place;
bhatta—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; natana kariya—newly done.
TRANSLATION
The other room was for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s lunch. The Lord's lunch
room was very secluded, and it was newly constructed by Bhattacarya.
TEXT 206
ICR এক দ্বার তার, প্রভু প্রবেশিতে |
পাকশালার এক দ্বার অন্ন পরিবেশিতে ॥ ২০৬ ॥
bahye eka dvara tara, prabhu pravesite
paka-salara eka dvara anna parivesite


--- Page 111 ---
Text 208] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 107
SYNONYMS
bahye—outside; eka dvara—one door; tara—of this room; prabhu pravesite —
for the entrance of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; paka-salara—of the kitchen;
eka dvara—another door; anna—food; parivesite —to serve.
TRANSLATION
The room was so constructed that there was only one door as an entrance
from the outside for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There was another door at-
tached to the kitchen, and it was through this door that the food was brought.
TEXT 207
বত্তিশা-আঠিয়। কলার আঙজটিয়। পাতে |
তিন-মান So 7a উভারিল ভাতে ॥ ২০৭ ॥
battisa-athiya kalara angatiya pate
tina-mana tandulera ubharila bhate
SYNONYMS
battisa-athiya—named battisa-athiya; kalara—of the banana tree; angatiya—
without being divided; pate—on a leaf; tina—three; mana—manas (a certain
weight); tandulera—of rice; ubharila—poured; bhate —cooked rice.
TRANSLATION
First, three manas of cooked rice—almost six pounds —was poured on a big
banana leaf.
PURPORT
This is the beginning of a description of the food prepared for Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. This description is given by Kaviraja Gosvami, who, it is assumed,
was an expert cook who knew both how to prepare and how to serve food.
TEXT 208
সীত-স্ুগন্ধি-স্বতে खन्न সিক্ত देकल ।
চারিদিকে পাতে gs বহিয়। চলিল ॥ ২০৮ 0
pita-sugandhi-ghrte anna sikta kaila
cari-dike pate ghrta vahiya calila


--- Page 112 ---
108 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
pita—yellowish; su-gandhi—fragrant; ghrte—with clarified butter; anna —rice;
sikta—mixed; kaila—made; cari-dike—on all sides; pate —the leaf; ghrta—the
clarified butter; vahiya calila—began to flood.
TRANSLATION
Then, the whole stack of rice was mixed with so much yellowish and
fragrant clarified butter that it began to overflow the leaf.
TEXT 209
কেয়াপত্র-কলাখোলা-ডোজ। সারি সারি ।
চারিদিকে ধরিয়াছে নানা वएअन ভরি” ॥ ২০৯ ॥
keyapatra-kalakhola-donga sari sari
cari-dike dhariyache nana vyanjana bhari’
SYNONYMS
keya-patra—the leaf of the keya plant; kala-khola—the skin of the banana
tree; donga—pots; sari sari—one after another; cari-dike—on all sides;
dhariyache—were holding; nana—various; vyafjana—cooked vegetables;
bhari’—filled.
TRANSLATION
There were a number of pots made of the bark of banana trees and the
leaves of the keya plant. These pots were filled with various cooked vege-
tables and placed on all sides of the leaf.
TEXT 210
THT नाक» নিন্ছব-তিক্ত-স্ুখ.ত-ঝোল।
মরিচের ঝাল, ছানাবড়া, বড়ি খোল ॥ ২১০ ॥
dasa-prakara saka, nimba-tikta-sukhta-jhola
maricera jhala, chana-bada, badi ghola
SYNONYMS
dasa-prakara saka—spinach of ten varieties; nimba-tikta-sukhta-jhola—a soup
called sukhta, made with bitter nimba leaf; maricera jhala—a pungent preparation
made with black pepper; chana-bada—a mild cake made of fried curd; badi
ghola—buttermilk with small pieces of fried dahl.


--- Page 113 ---
Text 212] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 109
TRANSLATION
There were about ten kinds of spinach, a soup called sukhta, which was
made with bitter nimba leaves, a pungent preparation made with black pep-
per, a mild cake made of fried curd, and buttermilk mixed with small fried
pieces of dahl.
TEXT 211
ZEYH, THF, বেসর, नास 7 |
মোচাঘণ্ট, মোচাভাজ।1, বিবিধ শাক্র। ॥ ২১১ ॥
dugdha-tumbi, dugdha-kusmanda, vesara, laphra
moca-ghanta, moca-bhaja, vividha sakra
SYNONYMS
dugdha-tumbi—squash cooked with milk; dugdha-kusmanda—pumpkin
cooked with milk; vesara—a preparation made from chick-pea flour; laphra—a
combination of several vegetables; moca-ghanta—boiled banana flowers; moca-
bhaja—fried banana flowers; vividha—various; sakra—vegetables.
TRANSLATION
There were preparations of dugdha-tumbi, dugdha-kusmanda, vesara,
laphra, moca-ghanta, moca-bhaja and other vegetables.
TEXT 212
বৃদ্ধকুস্মাগুবড়ীর व} अन অপার |
ফুলবড়ী-ফল-মুল বিবিধ প্রকার ॥ ২১২ ॥
vrddha-kusmanda-badira vyanjana apara
phulabadi-phala-mala vividha prakara
SYNONYMS
vrddha-kusmanda-badira—of small pieces of fried dahl mixed with ripe
pumpkin; vyanjana—vegetables; apara—unlimited; phula-badi—small fried
pieces of another kind of dahl; phala—fruits; mdala—roots; vividha prakara—of
different varieties.
TRANSLATION
There were unlimited quantities of vrddha-kusmanda-badi, phula-badi,
fruits and various roots.


--- Page 114 ---
110 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [{Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 213
নব-নিষ্বপত্র-সহ ভূষ্ট-বার্তাকী |
ফুলবড়ী, পটোল-ভাজ], কুণ্মাগু-মান-চাকী ॥ ২১৩ ॥
nava-nimbapatra-saha bhrsta-vartaki
phula-badi, patola-bhaja, kusmanda-mana-caki
SYNONYMS
nava—newly grown; nimba-patra—nimba leaves; saha—along with; bhrsta-
vartaki—fried eggplant; phula-badi—light badi; patola-bhaja—fried patola
vegetable; kusmanda—of pumpkin; mana—of squash; caki—rounds.
TRANSLATION
Other preparations included eggplant mixed with newly grown nimba
leaves fried together, light badi, fried patola, and fried rounds of squash and
pumpkin.
TEXT 214
ভূষ্ট-মাষ-মুদগ-সূপ অমৃত निन्य |
মধুরান্ন, বড়ান্নাদি =m नए ছয় ॥ ২১৪ ॥
bhrsta-masa-mudga-sapa amrta nindaya
madhuramla, badamladi amla panca chaya
SYNONYMS
bhrsta—fried; masa—urd dahl; mudga—mung dahl; sapa—soup; amrta—nec-
tar; nindaya—defeating; madhura-amla—sweet chutney; bada-amla—sour
preparation made with fried dahl; adi—and so on; amla—sour; panca chaya—
five or six kinds.
TRANSLATION
There was a soup made with fried urad dahl and mung dahl, defeating nec-
tar. There were also sweet chutney and five or six kinds of sour preparations,
beginning with badamla.
TEXT 215
মুদগবড়া, मांस वण], কলাবড়। মিষ্ট ।
ক্ষীরপুলি, নারিকেল-পুলী আর যত FR ॥ ২১৫ ॥


--- Page 115 ---
Text 217] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 111
mudga-bada, masa-bada, kala-bada mista
ksira-puli, narikela-puli ara yata pista
SYNONYMS
mudga-bada—fried cakes made of mung dahl; masa-bada—fried cakes made
of urd dahl; kala-bada—fried cakes made of banana; mista—very sweet; ksira-
puli—cakes made with sweet rice; narikela-puli—coconut cake; ara—and;
yata—varieties of; pista—cakes.
TRANSLATION
There were bharats made of mung dahl, of urd dahl and of sweet bananas,
and there was sweet rice cake, coconut cake and various other cakes.
TEXT 216
কূাজিবড়, দুঞ্চ-চিড়।, দুগ্ধ-লক্লকী |
আর যত পিঠা বকৈল, কহিতে না শকি ॥ ২১৬ ॥
kanji-bada, dugdha-cida, dugdha-laklaki
ara yata pitha kaila, kahite na saki
SYNONYMS
kanji-bada—cakes made with sour rice-water; dugdha-cida—sweet rice mixed
with milk; dugdha-laklaki—another preparation of milk and cakes to be licked up;
ara—and; yata—various types of; pitha—cakes; kaila—made; kahite—to de-
scribe; na saki—I am not able.
TRANSLATION
There was kanji-bada, dugdha-cida, dugdha-laklaki and various cakes,
which | am unable to describe.
TEXT 217
श्ङ-जि পরমাল্ন, মৃৎকুণ্ডিক। तिः ।
টাপ।/কলা-খঘনতুষ্ক-আজ্ম তাহা ধরি ॥ ২১৭ ॥
ghrta-sikta paramanna, mrt-kundika bhari’
canpakala-ghanadugdha-amra taha dhari
SYNONYMS
ghrta-sikta parama-anna—sweet rice mixed with ghee; mrt-kundika bhari’—
filling an earthen pot; canpa-kala—a kind of banana; ghana-dugdha—condensed
milk; amra—mango pulp; taha—that; dhari—including.


--- Page 116 ---
112 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Sweet rice mixed with ghee was poured into an earthen pot and mixed with
canpa-kala, condensed milk and mango.
TEXT 218
রসালা-মখিত णचि, সম্দেশ অপার |
গোঁড়ে উৎকলে যত ভুক্ষেযের প্রকার ॥ ২১৮ ॥
rasala-mathita 0301, sandesa apara
gaude utkale yata bhaksyera prakara
SYNONYMS
rasala—delicious; mathita—churned; dadhi—curd; sandesa—a sweetmeat;
apara—unlimited; gaude —in Bengal; utkale—in Orissa; yata—all; bhaksyera—of
eatables; prakara—kinds.
TRANSLATION
Other preparations included a very delicious churned curd and a variety of
sandesa sweetmeats. Indeed, all the various eatables available in Bengal and
Orissa were prepared.
TEXT 219
শ্রদ্ধা করি” ভট্টাচার্য जव করাইল ।
শুভ্র-পীঠোপরি Fem বসন পাতিল ॥ ২১৯ ॥
sraddha kari’ bhattacarya saba karaila
Subhra-pithopari saksma vasana patila
SYNONYMS
Sraddha kari’—with great respect; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
saba karaila—had them all prepared; subhra—white; pitha—a wooden platform;
upari—over; saksma—fine; vasana—cloth; patila—spread.
TRANSLATION
Thus Bhattacarya prepared a great variety of food and spread a fine cloth
over a white wooden platform.
TEXT 220
28 পাশে স্থ্গন্ধি লীতল জল-ঝারী |
অন্প-ব্যগুনোপরি দিল তুলসী-মঞ্জরী ॥ ২২০ ॥


--- Page 117 ---
Text 222]  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 113
dui pase sugandhi sitala jala-jhari
anna-vyanjanopari dila tulasi-manjari
SYNONYMS
dui pase—on two sides; su-gandhi—nicely scented; sitala—cold; jala-jhari—
pitchers of water; anna-vyaijana-upari—over the rice and vegetables; dila—
placed; tulasi-manjari—flowers of tulasi.
TRANSLATION
On two sides of the stack of food were pitchers filled with scented cold
water. The flowers of the tulasi tree were placed above the mound of rice.
TEXT 221
অম্বৃত-গুটিকা, পিঠা-পানা আমনাইল |
জগল্লাথ-প্রসাদ সব PAF ধরিল ॥ ২২১ ॥
amrta-gutika, pitha-pana anaila
jagannatha-prasada saba prthak dharila
SYNONYMS
amrta-gutika—the sweet named amrta-gutika; pitha-pana—cakes and sweet
rice; anaila—brought; jagannatha-prasada—remnants of the food of Lord Jagan-
natha; saba—all; prthak dharila—kept separately.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya also included several types of food that had been
offered to Lord Jagannatha. This included sweetballs known as amrta-gutika,
sweet rice and cakes. All these were kept separately.
PURPORT
Although the remnants of food left by jagannatha were brought into Bhat-
tacarya’s house, they were kept separate from the preparations he had made at
his home. It sometimes happens that prasada is mixed with a larger quantity of
food and then distributed, but in this case we find that Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
kept the jagannatha-prasada separate. He kept it aside particularly for the satisfac-
tion of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 222
হেনকালে মহাপ্রভু মধ্যাহ্ন করিয়া ৷
একলে আইল छात्र হৃদয় जांनिग्र। ॥ २२२ ॥


--- Page 118 ---
114 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
hena-kale mahaprabhu madhyahna kariya
ekale aila tanra hrdaya janiya
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; madhyahna
kariya—finishing His midday duties; ekale—alone; aila—came; tanra—of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; hrdaya—the heart; janiya—knowing.
TRANSLATION
When everything was ready, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came there alone
after finishing His midday duties. He knew the heart of Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya.
TEXT 223
ভট্টাচার্য কৈল তবে পাছ প্রক্ষালন |
ঘরের ভিতরে গেলা করিতে ভোজন ॥ ২২৩ ॥
bhattacarya kaila tabe pada praksalana
gharera bhitare gela karite bhojana
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kaila—performed; tabe—thereafter;
pada praksalana—washing the feet; gharera bhitare —within the room; gelda—en-
tered; karite bhojana—to take lunch.
TRANSLATION
After Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya washed the Lord’s feet, the Lord entered the
room to take His lunch.
TEXT 224
खन्ना किं দেখিয়া প্রভু বিস্মিত «st ।
ভট্টাচার্যে কহে কিছু ভঙ্গি कल्चिश्च। ॥ ২২৪ ॥
annadi dekhiya prabhu vismita hana
bhattacarye kahe kichu bharigi kariya
SYNONYMS
anna-adi dekhiya—seeing the arrangement of food; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; vismita hafia—being astonished; bhattacarye kahe—said to Bhat-
tacarya; kichu—some; bhangi—gesture; kariya—making.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 227] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 115
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was a little astonished to see the gorgeous ar-
rangement, and, gesturing, He spoke to Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TEXT 225
অলোকিক এই जव QFN |
দুই প্রহর ভিতরে বকৈছে হুইল त्क्तन ? ২২৫ ॥
alaukika ei 5303 anna-vyanjana
dui prahara bhitare kaiche ha-ila randhana?
SYNONYMS
alaukika—uncommon; ei—this; saba—all; anna-vyanjana—rice and vege-
tables; dui prahara bhitare —within six hours; kaiche—how; ha-ila randhana—
cooking was finished.
TRANSLATION
‘This is most uncommon! How was this arrangement of rice and vegetables
finished within six hours?
TEXT 226
শত চুলায় শত জন পাক যদি FCT ।
তবু শীঘ্র এত खव রাঙ্ধিতে न। পারে ॥ २२७ ॥
sata culaya sata jana paka yadi kare
tabu sighra eta dravya randhite na pare
SYNONYMS
sata culaya—in one hundred ovens; sata jana—one hundred men; paka yadi
kare —if engaged in cooking; tabu—still; sighra—so soon; eta dravya—so many
preparations; randhite na pare—could not cook.
TRANSLATION
‘Even a hundred men cooking on a hundred ovens could not possibly finish
all these preparations within so short a time.
TEXT 227
কৃষ্ণের ভোগ লাগাঞাছ,- অনুমান कति ।
উপরে দেখিয়ে যাতে তুলসী-মঞ্জরী ॥ २२१ ॥


--- Page 120 ---
116 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
krsnera bhoga laganacha, —anumana kari
upare dekhiye yate tulasi-manjari
SYNONYMS
krsnera bhoga laganacha—you have offered to Krsna; anumana kari—| hope;
upare—upon the food; dekhiye—I see; yate—since; tulasi-manjari—flowers of
the tulasi tree.
TRANSLATION
‘1 hope the food has already been offered to Krsna, since | see there are
tulasi flowers over the plates.
TEXT 228
ভাগ্যবান্‌ তুমি, সফল তোমার উদ্দেযাগ |
রাধাকৃষ্ণে লাগাঞ।ছ এতাছৃশ ভোগ ॥ ২২৮ ॥
bhagyavan tumi, saphala tomara udyoga
radha-krsne laganacha etadrsa bhoga
SYNONYMS
bhagyavan tumi—you are fortunate; sa-phala—successful; tomara—your;
udyoga—endeavor; radha-krsne—unto Their Lordships Radha and Krsna;
laganacha—you offered; etadrsa—such; bhoga—food.
TRANSLATION
“You are most fortunate, and your endeavor is successful, for you have
offered such wonderful food to Radha-Krsna.
TEXT 229
অন্লের সৌরভ্য, বর্ণ_ অতি মনোরম |
রাধাকৃষ্ণ সাক্ষাৎ 231 করিয়াছেন ভোজন ॥ ২২৯ ॥
annera saurabhya, varna——ati manorama
radha-krsna saksat ihan kariyachena bhojana
SYNONYMS
annera saurabhya—the flavor of the cooked rice; varpa—color; ati
manorama—very attractive; radha-krsna—Lord Krsna and Radharant; saksat—
directly; ihan—all this; kariyachena bhojana—have eaten.


--- Page 121 ---
Text 232] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 117
TRANSLATION
“The color of the rice is so attractive and its aroma so good that it appears
Radha and Krsna have directly taken it.
TEXT 230
তোমার ITS ভাগ্য কত वयन<जिव्‌ |
আমি -ভাগ্যবান্‌, ইহার অবশেষ পাব ॥ ২৩০ ॥
tomara bahuta bhagya kata prasamsiba
ami——bhagyavan, ihara avasesa paba
SYNONYMS
tomara—your; bahuta—great; bhagya—fortune; kata—how much; prasam-
siba—shall I praise; ami—I; bhagyavan—fortunate; ihara—of this; avasesa—rem-
nants; paba—shall get.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Bhattacarya, your fortune is very great. How much shall I praise
you? | also am very fortunate to be able to take the remnants of this food.
TEXT 231
ক্বষ্ণের আসন-পীঠ রাখহ উঠাঞ। |
মোরে প্রসাদ দেহ” ভিন্ন পাত্রেতে করিয়| ॥ ২৩১ ॥
krsnera asana-pitha rakhaha uthana
more prasada deha’ bhinna patrete kariya
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Lord Krsna; asana-pitha—the sitting place; rakhaha—keep aside;
uthana—raising; more—unto Me; prasada—prasada; deha’—give; bhinna—
separate; patrete—on a plate; kariya—putting.
TRANSLATION
“Take away Krsna’s sitting place and put it aside. Then give me prasada on
a different plate.”
TEXT 232
ভট্টাচার্য বলে, 2g न। করহ বিস্ময় ।
যেই খাবে, তাহার শক্তেয ভোগ সিদ্ধ হয় ॥ ২৩২ ॥


--- Page 122 ---
118 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
bhattacarya bale, —prabhu na karaha vismaya
yei khabe, tanhara saktye bhoga siddha haya
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya bale —Bhattacarya said; prabhu—my Lord; na karaha vismaya—do
not become astonished; yei khabe—whoever shall eat; tanhara saktye —by His
grace; bhoga—the food; siddha haya—has been prepared.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said, “It is not so wonderful, my Lord. Everything
has been made possible by the energy and mercy of He who will eat the food.
TEXT 233
উদ্যোগ न ছিল মোর গৃহিণীর ames |
যার गेट (खाने সিদ্ধ, সেই তাহা জানে ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
udyoga na chila mora grhinira randhane
yanra saktye bhoga siddha, sei taha jane
SYNONYMS
udyoga—exertion; na chila—there was not; mora—of me; grhinira—of my
wife; randhane —in cooking; yarnra saktye—by whose potency; bhoga siddha—
the food has been prepared; sei—He; taha jane —knows that.
TRANSLATION
“My wife and 1 did not especially exert ourselves in the cooking. He by
whose power the food has been prepared knows everything.
TEXT 234
এইত আসনে वजि' করহ ভোজন |
প্রভু কহে» _ ATI এই কৃষ্ণের আসন ॥ ২৩৪ ॥
eita asane vasi’ karaha bhojana
prabhu kahe,—pajya ei krsnera asana
SYNONYMS
eita asane —on this sitting place; vasi’—sitting; karaha bhojana—take Your
lunch; prabhu kahe—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; pdjya—worshipable; ei—
this; krspera asana—sitting place of Krsna.


--- Page 123 ---
Text 236] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers [35303 to the Lord 119
TRANSLATION
‘Now please sit in this place and take Your lunch.” Caitanya Mahaprabhu
replied, “This place is worshipable because it was used by Krsna.”
PURPORT
According to etiquette, things used by Krsna should not be used by anyone
else. Similarly, things used by the spiritual master should also not be used by any-
one else. That is etiquette. Whatever is used by Krsna or the spiritual master is
worshipable. In particular, their sitting or eating places should not be used by any-
one else. A devotee must be very careful to observe this.
TEXT 235
ভট্ট কহে, -खन्न, नो, — সমান প্রসাদ |
खन्न খাবে, পীঠে বসিতে কাহইঁ। অপরাধ ? ২৩৫ ॥
bhatta kahe, —anna, pitha, — samana prasada
anna khabe, pithe vasite kahan aparadha?
SYNONYMS
bhatta kahe —Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said; anna—food; pitha—sitting place;
samana—equal; prasada—mercy remnants of the Lord; anna khabe —You will eat
the food; pithe vasite —to sit on the place; kahan aparadha—where is the offense.
TRANSLATION
Bhattacarya said, ‘Both the food and the sitting place are the Lord’s mercy.
If You can eat the remnants of the food, what is the offense in Your sitting in
this place?”
TEXT 236
প্রভু কহে,-_ ভাল বৈলে, नो ख-खाच्) হয় |
কৃষ্ণের সকল শেষ ভূত আস্বাদয় ॥ ২৩৬ ॥
prabhu kahe, —bhala kaile, $35073-3/03 haya
krsnera sakala sesa bhrtya asvadaya
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; bhala kaile—you have
spoken correctly; sastra-ajia haya—there is such an order in the revealed scrip-
ture; krsnera sakala Sesa—everything left by Krsna; bhrtya—the servant;
asvadaya—partakes of.


--- Page 124 ---
120 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION

Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, “Yes, you have spoken correctly. The
5351725 enjoin that the devotee can partake of everything left by Krsna.

TEXT 237
ত্বয়োপযুক্তস্রগ.গন্ধবাসেইলকঙ্কারচচিতাঃ ।
चेष्टा. জনে: IAS মায়াং জয়েম হি ॥ ২৩৭ ॥

tvayopayukta-srag-gandha-
vaso ‘lankara-carcitah
ucchista-bhojino dasas
tava mayarn jayema hi
SYNONYMS

tvaya—by You; upayukta—used; srak—flower garlands; gandha—scented
substances like sandalwood pulp; vasah—garments; alankara—ornaments; car-
citah—being decorated with; ucchista—remnants of food; bhojinah—eating;
dasah —servants; tava—Your; mayam—illusory energy; jayema—can conquer
over; hi—certainly.

TRANSLATION

^“ ‘My dear Lord, the garlands, scented substances, garments, ornaments
and other such things that have been offered to You may later be used by Your
servants. By partaking of these things and eating the remnants of food You
have left, we will be able to conquer the illusory energy.’ ^“

PURPORT

This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.6.46). In the Hare Krsna move-
ment, the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, the dancing in ecstasy and the
eating of the remnants of food offered to the Lord are very, very important. One
may be illiterate or incapable of understanding the philosophy, but if he partakes
of these three items, he will certainly be liberated without delay.

This verse was spoken by Uddhava to Lord Krsna. This was during the time
when the Uddhava-gita was spoken. At that time there was some disturbance in
Dvaraka, and Lord Krsna had to leave the material world and enter the spiritual
world. Uddhava could understand the situation, and he talked with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The verse quoted above is an excerpt from their conver-
sations. Sri Krsna's pastimes in this material world are called prakata-lila


--- Page 125 ---
Text 238] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 121
(manifested pastimes), and His pastimes in the spiritual world are called aprakata-
lila (unmanifested pastimes). By unmanifested we mean that they are not present
before our eyes. It is not that Lord Krsna’s pastimes are unmanifest. They are going
on exactly as the sun is going on perpetually, but when the sun is present before
our eyes, we call it daytime (manifest), and when it is not present, we call it night
(unmanifest). Those who are above the jurisdiction of night are always in the
spiritual world, where the Lord's pastimes are constantly manifest to them. As the
Brahma-sarnhita confirms:
ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
tabhir ya eva nija-rapataya kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhato
govindam adi-purusar tam aharh bhajami
premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yar Syamasundaram acintya-guna-svaraparin
govindam adi-purusarn tam aham bhajami
“1 worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who resides in His own realm, Goloka,
with Radha, who resembles His own spiritual figure and who embodies the
ecstatic potency [hladinil. Their companions are Her confidantes, who embody
extensions of Her bodily form and who are imbued and permeated with ever-
blissful spiritual rasa. | worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is Syamasundara,
Krsna Himself with inconceivable innumerable attributes, whom the pure devo-
tees see in their heart of hearts with the eye of devotion tinged with the salve of
love.” (Bs. 5.37-38)
TEXT 238
তথাপি এতেক खन्न খাওন না যায়।
ভট্ট কহে, ऊनि, খাও যতেক যুয্নায় ॥ ২৩৮ ॥
tathapi eteka anna khaona na yaya
bhatta kahe,—jani, khao yateka yuyaya
SYNONYMS
tathapi—still; eteka—so much; anna—food; khaona—eating; na yaya—is not
possible; bhatta kahe—Bhattacarya said; jani—| know; khdao—You can eat;
yateka—how much; yuyaya—is possible.


--- Page 126 ---
122 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, “There is so much food here that it is
impossible to eat.”” Bhattacarya replied, “८1 know how much You can eat.
TEXT 239
নীলাচলে ভোজন তুমি কর বায়ান্ন বার ।
এক এক ভোগের खन्न मंड শত ভার ॥ ২৩৯ ॥
nilacale bhojana tumi kara bayanna bara
eka eka bhogera anna sata sata bhara
SYNONYMS
nilacale —at Jagannatha Puri; bhojana—accepting lunch; tumi—You; kara—do;
bayanna bara—fifty-two times; eka eka bhogera—of each and every offering;
anna—eatables; sata sata bhara—hundreds of buckets.
TRANSLATION
‘After all, at Jagannatha Puri You eat fifty-two times a day, and each time
You eat hundreds of buckets filled with prasada.
TEXT 240
দ্বারকাতে যোল-সহুজ্জ্র মহিবী-মন্দিরে |
অষ্টাদশ মাতা, আর AFCA ঘরে ॥ ২৪০ ॥
dvdarakate sola-sahasra mahisi-mandire
astadasa mata, ara yadavera ghare
SYNONYMS
dvarakate —at Dvaraka-dhama; sola-sahasra—sixteen thousand; mahisi—
queens; mandire —palaces; astadasa mata —eighteen mothers; ara—and;
yadavera ghare —in the house of the Yadu dynasty.
TRANSLATION
‘At Dvaraka, You keep sixteen thousand queens in sixteen thousand
palaces. Also, there are eighteen mothers and numerous friends and relatives
of the Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 241
लटक (क) খুড়া, মামা, পিসাদি গোপগণ।
সখাবৃন্দ সবার ঘরে দ্বিসন্ধ্য।-“ভোজন ॥ ২৪১ ॥


--- Page 127 ---
Text 242] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 123
vraje jyetha, khuda, mama, pisadi gopa-gana
sakha-vrnda sabara ghare dvisandhya-bhojana
SYNONYMS

vraje—at Vindavana; jyetha—the father’s elder brothers; khuda—the father’s
younger brothers; mama—the mother’s brothers; pisa—the husbands of aunts;
adi—and so on; gopa-gana—cowherd men; sakha-vrnda—hundreds of friends;
sabara—of all of them; ghare—in the houses; dvi-sandhya—twice a day; bho-
jana—eating.

TRANSLATION

“In Vrndavana You also have Your father’s elder brothers, Your father’s
younger brothers, maternal uncles, husbands of Your father’s sisters and many
cowherd men. There are also cowherd boy friends, and You eat twice a day,
morning and evening, in the house of each and every one.

PURPORT

In Dvaraka, Lord Krsna had eighteen mothers like Devaki, Rohini and others.
Besides these was: His foster mother Yasoda in Vrndavana. Lord Krsna also had
two uncles, who were brothers of Nanda Maharaja. As stated by Srila Rapa
Gosvami in his Sri-krspna-ganoddesa-dipika, upanando ‘bhinandas ca pitrvyau par-
va-jau pituh: “The elder brothers of Nanda Maharaja were Upananda and Abhi-
nanda.” Similarly, in the same book the names of the younger brothers of Nanda
Maharaja are given. Pitrvyau tu kaniyamsau syatam sannanda-nandanau:
“Sannanda and Nandana, or Sunanda and Pandava, were the younger brothers of
Krsna's father, Nanda Maharaja.” Sri Krsna's maternal uncles were also described
there. Yasodhara-yasodeva-sudevadyas tu matulah: “Yasodhara, Yasodeva and
Sudeva were the maternal uncles of Krsna.” Krsna’'s uncles are also mentioned.
Mahanilah sunilas ca ramanav etayoh kramat: “Mahanila and Sunila are the hus-
bands of Krsna's aunts.”

TEXT 242
(नो वर्धन-वटञ्छ खन्न খাইলা রাশি রাশি ৷
তার লেখায় এই खन्न নহে এক গ্রাসী ॥ ২৪২ ॥
govardhana-yajiie anna khaila rasi rasi
tara lekhaya ei anna nahe eka grasi
SYNONYMS

govardhana-yajiie—in the Covardhana-paja sacrifice; anna—food; khaila—
You ate; rasi rasi—stacks; tara—to that; lekhaya—in comparison; ei—this;
anna—food; nahe—not; eka grasi—one morsel.


--- Page 128 ---
124 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
“Indeed,’”” Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya continued, ‘“at the Govardhana-puja
ceremony You ate stacks of rice. In comparison to that, this small quantity is
not even a morsel for You.
TEXT 243
তুমি ত' ঈশ্বর, মু ক্ষুদ্র জীব ছার ।
এক-গ্রাস মাধুকরী FIZ অঙ্গীকার ॥ ২৪৩ ॥
tumi ta’ iSvara, /7708/----10500173 jiva chara
eka-grasa madhukari karaha angikara
SYNONYMS
tumi—You; ta’—certainly; iSvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
muni—I; ksudra jiva—insignificant living being; chara—worthless; eka-grasa—
one small quantity; madhu-kari—as collected by the bees; karaha—please do;
angikara—accept.
TRANSLATION
‘You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas | am a most insig-
nificant living being. Therefore You may accept a little quantity of food from
my house.”
PURPORT
A sannyasiis expected to collect a little food from each and every householder.
That is to say, he should take whatever he requires to eat. This system is called
madhukari. The word madhukari comes from the word madhukara and means
“honey-collecting bees.” Bees collect a little honey from each flower, but all these
small quantities of honey accumulate to become a beehive. Sannyasis should col-
lect a little from each and every householder and should eat simply what is
necessary to maintain the body. Being a sannyasi, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
could collect a little food from the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, and this
was the Bhattacarya’s request. Compared to the food eaten by the Lord on other
occasions, Bhattacarya’s feast was not even a morsel. This is what Bhattacarya is
pointing out to the Lord.
TEXT 244
এত শুনি” হাসি” প্রভু বসিলা ভোজনে |
জগল্লাথের প্রসাদ ভট্ট দেন হর্ষ-মনে ॥ ২৪৪ ॥


--- Page 129 ---
Text 246] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 125
eta suni’ hasi’ prabhu vasila bhojane
jagannathera prasada bhatta dena harsa-mane
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; hasi’—smiling; prabhu—Lord ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
vasila bhojane —sat down to eat; jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; prasada—
remnants of food; bhatta—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; dena harsa-mane —delivers
in great happiness.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled and sat down to eat. Bhat-
tacarya, with great pleasure, first offered Him the prasada from the Jagannatha
temple.
TEXT 245
হেনকালে “অমোৎঘ”,-_ ভট্টাচার্যের THATS |
FA, मिन्लक टर] याशरी-कचा त्र र| ॥ ২৪৫ ॥
hena-kale ‘amogha,’——bhattacaryera jamata
kulina, nindaka tenho sathi-kanyara bharta
SYNONYMS
hena-kale —exactly at this time; amogha—Amogha; bhattacaryera jamata—the
son-in-law of Bhattacarya; kulina—of aristocratic birth; nindaka—blasphemer;
tenho—he; sathi-kanyara bharta—the husband of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya's
daughter named Sathi.
TRANSLATION
At this time Bhattacarya had a son-in-law named Amogha, who was the hus-
band of his daughter named Sathi. Although born in an aristocratic brahmana
family, this Amogha was a great faultfinder and blasphemer.
TEXT 246
ভোজন দেখিতে চাহে, আসিতে না পারে।
লাঠী-হাতে ভট্টাচার্য আছেন FACT ॥ ২৪৬ ॥
bhojana dekhite cahe, asite na pare
lathi-hate bhattacarya achena duyare


--- Page 130 ---
126 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
bhojana—the eating; dekhite cahe—he wanted to see; asite na pare—could
not come; lathi-hate—with a stick in his hand; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; achena—was; duyare—on the threshold.
TRANSLATION
Amogha wanted to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu eat, but he was not
allowed to enter. Indeed, Bhattacarya guarded the threshold of his house with
a stick in his hand.
TEXT 247
क -
তেঁহো যদি প্রলাদ দিতে হৈল৷ আন-মন |
सटां আসি” खन्न দেখি” করয়ে নিন্দন ॥ ২৪৭ ॥
tenho yadi prasada dite haila ana-mana
amogha asi’ anna dekhi’ karaye nindana
SYNONYMS
tenho —he (Bhattacarya); yadi—when; prasada dite—supplying the prasada;
haila—became; dna-mana—inattentive; amogha—Amogha; asi’—coming; anna
dekhi’—seeing the food; karaye nindana—began blaspheming.
TRANSLATION
However, as soon as Bhattacarya began distributing prasada and was a little
inattentive, Amogha came in. Seeing the quantity of food, he began to
blaspheme.
TEXT 248
এই TCA তৃপ্ত হয় দশ বার कन |
একেলা FIA করে এতেক ভক্ষণ | २8४ ॥
ei anne trpta haya dasa bara jana
ekela sannyasi kare eteka bhaksana!
SYNONYMS
ei anne—with so much food; trpta haya—can be satisfied; dasa bara jana—at
least ten to twelve men; ekela—alone; sannyasi—this person in the renounced
order; kare—does; eteka—so much; bhaksana—eating.
TRANSLATION
“This much food is sufficient to satisfy ten or twelve men, but this sannyasi
alone is eating so much!”’


--- Page 131 ---
Text 251] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 127
TEXT 249
শুনিতেই ভট্ট।চার্য উলটি” চাহিল |
ভার सदभ।न দেখি” অমোঘ পলাইল ॥ ২৪৯ ॥
Sunitei bhattacarya ulati’ cahila
(5001 avadhana dekhi’ amogha palaila
SYNONYMS
Sunitei—hearing; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; wulati’ cahila—
turned his eyes upon him; tarira—his; avadhana—attention; dekhi’—seeing;
amogha—Amogha; palaila—Ileft.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Amogha said this, Sarvabhauma Bhattiacarya turned his eyes
upon him. Seeing Bhattacarya’s attitude, Amogha immediately left.
TEXT 250
ভট্টাচার্য লাঠি লঞা মারিতে ধাইল |
পলাইল SCAT, তার লাগ न। পাইল ॥ ২৫০ ॥
bhattacarya lathi lana marite dhaila
palaila amogha, tara laga na paila
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; lathi lana—taking a stick; marite—to
strike; dhaila—ran; palaila—fled; amogha—Amogha; tara—him; laga na paila—
could not catch.
TRANSLATION
Bhattacarya ran after him to strike him with a stick, but Amogha fled so fast
that Bhattacarya could not catch him.
TEXT 251
তবে গালি, শাপ দিতে ভট্টাচার্য আইলা |
নিন্দা শুনি” মহাপ্রভু হাসিতে লাগিল। ॥ ২৫১ ॥
tabe gali, sapa dite bhattacarya aila
ninda suni’ mahaprabhu hasite lagila


--- Page 132 ---
128 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; gali—calling by ill names; sapa dite—cursing; bhat-
tacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; aila—came back; ninda suni’—hearing the
criticism; mahaprabhu —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hasite lagila—began to laugh.
TRANSLATION
Bhattacarya then began to curse and call his son-in-law ill names. When
Bhattacarya returned, he saw that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was laughing to
hear him criticize Amogha.
TEXT 252
শুনি” ষাঠীর ম।তা শিরে-বুকে খঘাত মারে ।
FIR AND হউক” — Ba) বলে বারে বারে ॥ ২৫২ ॥
Suni’ sathira mata Sire-buke ghata mare
‘sathi randi ha-uka’——iha bale bare bare
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; sathira mata—the mother of Sathi; sire—on the head; buke —
on the chest; ghata mare —strikes; sathi randi ha-uka—Ilet Sathi become a widow;
iha bale —says this; bare bare —again and again.
TRANSLATION
When Sathi’s mother, Bhattacarya’s wife, heard of this incident, she im-
mediately began to strike her head and chest, saying again, ‘Let Sathi become
a ५१५०५५१८.
TEXT 253
তু'হার দুঃখ দেখি” ड षटं ट] প্রবোধিয়া ।
দু'হার ইচ্ছাতে ভোজন टेकन्‌ दुष्टे হুঞ। ॥ २९७ ॥
dunhara duhkha dekhi’ prabhu dunha prabodhiya
dunhara icchate bhojana kaila tusta hana
SYNONYMS
dunhira duhkha dekhi’—seeing the lamentation of both; prabhu—Lord ऽन
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; durnha prabodhiya—pacifying them; dunhara icchate —by
the will of both of them; bhojana kaila—took His lunch; tusta hana—with great
satisfaction.


--- Page 133 ---
Text 255] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 129
TRANSLATION
Seeing the lamentation of both husband and wife, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
tried to pacify them. According to their desire, He ate the prasada and was
very satisfied.
TEXT 254
আচমন করাঞ। ভট্ট দিল মুখব।স |
তুলসী-মঞ্জরী, লবঙ্গ, এলাচি রসবাস ॥ ২৫৪ ॥
dcamana karana bhatta dila mukha-vasa
tulasi-manjari, lavanga, elaci rasa-vasa
SYNONYMS
acamana karand—washing the mouth, hands and legs of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhatta—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; dila mukha-vasa—gave some
flavored spices; tulasi-manjari—the flowers of tulasi; lavanga—cloves; elaci—
cardamom; rasa-vasa—that which brings saliva.
TRANSLATION
After Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu finished eating, Bhatticarya washed His
mouth, hands and legs and offered Him flavored spices, tulasi-maiijari, cloves,
and cardamom.
TEXT 255
সর্বাঙ্গে পরাইল প্রভুর মাল্যচন্দন |
দণ্ডবঙ হুঞা বলে FHP বচন ॥ ২৫৫ ॥
sarvange paraila prabhura malya-candana
dandavat hana bale sadainya vacana
SYNONYMS
sarva-ange—all over the body; paraila—put; prabhura—of the Lord; malya-
candana—a flower garland and sandalwood pulp; dandavat haina—offering obei-
sances; bale —says; sa-dainya—humble; vacana—statement.
TRANSLATION
The Bhattacarya then placed a flower garland over Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and smeared His body with sandalwood pulp. After offering obeisances, the
Bhattacarya submitted the following humble statement.


--- Page 134 ---
130 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 256
form করাইতে তোম। खांनिर्‌ নিজ-ঘরে ।
এই অপরাধ, প্রভু, ক্ষমা কর মোরে ॥ ২৫৬ ॥
ninda karaite toma aninu nija-ghare
ei aparadha, prabhu, ksama kara more
SYNONYMS
ninda karaite—just to cause blasphemy; toma—You; aninu—I brought; nija-
ghare—to my place; ei aparadha—this offense; prabhu—my Lord; ksama kara—
please pardon; more —me.
TRANSLATION
“1 brought You to my home just to have You blasphemed. This is a great
offense. Please excuse me. | beg Your pardon.”
TEXT 257
প্রভু কহে,-_ निम्न] নহে, “সহজ” কহিল ।
ইহাতে তোমার কিবা অপরাধ হৈল ? ২৫৭ ॥
prabhu kahe, —ninda nahe, ‘sahaja’ kahila
ihate tomara kiba aparadha haila?
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Lord ৩0 Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; nindi nahe—not
blasphemy; sahaja—rightly; kahila—he spoke; ihate—in this; tomara—your;
kiba—what; aparadha—offense; haila—was there.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “What Amogha has said is correct; therefore
itis not blasphemy. What is your offense ?’’
TEXT 258
এত বলি” মহাপ্রভু एलिन। ভবনে ।
ভট্টাচার্য ভার ঘরে গেলা SIF সনে ॥ ২৫৮ ॥
eta bali” mahaprabhu calila bhavane
bhattacarya tanra ghare gela tanra sane


--- Page 135 ---
Text 260] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 131
SYNONYMS
eta bali'—saying this; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calila
bhavane—returned to His residence; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
tanra ghare—to His place; gela—went; tanra sane—with Him.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left and returned to His resi-
dence. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya also followed Him.
TEXT 259
প্রভু-পদে পড়ি” ag আত্মনিন্দ৷ কৈল।
ভারে শান্ত করি' প্রভু ঘরে পাঠাইল ॥ ২৫৯ ॥
prabhu-pade padi’ bahu atma-ninda kaila
tanre santa kari’ prabhu ghare pathaila
SYNONYMS
prabhu-pade—at the feet of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; padi’—falling
down; bahu—much; atma-ninda kaila—made self-reproach; tanre—him; santa
kari’—making pacified; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ghare pathaila—sent
back to his home.
TRANSLATION
Falling down at the Lord’s feet, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said many things
in self-reproach. The Lord then pacified him and sent him back to his home.
TEXT 260
ঘরে আসি” ভট্টাচার্য ষাঠীর মাতা-সনে |
আপনা fafa কিছু বলেন বচনে ॥ ২৬০ ॥
ghare asi’ bhattacarya sathira mata-sane
apana nindiya kichu balena vacane
SYNONYMS
ghare asi’—returning home; bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; sathira
mata-sane—with the mother of Sathi; 30973 nindiya—condemning himself;
kichu—some; balena vacane —speaks words.


--- Page 136 ---
132 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
After returning to his home, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya consulted with his
wife, the mother of Sathi. After personally condemning himself, he began to
speak as follows.
TEXT 261
চৈতন্য-গোসাঞ্ির নিন্দ। निन Tiel হৈতে ।
তারে বধ CHCA হয় প।প-প্রায়শ্চিত্তে ॥ ২৬১ ॥
caitanya-gosanira ninda sunila yaha haite
tare vadha kaile haya papa-prayascitte
SYNONYMS
caitanya-gosanira—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nindi—blasphemy; sunila—I
have heard; yaha haite—from whom; tare vadha kaile—if he is killed; haya—
there is; papa-prayascitte —atonement for the sinful act.
TRANSLATION
“If the man who blasphemed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is killed, his sinful
action may be atoned.”
PURPORT
The Hari-bhakti-vilasa cites the following quotation from Skanda Purana con-
cerning the blaspheming of a Vaisnava:
yo hi bhagavatari lokam
upahasam nrpottama
karoti tasya nasyanti
artha-dharma-yasah-sutah
nindam kurvanti ye madha
vaispavanarn mahatmanam
patanti pitrbhih sardhar
maha-raurava-samjiite
hanti nindati vai dvesti
vaispavan nabhinandati
krudhyate yati no harsarn
darsane patanani sat


--- Page 137 ---
Text 2611  Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 133
In this conversation between Markandeya and Bhagiratha, it is said: “My dear
King, if one derides an exalted devotee, he loses the results of his pious activities,
his opulence, his reputation and his sons. Vaisnavas are all great souls. Whoever
blasphemes them falls down to the hell known 25 Maharaurava. He is also accom-
panied by his forefathers. Whoever kills or blasphemes a Vaisnava and whoever is
envious of a Vaisnava or angry with him, or whoever does not offer him obei-
sances or feel joy upon seeing a Vaisnava, certainly falls into a hellish condition.”
The Hari-bhakti-vilasa (10.314) also gives the following quotation from
Dvaraka-mahatmya:
kara-patrais ca phalyante
sutivrair yama-sasanaih
nindarn kurvanti ye papa
vaispavanarn mahatmanam
In a conversation between Prahlada Maharaja and Bali Maharaja, it is said, “Those
sinful people who blaspheme Vaisnavas, who are all great souls, are subjected
very severely to the punishment offered by Yamaraja.”
In the Bhakti-sandarbha (313) there is a statement concerning the blaspheming
of Lord Visnu.
ye nindanti hrsikesarn
tad-bhaktarih punya-rapinam
sata-janmarjitarn punyarn
tesarn nasyati niscitarn
te pacyante maha-ghore
kumbhipake bhayanake
bhaksitah kita-sanghena
yavac candra-divakarau
sri-vispor avamananad
gurutarari sri-vaispavollarnghanam
tadiya-dasaka-janan
na pasyet purusadhaman
taih sardharn vancaka-janaih
saha-vasarn na karayet
“One who criticizes Lord Visnu and His devotees loses all the benefits accrued in
a hundred pious births. Such a person rots in the Kumbhipaka hell and is bitten by
worms as long as the sun and moon exist. One should therefore not even see the
face of a person who blasphemes Lord Visnu and His devotees. Never try to
associate with such persons.”


--- Page 138 ---
134 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
In his Bhakti-sandarbha (265), Jiva Gosvami further quotes from Srimad-
Bhagavatam (10.74.40):
nindam bhagavatah srnvan
tat-parasya janasya va
tato napaiti yah so ‘pi
yaty adhah sukrtac cyutah
“If one does not immediately leave upon hearing the Lord or the Lord's devotee
blasphemed, he falls down from devotional service.” Similarly, Lord Siva’'s wife Sati
states in Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.4.17):
karnau pidhaya nirayad yad akalpa ise
dharmavitary asrnibhir nrbhir asyamane
chindyat prasahya rusatim asatim prabhus cej
jihvam asan api tato visrjet sa dharmah
“If one hears an irresponsible person blaspheme the master and controller of
religion, he should block his ears and go away if unable to punish him. But if one is
able to kill, then one should by force cut out the blasphemer’s tongue and kill the
offender, and after that he should give up his own life.”
TEXT 262
fowl নিজ-প্রাণ যদি করি বিমে।চন |
তুই যোগ্য নহে, দুই শরীর ত্রাহ্মণ ॥ ২৬২ ॥
kimva nija-prana yadi kari vimocana
dui yogya nahe, dui Sarira brahmana
SYNONYMS
kimva—or; nija-prana—my own life; yadi—if; kari vimocana—I give up; dui—
both such actions; yogya nahe—are not befitting; dui sarira—both the bodies;
brahmana—brahmaras.
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya continued, “01, if | give up my own life, this sin-
ful action may be atoned. However, neither of these ideas are befitting be-
cause both bodies belong to brahmanas.


--- Page 139 ---
Text 264] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 135
TEXT 263
পুনঃ সেই निन्नटकन् মুখ না দেখিব ।
পরিত্যাগ टेक, তার নাম না লইব ॥ ২৬৩ ॥
punah sei nindakera mukha na dekhiba
parityaga kailun, tara nama na la-iba
SYNONYMS
punah —again; sei—that; nindakera—of the blasphemer; mukha—face; na—
not; dekhiba—I shall see; parityaga—giving up; (८2१1८40) --। do; tara—his; nama—
name; na—not; la-iba—I shall take.
TRANSLATION
‘Instead, | shall never see the face of that blasphemer. I reject him and give
up his relationship. | shall never even speak his name.
TEXT 264
বাঠীরে কহু-তারে ছাড়.ক, সে হুইল “পতিত” |
“পতিত' হইলে ङ] ত্যজিতে উচিত ॥ ২৬৪ ॥
sathire kaha——tare chaduka, se ha-ila ‘patita’
‘patita’ ha-ile bharta tyajite ucita
SYNONYMS
sathire kaha—inform Sathi; tare chaduka—let her give him up; se ha-ila—he
has become; patita—fallen; patita ha-ile—when one has fallen; bharta—such a
husband; tyajite—to give up; ucita—is the duty.
TRANSLATION
‘Inform my daughter Sathi to abandon her relationship with her husband
because he has fallen down. When the husband falls down, it is the wife’s duty
to relinquish the relationship.
PURPORT
Srila Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya considered that if Amogha were killed, one
would suffer sinful reactions for killing the body of a brahmana. For the same
reason, it would have been undesirable for Bhattacarya to commit suicide be-
cause he also was a brahmana. Since neither course could be accepted, Bhat-
tacarya decided to give up his relationship with Amogha and never see his face.


--- Page 140 ---
136 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15

As far as killing the body of a brahmana is concerned, $rimad-Bhagavatam
(1.7.53) gives the following injunction:

$ri bhagavan uvaca
brahma-bandhur na hantavya
atatayi vadhar-hanah
mayaivobhayam amnatarm
paripahy anusasanam
“The Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna said: A friend of a brahmana is not to be
killed, but if he is an aggressor, he must be killed. All these rulings are in the
scriptures, and you should act accordingly.”

Quoting from the smrti, Srila Sridhara Svami comments on this quotation from

Srimad-Bhagavatam:
atatayinam ayantam
api vedanta-paragam
jigharn-santarir jighamsiyan
na tena brahmaha bhavet
“Even though an aggressor may be a very learned scholar of Vedanta, he should
be killed because of his envy in killing others. In such a case, it is not sinful to kill a
brahmana.” |
It is also stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.7.57):
vapanam dravinadanam
sthanan niryapanar tatha
esa hi brahma-bandhanari
vadho nanyo sti daihikah
“Cutting the hair from his head, depriving him of his wealth and driving him from
his residence are the prescribed punishments for the relative of a brahmana. There
is no injunction for killing the body.”

Such punishment is sufficient for a brahma-bandhu. There is no need to per-
sonally kill his body. As far as Sathi, the daughter of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya,
was concerned, she was advised to give up her relationship with her husband.
Concerning this, the Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.18) states, na patis ca sa syan na
mocayed yah samupeta-mrtyum: “One cannot be a husband if he cannot liberate
his dependents from inevitable death.” If a person is not in Krsna consciousness
and is bereft of spiritual power, he cannot protect his wife from the path of re-
peated birth and death. Consequently such a person cannot be accepted as a
husband. A wife should dedicate her life and everything to Krsna for further ad-


--- Page 141 ---
Text 265] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 137
vancement in Krsna consciousness. If she gives up her connection with her hus-
band, who abandons Krsna consciousness, she follows in the footsteps of the dvi-
ja-patni, the wives of the brahmanas who were engaged in performing sacrifices.
The wife is not to be condemned for cutting off such a relationship. In this regard,
Sri Krsna states in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.23.31-32):
patayo nabhyasayeran
pitr-bhratr-sutadayah
lokas ca vo mayopeta
deva apy anumanvate
na pritaye ‘nuragaya
hy anga-sango nrpam iha
tan mano mayi yunjana
aciran mam avapsyatha
Such a separation is never condemned by the supreme will. No one should be en-
vious of the order of Krsna. Even demigods support such action. In this material
world, one does not become beloved simply by maintaining a bodily relationship.
However, one can attain complete perfection by associating in Krsna conscious-
ness.
TEXT 265
পতিঞ্চ পতেতং SjTE ॥ ২৬৫ ॥
0300 ca 290(3977 tyajet
SYNONYMS
patim—husband; ca—and; patitam—fallen; tyajet—one should give up.
TRANSLATION
“When a husband is fallen, his relationship must be given up.”
PURPORT
This is a quotation from smrti-sastra. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.11.28):
santustalolupa daksa
dharma-jia priya-satya-vak
apramatta sucih snigdha
patim tv apatitari bhajet


--- Page 142 ---
138 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 15
“A wife who is satisfied, who is not greedy, who is expert and knows religious
principles, who speaks what is dear and truthful and is not bewildered, who is al-
ways clean and affectionate, should be very devoted to her husband who is not
fallen.”
TEXT 266
সেই FTE खटमाच কাই পলাঞ। (नन |
প্রাতঃকালে তার বিসূচিকা-ব্যাধি হৈল ॥ ২৬৬ ॥
sei 13076 amogha kahar palana gela
pratah-kale tara visacika-vyadhi haila
SYNONYMS
sei ratre—that night; amogha—the son-in-law of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
13037 —where; palana gela—fled; pratah-kale—in the morning; tara—his; vi-
sacika-vyadhi—infection of cholera; haila—there was.
TRANSLATION
That night Amogha, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’s son-in-law, fled, and in the
morning he immediately fell sick with cholera.
TEXT 267
BCA মরেন- निः কহে ভট্ট।চার্য ।
সহায় FZ দৈব CTA মোর कर्य ২৬৭ ॥
amogha marena——suni’ kahe bhattacarya
sahaya ha-iya daiva kaila mora karya
SYNONYMS
amogha marena—Amogha is dying; suni’—hearing; kahe bhattacarya—Bhat-
tacarya said; sahaya ha-iya—helping; daiva—Providence; kaila—did; mora—my;
karya—duty.
TRANSLATION
When Bhattacarya heard that Amogha was dying of cholera, he thought, “0
is the favor of Providence that He is doing what | want to do.
TEXT 268
ঈশ্বরে ত' অপরাধ ফলে SS |
এত वनिः পড়ে দুই শাস্ত্রের বচন ॥ ২৬৮ ॥


--- Page 143 ---
Text 269] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 139
iSvare ta’ aparadha phale tata-ksana
eta bali’ pade dui sastrera vacana
SYNONYMS
isvare—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ta’—indeed; aparadha—
offense; phale—brings results; tata-ksapa—immediately; eta bali’—saying this;
pade —recites; dui—two; sastrera vacana—quotations from revealed scriptures.
TRANSLATION
“When one offends the Supreme Personality of Godhead, karma im-
mediately takes effect.” After saying this, he recited two verses from revealed
scripture.
TEXT 269
মহত৷ হি প্রযত্লেন হস্ত্যস্বরখপ তিভিঃ ।
অস্মাভিযদলহুষ্টেরং গন্ধবৈশুদলষ্ঠিতম্‌ ॥ ২৬৯ ॥
mahata hi prayatnena
hasty-asva-ratha-pattibhih
asmabhir yad anustheyam
gandharvais tad anusthitam
SYNONYMS
mahata—very great; hi—certainly; prayatnena—by endeavor; hasti—
elephants; asva—horses; ratha—chariots; pattibhih—and by infantry soldiers;
asmabhih—by ourselves; yat—whatever; anustheyarn—has to be arranged; ’
gandharvaih —by the Gandharvas; tat—that; anusthitam—done.
TRANSLATION
‘What we have had to arrange with great endeavor by collecting
elephants, horses, chariots and infantry soldiers has already been ac-
complished by the Gandharvas.”
PURPORT
This is a quotation from the Mahabharata (Vana-parva 241.15). Bhimasena
made this statement when all the Pandavas were living incognito. At that time
there was a fight between the Kauravas and the Gandharvas. The Kaurava soldiers
were under the command of Karna, but the commander-in-chief of the Gandhar-
vas was able to arrest all the Kauravas by virtue of superior military strength. At
that time Duryodhana’s ministers and commanders, who were living in the forest,


--- Page 144 ---
140 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
requested Maharaja Yudhisthira to help. After being thus petitioned, Bhimasena
spoke the verse given above, remembering Duryodhana’s former nefarious and
atrocious activities against them. Indeed, Bhimasena felt it very fitting that
Duryodhana and his company were arrested. This could have been accomplished
by the Pandavas only with great endeavor.
TEXT 270
আয়ুঃ শ্রিয়ং যশে। ধর্মং লোকানাশিষ এব 51
হস্তি শ্রেয়াংসি সর্বাণি পুংসে। মহদ।তক্রমঃ ॥ ২৭০ ॥
ayuh Sriyam yaso 00311773177
lokan asisa eva ca
hanti Sreyamsi sarvani
puriso mahad-atikramah
SYNONYMS

ayuh—duration of life; sriyam—opulence; yasah—reputation; dharmam—
religion; lokan—possessions; asisah—benedictions; eva—certainly; ca—and;
hanti—destroys; sreyamsi—good fortune; sarvani—all; purisah—of a person;
mahat—of great souls; atikramah—violation.

TRANSLATION

‘ ‘When a person mistreats great souls, his life span, opulence, reputation,

religion, possessions and good fortune are all destroyed.’
PURPORT

This is a statement made by Sukadeva Gosvami, who was relating Srimad-
Bhagavatam (10.4.46) to Maharaja Pariksit. This quotation concerns the attempted
killing of Krsna's sister (Yogamaya), who appeared before Krsna's birth as the
daughter of mother 39০03. This daughter Yogamaya and Krsna were born
simultaneously, and Vasudeva replaced Krsna by taking Yogamaya away. When
she was brought to Mathura and Karisa attempted to kill her, Yogamaya slipped
out of his hands. She could not be killed. She then informed Karnsa about the
birth of his enemy, Krsna, and being thus baffled, Karmsa consulted his associates,
who were all demons. When this big conspiracy was taking place, this verse was
spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami. He points out that a demon can lose everything
because of his nefarious activities.

The word mahad-atikramah, meaning “envy of Lord Visnu and His devotees,” is
significant in this verse. The word mahat indicates a great personality, a devotee
or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. Being always engaged in the


--- Page 145 ---
Text 272] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 141
Lord's service, the devotees themselves are as great as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The word mabhat is also explained in Bhagavad-gita (9.13):
mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivir prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jhdtva bhatadim avyayam
“O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protec-
tion of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because
they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and inexhaust-
ible.”
Being envious of the Lord and His devotees is not at all auspicious for a demon.
By such envy, a demon loses everything considered beneficial.
TEXT 271
গোপীনাথাচার্থ গেলা প্রভু-দরশনে |
প্রভু তারে পুছিল ভট্টাচার্য-বিবরণে ॥ ২৭১ ॥
gopinathacarya gela prabhu-darasane
prabhu tanre puchila bhattacarya-vivarane
SYNONYMS
gopinathacarya—Gopinatha Acarya; gela—went; prabhu-darasane—to see
Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prabhu—Lord उ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre —
unto Him; puchila—inquired; bhattacarya-vivarane —the affairs in the house of
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TRANSLATION
At this time, Gopiniatha Acarya went to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and
the Lord asked him about the events taking place in Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya’s house.
TEXT 272
আচার্য কহে,_উপবাস বকৈল তুই जन 1
বিসুচিকা-ব্যাধিতে অমোঘ ছাড়িছে জীবন ॥ ২৭২ ॥
acarya kahe, —upavasa kaila dui jana
visacika-vyadhite amogha chadiche jivana


--- Page 146 ---
142 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
SYNONYMS
acarya kahe —Gopinatha Acarya informed; upavasa—fasting; kaila—observed;
dui jana—the two persons; vistcika-vyadhite—by the disease of cholera;
amogha—Amogha; chadiche jivana—is going to die.
TRANSLATION
Gopinatha Acarya informed the Lord that both the husband and wife were
fasting and that their son-in-law Amogha was dying of cholera.
TEXT 273
শুল্” কৃপাময় প্রভু আইলা धाभ ।
खटमोटचटत्र কহে তার বুকে ङ्ख দিয়।॥ ২৭৩ ॥
Suni’ krpamaya prabhu aila 00373
amoghere kahe tara buke hasta diya
SYNONYMS
Suni’ —hearing; krpa-maya—merciful; prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
aila—came; dhana—running; amoghere —unto Amogha; kahe —He says; tara—
His; buke—on the chest; hasta diya—keeping His hand.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard that Amogha was going to die, He
immediately ran to him in great haste. Placing His hand on Amogha’s chest,
He spoke as follows.
TEXT 274
সহজে নির্মল এই “ত্রাঙ্মণ”-হৃদয় |
Fram বসিতে এই যোগ্যস্থান হয় ॥ ২৭৪ ॥
sahaje nirmala ei ‘brahmana’-hrdaya
krsnera vasite ei yogya-sthana haya
SYNONYMS
sahaje—by nature; nirmala—without contamination; ei—this; brahmana-
hrdaya—heart of a brahmana; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; vasite—to sit down; ei—
this; yogya-sthana—proper place; haya—is.


--- Page 147 ---
Text 276] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 143
TRANSLATION
“The heart of a brahmana is by nature very clean; therefore it is a proper
place for Krsna to sit.
TEXT 275
মাওসর্য'-চণ্ডাল কেনে दे] বসাইলে 1
পরম পৰিত্র স্থান অপবিত্র কৈলে ॥ ২৭৫ ॥
‘matsarya’~-candala kene 1037 vasaile
parama pavitra sthana apavitra kaile
SYNONYMS
matsarya—jealousy; candala—the lowest of the men; kene—why; ihan—
here; vasaile—you allowed to sit; parama pavitra—most purified; sthana—place;
apavitra—impure; kaile—you have made.
TRANSLATION
“Why have you allowed jealousy to sit here also? Because of this, you have
become like a candala, the lowest of men, and you have also contaminated a
most purified place—your heart.
TEXT 276
সার্বন্ভৌম-সঙ্গে তোমার ‘THI’ fe ক্ষয় ৷
‘TF ঘুচিলে জীব “রুষ্ণনাম” লয় 1 ২৭৬ ॥
sarvabhauma-sange tomara ‘kalusa’ haila ksaya
‘kalmasa’ ghucile jiva ‘krsna-nama’ laya
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma-sarnge —by the association of Sarvabhauma; tomara—your;
kalusa—contamination; haila ksaya—is now vanquished; kalmasa—contamina-
tion; ghucile—when dispelled; jiva—the living entity; krsna-nama—the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra; laya—can chant.
TRANSLATION
“However, due to the association of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, all your con-
tamination is now vanquished. When a person’s heart is cleansed of all con-
tamination, he is able to chant the maha-mantra, Hare Krsna.


--- Page 148 ---
144 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 277
উঠহু, অমোঘ, তুমি লও FRA |
অচিরে তোমারে ক্বপ। করিবে ta ॥ २११ ॥
uthaha, amogha, tumi lao krsna-nama
acire tomare krpa karibe bhagavan
SYNONYMS
uthaha—get up; amogha—Amogha; tumi—you; lao—chant; krspa-nama—
the holy name of Lord Krsna; acire —very soon; tomare—unto you; krpa—mercy;
karibe —will bestow; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
‘Therefore, Amogha, get up and chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra! If you
do so, Krsna will unfailingly bestow mercy upon you.”
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases —impersonal Brahman, Param-
atma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan. All of these are one
and the same truth, but Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan constitute three dif-
ferent features. Whoever understands Brahman is called a brahmana, and when a
brahmana engages in the Lord’s devotional service, he is called a Vaisnava. Unless
one comes to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his realization of
impersonal Brahman is imperfect. A brahmana can chant the Hare Krsna mantra on
the platform of namabhasa, but not on the platform of pure vibration. When a
brahmana engages in the Lord's service, fully understanding his eternal relation-
ship, his devotional service is called abhidheya. When one attains that stage, he is
called a bhagavata or a Vaisnava. This indicates that he is free from contamination
and material attachment. This is confirmed by Bhagavad-gita (7.28):
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful ac-
tions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion,
engage themselves in My service with determination.”
A brahmana may be a very learned scholar, but this does not mean that he is
free from material contamination. A brahmana’s contamination, however, is in the


--- Page 149 ---
Text 277] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 145
mode of goodness. In the material world, the three modes are goodness, passion
and ignorance, and all of these are simply different gradations of contamination.
Unless a brahmana transcends such contamination and approaches the platform
of unalloyed devotional service, he cannot be accepted as a Vaisnava. An imper-
sonalist may be aware of the impersonal Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth,
but his activities are on the impersonal platform. Sometimes he imagines a form of
the Lord (saguna-upasana), but such an attempt is never successful in helping one
attain complete realization. The impersonalist may consider himself a brahmana
and may be situated in the mode of goodness, but nonetheless he is conditioned
by one of the modes of material nature. This means that he is not yet liberated, for
liberation cannot be attained unless one is completely free from the modes. In any
case, the Mayavada philosophy keeps one conditioned. If one becomes a
Vaisnava through proper initiation, he automatically becomes a brahmana. There
is no doubt about it. The Garuda Purana confirms this:
brahmananarh sahasrebhyah
satra-yaji visisyate
satra-yaji-sahasrebhyah
sarva-vedanta-paragah
sarva-vedanta-vit-kotya
visnu-bhakto visisyate
“Out of many thousands of brahmanas, one may become qualified to perform
yajia. Out of many thousands of such qualified brahmanas, one may be fully
aware of the Vedanta philosophy. Out of many millions of learned Vedanta schol-
ars, there may be one visnu-bhakta, or devotee of Lord Visnu. It is he who is most
exalted.”

Unless one is a fully qualified brahmana, he cannot advance in the spiritual
science. A real brahmana is never envious of Vaisnavas. If he is, he is considered
an imperfect neophyte. Impersonalist brahmanas are always opposed to Vaisnava
principles. They are envious of Vaisnavas because they do not know the goal of
life. Na te viduh svartha-gatirn hi visnum. However, when a brahmana becomes a
Vaisnava, there is no duality. If a brahmana does not become a Vaisnava, he cer-
tainly falls down from the brahmana platform. This is confirmed by Srimad-
Bhagavatam (11.5.3): na bhajanty avajananti sthanad bhrastah patanty adhah.

We can actually see that in this age of Kali many so-called brahmanas are en-
vious of Vaisnavas. The Kali-contaminated brahmanas consider Deity worship to
be imaginative: arcye visnau $ila-dhir gurusu nara-matir vaisnave jati-buddhih.
Such a contaminated brahmana may superficially imagine a form of the Lord, but
actually he considers the Deity in the temple to be made of stone or wood.
Similarly, such a contaminated brahmana considers the guru to be an ordinary
human being, and he objects when a Vaisnava is created by the Krsna conscious-


--- Page 150 ---
146 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
ness movement. Many so-called brahmanas attempt to fight us, saying, “How can
you create a brahmana out of a European or American? A brahmana can be born
only in a brahmana family.” They do not consider that this is never stated in any
revealed scripture. It is specifically stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.13): caturvarnyarn
maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah. ‘According to the three modes of material
nature and the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were
created by Me.”

Thus a brahmana is not a result of the caste system. He becomes a brahmana
only by qualification. Similarly, a Vaisnava does not belong to a particular caste;
rather, his designation is determined by the rendering of devotional service.

TEXT 278
শুনি” ‘Fa ‘Fao’ বলি” অমোঘ छिन |
(यैटमाग्रोटक्न মত্ত 3] নাচিতে नाजिन। ২৭৮ ॥
Suni’ ‘krspa’ ‘krspa’ bali’ amogha uthila
premonmade matta hafa nacite lagila
SYNONYMS

Suni’—hearing; krsna krspna—the holy name of Krsna; bali’—speaking; amogha
uthila—Amogha stood up; premonmade —in ecstatic love of Krsna; matta hana—
becoming maddened; nacite lagila—began to dance.

TRANSLATION

After hearing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and being touched by Him,
Amogha, who was on his deathbed, immediately stood up and began to chant
the holy name of Krsna. Thus he became mad with ecstatic love and began to
dance emotionally.

TEXT 279
क्ण, WE, পুলক, BY, (AW, স্বরভঙ্গ ৷
প্রভু হাসে দেখি” তার প্রেমের তরঙ্গ ॥ ২৭৯ ॥
kampa, asru, pulaka, stambha, 5৮০03, svara-bhanga
prabhu hase dekhi’ tara premera taranga
SYNONYMS

kampa—trembling; asru—tears; pulaka—jubilation; stambha—being stunned;

sveda—perspiration; svara-bhariga—faltering of the voice; prabhu hase—S$ri


--- Page 151 ---
Text 281] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 147
Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to laugh; dekhi’—seeing; tara—Amogha’s; premera
taranga—waves of ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
While Amogha danced in ecstatic love, he manifested all the ecstatic
symptoms —trembling, tears, jubilation, trance, perspiration and a faltering
voice. Seeing these waves of ecstatic emotion, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
began to laugh.
TEXT 280
প্রভুর চরণে ধরি” করয়ে বিনয়।
অপরাধ कम মোরে, প্রভু, দয়াময় ॥ ২৮ ০॥
prabhura carane dhari’ karaye vinaya
aparadha ksama more, prabhu, dayamaya
SYNONYMS
prabhura carane —the lotus feet of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dhari’—
catching; karaye —does; vinaya—submission; aparadha— offense; ksama—kindly
excuse; more—me; prabhu—O Lord; daya-maya—merciful.
TRANSLATION
Amogha then fell before the Lord’s lotus feet and submissively said, “O
merciful Lord, please excuse my offense.’”
TEXT 281
এই ছার মুখে তোমার कच्चिन्‌ নিন্দনে |
এত বলি” আপন গালে চড়ায় আপনে ॥ ২৮১ ॥
ei chara mukhe tomara karinu nindane
eta bali’ apana gale cadaya apane
SYNONYMS
ei chara mukhe —in this abominable mouth; tomara—Your; karinu—I did; nin-
dane —blaspheming; eta bali’—saying this; apana—his own; gale —cheeks;
cadaya—he slapped; apane —himself.


--- Page 152 ---
148 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Not only did Amogha beg the Lord’s pardon, but he also began slapping his
own cheeks, saying, “চ) this mouth | have blasphemed You.’
TEXT 282
চড়াইতে চড়াইতে গাল ফুলাইল |
হাতে ধরি” গোপীনাথাচার্য নিষেধিল ॥ ২৮২ ॥
cadaite cadaite gala phulaila
hate dhari’ gopinathacarya nisedhila
SYNONYMS
cadéite cadaite —slapping over and over again; gala—the cheeks; phulaila—he
made them swollen; hate dhari’—catching his hands; gopinatha-acarya—
Copinatha Acarya; nisedhila—forbade.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, Amogha continued slapping his face over and over until his cheeks
were swollen. Finally Gopinatha Acarya stopped him by catching hold of his
hands.
TEXT 283
প্রভু আশ্বাসন করে স্পর্শি' তার भाल ।
সার্বভৌম-সম্ব্ধে তুমি মোর (FLAG ॥ ২৮৩ ॥
prabhu asvasana kare sparsi’ tara 83803
sarvabhauma-sambandhe tumi mora sneha-patra
SYNONYMS
prabhu --5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asvasana kare —pacifies; sparsi’—touching;
tara—his; gatra—body; sarvabhauma-sambandhe —because of a relation to Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; tumi—you; mora—My; sneha-patra—object of affection.
TRANSLATION
After this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu pacified Amogha by touching his body
and saying, ‘‘You are the object of My affection because you are the son-in-
law of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.


--- Page 153 ---
Text 286] Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 149
TEXT 284
সার্বভৌম-গৃহে দাস-দাসী, যে কুক্ক,র।
সেহ মোর প্রিয়, खच জন चट দূর ॥ ২৮৪ ॥
sarvabhauma-grhe dasa-dasi, ye kukkura
seha mora priya, anya jana rahu dara
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma-grhe —at the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; dasa-dasi—ser-
vants and maidservants; ye kukkura—even a dog; seha—all of them; mora—to
Me; priya—very dear; anya jana—others; rahu dara—what to speak of.
TRANSLATION
“Everyone in Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’s house is very dear to Me, includ-
ing his maids and servants and even his dog. And what to speak of his rela-
tives?
TEXT 285
অপরাধ” নাহি, जण] লও FAI |
এত वनि, প্রভু আইলা সার্বভৌম-স্থান ॥ ২৮৫ ॥
aparadha’ nahi, sada lao krsna-nama
eta bali’ prabhu aila sarvabhauma-sthana
SYNONYMS
aparadha’ nahi—do not commit offenses; sada—always; lao —chant; krsna-
nama —the Hare Krsna maha-mantra; eta bali’—saying this; prabhu —Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; aila—came; sarvabhauma-sthana—to the place of Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya.
TRANSLATION
‘““Amogha, always chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and do not commit
any further offenses.” After giving Amogha this instruction, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu went to Sarvabhauma’s house.”
TEXT 286
व्य्‌ দেখি” সার্বভৌম ধরিল। চরণে |
প্রভু Sica আলিঙ্গিয়৷ বসিল। আসনে ॥ ২৮৬ ॥


--- Page 154 ---
150 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
prabhu dekhi’ sarvabhauma dharila carane
prabhu tanre alingiya vasila asane
SYNONYMS
prabhu dekhi’—seeing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sarvabhauma—Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; dharila carane—caught hold of His feet; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarre —him; alingiya—embracing; vasila asane —sat down
on the seat.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the Lord, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya immediately caught hold
of His lotus feet. The Lord also embraced him and sat down.
TEXT 287
প্রভু কহে,-_অমোগথঘ শিশু, किव তার দোষ।
কেনে উপবাস কর, কেনে কর CAFU ২৮৭ ॥
prabhu kahe,—amogha sisu, kiba tara dosa
kene upavasa kara, kene kara rosa
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; amogha sisu—Amogha is a child;
kiba—what; tara dosa—his fault; kene—why; upavasa kara—are you fasting;
kene —why; kara rosa—are you angry.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu pacified Sarvabhauma, saying, ‘‘After all,
Amogha, your son-in-law, is a child. So what is his fault? Why are you fasting,
and why are you angry?
TEXT 288
উঠ, স্রান কর, দেখ SALTY |
नोख wife, ভোজন কর, তবে মোর সুখ ॥ ২৮৮ ॥
utha, snana kara, dekha jagannatha-mukha
sighra asi, bhojana kara, tabe mora sukha
SYNONYMS
utha—get up; snana kara—take your bath; dekha—see; jagannatha-mukha—
Lord Jagannatha's face; sighra asi—coming back very soon; bhojana kara—take
your lunch; tabe mora sukha—then । shall be very happy.


--- Page 155 ---
Text 291] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers [35303 to the Lord 151
TRANSLATION
“Just get up and take your bath and go see the face of Lord Jagannatha.
Then return here to eat your lunch. In this way I shall be happy.
TEXT 289
তাবৎ রহিব আমি এথায় বসিয়া ।
যাবৎ না খাইবে তুমি প্রসাদ আসিয়া ॥ ২৮৯ ॥
tavat rahiba ami ethaya vasiya
yavat na khaibe tumi prasada asiya
SYNONYMS
tavat—as long as; rahiba—shall stay; ami—I; ethaya—here; vasiya—sitting;
yavat—as long as; na khaibe —will not eat; tumi—you; prasada—remnants of the
food of Jagannatha; asiya—coming here.
TRANSLATION
‘I shall stay here until you return to take Lord Jagannatha’s remnants for
your lunch.”
TEXT 290
প্রভু-পদ ধরি” ভট্ট কহিতে नाजिन।।
AS অমোঘ, তারে কেনে SFIS ॥ ২৯০ ॥
prabhu-pada dhari’ bhatta kahite lagila
marita’ amogha, tare kene jiyaila
SYNONYMS
prabhu-pada—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's lotus feet; dhari’—catching hold of;
bhatta—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; kahite lagila—began to speak; marita’
amogha—Amogha would have died; tare —him; kene—why; jiyaila—have You
brought to life.
TRANSLATION
Catching hold of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s lotus feet, Bhattacarya said,
‘Why did You bring Amogha back to life? It would have been better had he
died.”
TEXT 291
প্রভু কহে, खटमांच শিশু, তোমার বালক |
বালক-দোষ না লয় शिख], তাহাতে পালক ॥ ২৯১ ॥


--- Page 156 ---
152 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
prabhu kahe, —amogha $isu, tomara balaka
balaka-dosa na laya pita, tahate palaka
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; amogha sisu—Amogha is a child;
tomara balaka—your son; balaka-dosa—the offense of a child; na laya—does not
accept; pita—the father; tahate —unto him; palaka—the maintainer.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘Amogha is a child and your son. The father
does not take the faults of his son seriously, especially when he is maintaining
him.
TEXT 292
এবে “বৈষ্ণব' হৈল, তার গেল “অপরাধ” |
তাহার উপরে ट्व TAZ প্রসাদ ॥ ২৯২ ॥
ebe ‘vaisnava’ haila, tara gela ‘aparadha’
tahara upare ebe karaha prasada
SYNONYMS
ebe—now; vaispava haila—has become a Vaisnava; tara—his; gela—went
away; aparadha—offenses; tahara upare—upon him; ebe—now; karaha
prasada—show mercy.
TRANSLATION
‘Now that he has become > Vaisnava, he is offenseless. You can bestow your
mercy upon him without hesitation.”
TEXT 293
ভট্ট কহে,__চল, প্রভু, ঈশ্বর-দরশনে |
प्रान করি” সাহা glee আসিছে”। এখনে ॥ ২৯৩ ॥
bhatta kahe, —cala, prabhu, isvara-darasane
snana kari’ tanha muni asichon ekhane
SYNONYMS
bhatta kahe —Bhattacarya said; cala—go; prabhu—my Lord; isvara-darasane —
to see Lord Jagannatha, the Personality of Godhead; snana kari’—taking my bath;
tarnnha—there; muni—I; asichori—shall come back; ekhane—here.


--- Page 157 ---
Text 295] Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya Offers 35303 to the Lord 153
TRANSLATION
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya said, ‘Please go, my Lord, to see Lord Jagannatha.
After taking my bath, I shall go there and then return.”
TEXT 294
প্রভু কহে,__গোপীনাথ, रेड) खि चिव ।
Teal enw পাইলে, বার্তা আমাকে কহিবা ॥২৯৪॥
prabhu kahe, —gopinatha, ihani rahiba
inho prasada paile, varta amake kahiba
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; gopinatha—Gopinatha; ihani
rahiba—please stay here; inho—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; prasada paile —when
he takes his lunch; varta—the news; amake kahiba —inform Me.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then told Gopinatha, ‘Stay here and inform Me
when Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya has taken his prasada.’”’
TEXT 295
এত বলি' প্রভু গেল৷ ঈশ্বর-দরশনে |
ভট্ট স্নান দর্শন করি” করিল ভোজনে ॥ ২৯৫ ॥
eta bali’ prabhu gela isvara-darasane
bhatta snana darsana kari’ karila bhojane
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; prabhu—3Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gelda—went; isvara-
darasane —to see Lord Jagannatha; bhatta—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; snana dar-
Sana kari’—finishing his bathing and seeing of Lord Jagannatha; karila bhojane —
accepted food.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to see Lord Jagannatha.
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya completed his bath, went to see Lord Jagannatha
and then returned to his house to accept food.


--- Page 158 ---
154 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
TEXT 296
সেই खटयांष হৈল প্রভুর ভক্ত ‘OTT’ |
প্রেমে নাচে, FAH লয় মহাশান্ত ॥ ২৯৬ ॥
sei amogha haila prabhura bhakta ‘ekanta’
preme nace, krsna-nama laya maha-santa
SYNONYMS
sei amogha—that same Amogha; haila—became; prabhura—of Lord ঠা
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta—devotee; ekanta—unflinching; preme nace—
dances in ecstasy; krsna-nama laya—chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra; maha-
santa—very peaceful.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Amogha became an unalloyed devotee of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He danced in ecstasy and peacefully chanted the holy name of
Lord Krsna.
TEXT 297
এছে ण्लि-नोल। করে শচীর নন্দন।
যেই দেখে, Tw, ভার বিস্ময় হয় মন ॥ ২৯৭ ॥
aiche citra-lila kare sacira nandana
yei dekhe, sune, tanra vismaya haya mana
SYNONYMS
aiche—in this way; citra-lila—varieties of pastimes; kare—performs; sacira
nandana—the son of mother Sac; yei dekhe—anyone who sees; sune—hears;
tanra—his; vismaya—astonished; haya—becomes; mana —mind.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His various pastimes.
Whoever sees them or hears of them becomes truly astonished.
TEXT 298
এঁছে ভট্ট-গৃহে করে ভোজন-বিলাস |
তার মধ্যে নানা চিত্র-চরিত্র-প্রকাশ ॥ ২৯৮ ॥


--- Page 159 ---
Text 299] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 155
aiche bhatta-grhe kare bhojana-vilasa
tara madhye nana citra-caritra-prakasa
SYNONYMS
aiche—in this way; bhatta-grhe—in the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya;
kare —performs; bhojana-vilasa—pastime of eating; tara madhye—within that
pastime; nana—various; citra-caritra—of varieties of activities; prakasa—
manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu enjoyed eating in Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya’s house. Within that one pastime, many wonderful pastimes were
manifest.
TEXT 299
সার্বভৌম-ঘরে এই ভোজন-চরিত |
সার্বভৌম-প্রেম ষাহ। হইল। বিদিত ॥ ২৯৯ ॥
sarvabhauma-ghare ei bhojana-carita
sarvabhauma-prema yanha ha-ila vidita
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma-ghare—in the house of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; ei—these;
bhojana-carita—eating affairs; sarvabhauma-prema—love of Sarvabhauma Bhat-
tacarya; yanha—where; ha-ila—became; vidita—well known.
TRANSLATION
These are the peculiar characteristics of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
pastimes. Thus the Lord ate in Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya’s house, and in this
way Sarvabhauma’s love for the Lord has become very well known.
PURPORT
As stated in the Sakha-nirnayamrta:
amogha-panditam vande
$ri-gaurenatma-satkrtam
prema-gadgada-sandrangam
pulakakula-vigraham


--- Page 160 ---
156 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 15
“I offer my obeisances unto Amogha Pandita, who was accepted by Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. As a result of this acceptance, he was always merged in
ecstatic love, and he manifested ecstatic symptoms such as choking of the voice
and standing of the hairs on his body.”
TEXT 300
ষাঠীর মাতার প্রেম, আর প্রভুর প্রস।দ ।
তভক্ত-সন্বন্ধে যাহা ক্ষমিল অপরাধ ॥ ৩০০ ॥
sathira matara prema, ara prabhura prasada
bhakta-sambandhe yaha ksamila aparadha
SYNONYMS
sathira matara prema—the love of the mother of Sathi; ara—and; prabhura
prasada—the mercy of 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhakta-sambandhe —because
of a relationship with a devotee; yaha—where; ksamila aparadha—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu excused the offense.
TRANSLATION
Thus | have related the ecstatic love of Sarvabhauma'’s wife, who is known
as the mother of Sathi. | have also related Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s great
mercy, which He manifested by excusing Amogha’s offense. He did so due to
Amogha’s relationship with a devotee.
PURPORT
Amogha was an offender because he blasphemed the Lord. As a result, he was
about to die of cholera. Amogha did not receive an opportunity to be freed from
all offenses after being attacked by the disease, but Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and
his wife were very dear to the Lord. Because of their relationship, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu excused Amogha. Instead of being punished by the Lord, he was
saved by the Lord's mercy. All this was due to the unflinching love of Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Externally, Amogha was Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya’s son-in-law, and he was being maintained by Sar-
vabhauma. Consequently if Amogha were not excused, his punishment would
have directly affected Sarvabhauma. Amogha’s death would have indirectly
brought about the death of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
TEXT 301
শ্রদ্ধা করি' এই नोल শুনে যেই जन ।
অচিরাৎ পায় সেই চৈতদ্য-চরণ ॥ ৩০১ ॥


--- Page 161 ---
Text 302] Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Offers Prasada to the Lord 157
Sraddha kari’ ei lila Sune yei jana
acirat paya sei caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
Sraddha kari’—with faith and love; ei lila—this pastime; sune—hears; yei
jana—whoever; acirat—very soon; paya—attains; sei—he; caitanya-carana—the
lotus feet of Lord Caitanya.
TRANSLATION
Whoever hears these pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with faith and
love will attain the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet very soon.
TEXT 302
জীরূপ-রখুলাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চেৈতন্যচরিতান্ত কহে কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ৩০২ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Sri Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; d$a—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Riipa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
lla, Fifteenth Chapter, describing the Lord's eating at the house of Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya.


--- Page 162 ---
CHAPTER 16
The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following summary of this chapter in his
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to go to
Vrndavana, Ramananda Raya and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya indirectly presented
many obstructions. In due course of time, all the devotees of Bengal visited Jagan-
natha Puri for the third year. This time, all the wives of the Vaisnavas brought
many types of food, intending to extend invitations to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
at Jagannatha Puri. When the devotees arrived, Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent his
blessings in the form of garlands. In that year also, the Gundica temple was
cleansed, and when the Caturmasya period was over, all the devotees returned to
their homes in Bengal. Caitanya Mahaprabhu forbade Nityananda to visit Nilacala
every year. Questioned by the inhabitants of Kulina-grama, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
again repeated the symptoms of a Vaisnava. Vidyanidhi also came to Jagannatha
Puri and saw the festival of Odana-sasthi. When the devotees bade farewell to
the Lord, the Lord was determined to go to Vrndavana, and on the day of Vijaya-
dasami, He departed.

Maharaja Prataparudra made various arrangements for Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s trip to Vrndavana. When He crossed the River Citrotpala, Rama-
nanda Raya, Mardaraja and Haricandana went with Him. 7 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
requested ০9৪03017313 Pandita to go to Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri, but he did not
abide by this order. From Kataka, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again requested
Gadadhara Pandita to return to Nilacala, and He bade farewell to Ramananda Raya
from Bhadraka. After this, 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu crossed the border of Orissa
state, and He arrived at Panihati by boat. Thereafter He visited the house of
Raghava Pandita, and from there He went to Kumarahatta and eventually to
Kuliya, where He excused many offenders. From there He went to Ramakeli,
where He saw 57 Ripa and Sanatana and accepted them as His chief disciples.
Returning from Ramakeli, He met Raghunatha dasa and after giving him instruc-
tions sent him back home. Thereafter the Lord returned to Nildcala and began to
make plans {0 go to Vrndavana without a companion.

TEXT 1
N
(नौङ। छां न९ (शौीज्र८ मषः সিঞ্চন্‌ স্বালো কনাম্বতৈ: |
ভবাগ্নিদঞ্চজনতা-বীরুধঃ সমজীবয়ৎ ॥ > ॥
159


--- Page 163 ---
160 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
gaudodyanarn gaura-meghah
sifican svalokanamrtaih
bhavagni-dagdha-janata-
virudhah samajivayat
SYNONYMS
gauda-udyanam—upon the garden known as Gauda-desa; gaura-meghah—
the cloud known as Gaura; sifican—pouring water; sva—His own; alokana-
amrtaih —with the nectar of the glance; bhava-agni—by the blazing fire of ma-
terial existence; dagdha—having been burnt; janata—the people in general;
virudhah—who are like creepers and plants; samajivayat—revived.
TRANSLATION
By the nectar of His personal glance, the cloud known as $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu poured water upon the garden of Gauda-desa and revived the
people, who were like creepers and plants burning in the forest fire of ma-
terial existence.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় (गोत्रस्य orn নিভ্যানল্দ |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃষ্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; gauracandra—to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all
glories; nityananda—to Nityananda Prabhu; jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to
Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vinda—to the devotees of Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All
glories to Advaitacandra! All glories to all the devotees of the Lord!
TEXT 3
প্রভুর হইল ইচ্ছা! যাইতে বৃন্দাবন |
শুনিয়া প্রতাপরুদ্ব হইলা বিমন ॥ ৩ ॥


--- Page 164 ---
Text 5] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 161
prabhura ha-ila iccha yaite vindavana
Suniya prataparudra ha-ila vimana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ha-ila—there was; iccha—the
desire; yaite—to go; vrndavana—to Vindavana; suniya—hearing; prataparudra—
Maharaja Prataparudra; ha-ila vimana—became morose.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu decided to go to Vrndavana, and Maharaja Pra-
taparudra became very morose upon hearing this news.
TEXT 4
সার্বভৌম, রামানন্দ, আনি' দুই कन |
তু'হাকে কহেন রাজ বিনয়-বচন ॥ ৪ ॥
sarvabhauma, ramananda, ani’ dui jana
dunhake kahena raja vinaya-vacana
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma; ramananda—Ramananda; ani’—calling; dui
Jjana—two persons; durhake —unto both of them; kahena—said; raja—the King;
vinaya-vacana—submissive words.
TRANSLATION
The King therefore called for Sarvabhauma Bhatticarya and Ramananda
Raya, and he spoke the following submissive words to them.
TEXT 5
नोनोलि ছাড়ি” প্রভুর মন HE যাইতে ॥
তোমরা করহ যত্ন তাহারে রাখিতে ॥ ৫ ॥
niladri chadi’ prabhura mana anyatra yaite
tomara karaha yatna tanhare rakhite
SYNONYMS
niladri—)agannatha Puri; chadi’—giving up; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; mana—the mind; anyatra—elsewhere; yaite—to go; tomara—both
of you; karaha—make; yatna—endeavor; tanhare—Him; rakhite —to keep.


--- Page 165 ---
162 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Prataparudra Maharaja said, ‘‘Please endeavor to keep Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu here at Jagannatha Puri, for now He is thinking of going
elsewhere.
TEXT 6
তাহা विन এই Fler মোরে নাহি তায় |
গোসাঞ্চি রাখিতে Faz नान উপায় ॥ ७ ॥
tanha vina ei rajya more nahi bhaya
gosani rakhite karaha nana upaya
SYNONYMS
tanha vind —without Him; ei rajya—this kingdom; more —to me; nahi bhaya—
is not very pleasing; gosani—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rakhite—to keep;
karaha—do; nana upaya—various sorts of devices.
TRANSLATION
“Without Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, this kingdom is not pleasing to me.
Therefore please try to devise some plan to enable the Lord to stay here.”
TEXT 7
রামানন্দ, সার্বভৌম, তুইজনা-স্থানে |
তবে যুক্তি করে প্রভু- “যাব जुम्ला बटन ॥ ৭ ॥
ramananda, sarvabhauma, dui-jana-sthane
tabe yukti kare prabhu——"‘yaba vrndavane’
SYNONYMS
ramananda—Ramananda; sdrvabhauma—Sarvabhauma; dui-jana-sthane —
before the two persons; tabe—then; yukti kare—consulted; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yaba vrndavane —I shall go to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
After this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself consulted Ramananda Riya
and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, saying, “1 shall go to Vrndavana.””


--- Page 166 ---
Text 10] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 163
TEXT 8
তুঁহে কহে, -__রথযাত্র| কর দরশন।
कोक আইলে, তবে করিহ গমন ॥ ८. ॥
dunhe kahe, —ratha-yatra kara darasana
kartika aile, tabe kariha gamana
SYNONYMS
dunhe kahe—both of them said; ratha-yatra—the Ratha-yatra festival; kara
darasana—please see; kartika aile—when the month of Karttika arrives; tabe —at
that time; kariha gamana—You can go.
TRANSLATION वि
Ramananda Raya and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya requested the Lord to ob-
serve first the Ratha-yatra festival. Then when the month of Karttika arrived,
He could go to Vrndavana.
TEXT 9
কান্তিক আইলে কহে-_-এবে মহাশীত |
দোলযাত্র| দেখি” যাও- এই ভাল Fs ॥ > ॥
kartika aile kahe——ebe maha-sita
dola-yatra dekhi’ yao——ei bhala rita
SYNONYMS ॥
kartika aile—when the month of Karttika arrived; kahe—both of them said;
ebe—now; maha-sita—very cold; dola-yatra dekhi’—after seeing the Dola-yatra
ceremony; yao—You go; ei—this; bhala rita—a very nice program.
TRANSLATION
However, when the month of Karttika came, they both told the Lord, “Now
it is very cold. It is better that You wait to see the Dola-yatra festival and then
go. That will be very nice.”
TEXT 10
আজি-কালি করি” উঠায় বিবিধ উপায় ।
যাইতে সম্মতি না দেয় বিচ্ছেদের ভয় ॥ ১০ ॥


--- Page 167 ---
164 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
gji-kali kari’ uthaya vividha upaya
ydite sammati na deya vicchedera bhaya
SYNONYMS
aji-kali kari’—delaying today and tomorrow; uthdya—they put forward;
vividha upaya—many devices; yaite —to go; sammati—permission; na deya—did
not give; vicchedera bhaya—because of fearing separation.
TRANSLATION
In this way they both presented many impediments, indirectly not granting
the Lord permission to go to Vrndavana. They did this because they were
afraid of separation from Him.
TEXT 11
যদ্যপি স্বতন্ত্র প্রভু নহে নিবারণ ।
ভক্ত-ইচ্ছা বিনা প্রভু না করে গমন ॥ >> ॥
yadyapi svatantra prabhu nahe nivarana
bhakta-iccha vina prabhu na kare gamana
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; svatantra—fully independent; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nahe nivarana—there is no checking Him; bhakta-iccha vina—with-
out the permission of devotees; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na kare
gamana—does not go.
TRANSLATION
Although the Lord is completely independent and incapable of being
checked by anyone, He still did not go without the permission of His devo-
tees.
TEXT 12
তৃতীয় AACA সব গোৌড়ের ভক্তগণ |
লীলাচলে চলিতে সবার হৈল মন ॥ ১২ ॥
trtiya vatsare saba gaudera bhakta-gana
nilacale calite sabara haila mana


--- Page 168 ---
Text 15] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 165
SYNONYMS
trtiya vatsare—in the third year; saba—all; gaudera bhakta-gana—devotees
from Bengal; nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; calite—to go; sabara—of everyone;
haila—there was; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Then, for the third year, all the devotees of Bengal wanted to return again to
Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 13
সবে মেলি” (भेन অদ্বৈত আচার্যের পাশে |
প্রভু দেখিতে আচার্য एनिन। উল্লাসে ॥ ১৩ ॥
sabe meli’ gela advaita acaryera pase
prabhu dekhite acarya calila ullase
SYNONYMS
sabe —everyone; meli’—after assembling together; gela—went; advaita—
Advaita; acaryera—of the leader of Navadvipa; pase—in the presence; prabhu
dekhite—to see Lord अ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dcarya—Advaita Acarya; calila—
departed; ullase —in great jubilation.
TRANSLATION
All the Bengali devotees gathered around Advaita Acarya, and in great
jubilation Advaita Acarya departed to Jagannatha Puri to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXTS 14-15
যতপি প্রভুর আজ্ঞা গৌড়েতে রহিতে |
নিত্যানন্দ-প্রভুকে খ্রেমভক্তি প্রকাশিতে ॥ ১৪ ॥
তথাপি চলিলা মহাপ্রন্ভুরে দেখিতে ।
নিত্যানন্দের প্রেম-চেষ্টা কে পারে বুঝিতে ॥ ১৫ ॥
yadyapi prabhura 2/7 gaudete rahite
nityananda-prabhuke prema-bhakti prakasite
tathapi calila mahaprabhure dekhite
nityanandera prema-cesta ke pare bujhite


--- Page 169 ---
166 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; &jia—the order;
gaudete rahite—to stay in Bengal; nityananda-prabhuke —unto Nityananda
Prabhu; prema-bhakti—ecstatic love of Godhead; prakasite—to preach;
tathapi—still; calilai—departed; mahaprabhure—S$ri  Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dekhite —to see; nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; prema-cesta—the
activities of ecstatic love; ke—who; pare —is able; bujhite —to understand.
TRANSLATION
Although the Lord told Nityananda Prabhu to stay in Bengal and spread
ecstatic love of God, Nityananda left to go see Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Who
can understand Nityananda Prabhu’s ecstatic love?
TEXTS 16-17
আচার্যরত্ন, বিস্তানিথধি, ata, রামাই ।
বাসুদেব, মুবরারি, গে।বিন্দাদি তিন ভাই ॥ ১৬ ॥
রাখব পণ্ডিত নিজ-ঝালি जांका 1 |
কুলীন-গ্রামবাসী চলে পট্রভোরী sel ॥ ১৭ ॥
acaryaratna, vidyanidhi, srivasa, ramai
vasudeva, murari, govindadi tina bhai
raghava pandita nija-jhali sajana
kulina-grama-vasi cale patta-dori lana
SYNONYMS
acaryaratna—Acaryaratna; vidyanidhi—Vidyanidhi; srivasa —Srivasa; ramai—
Ramai; vasudeva—Vasudeva; murari—Murari; govinda-adi tina bhai—Govinda
and his two brothers; raghava pandita—Raghava Pandita; nija-jhali—his own
bags; sajana—assorting; kulina-grama-vasi—the inhabitants of Kulina-grama;
cale—went; patta-dori lana—taking silken ropes.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees of Navadvipa departed, including Acaryaratna, Vidyanidhi,
Srivasa, Ramai, Vasudeva, Murari, Govinda and his two brothers and Raghava
Pandita, who took bags of assorted foods. The inhabitants of Kulina-grama,
carrying silken ropes, also departed.


--- Page 170 ---
Text 20] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 167
TEXT 18
খণ্ডবাসী নরহরি, Baga |
সর্ব-ভক্ত' চলে, তার কে করে গণন ॥ ১৮ ॥
khanda-vasi narahari, $ri-raghunandana
sarva-bhakta cale, tara ke kare ganana
SYNONYMS
khanda-vasi narahari—Narahari, a resident of the village Khanda; sri-raghunan-
dana—Sri Raghunandana; sarva-bhakta—all the devotees; cale—went; tara—of
that; ke—who; kare ganana—can count.
TRANSLATION
Narahari and Sri Raghunandana, who were from the village of Khanda, and
many other devotees also departed. Who can count them?
TEXT 19
শিবানম্দ-সেন করে খাটি সমাধান।
সবারে পালন করি” সুখে Sel যান ॥ >> ॥
Sivananda-sena kare ghati samadhana
sabare palana kari’ sukhe lana yana
SYNONYMS
Sivananda-sena—Sivananda Sena; kare —made; ghati samadhana—arrange-
ments for expenditures to clear the tax collecting centers; sabare—everyone;
palana—maintaining; kari’—doing; sukhe—in happiness; lana—taking; yana—
goes.
TRANSLATION
Sivananda Sena, who was in charge of the party, made arrangements to
clear the tax collecting centers. He took care of all the devotees and happily
traveled with them.
TEXT 20
AIA ALTE করেন, দেন বাসা-স্থান |
শিবানন্দ জানে উড়িয়া-পথের সন্ধান ॥ ২০ ॥


--- Page 171 ---
168 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
sabara sarva-karya karena, dena vasa-sthana
sivananda jane udiya-pathera sandhana
SYNONYMS
sabara—of all of them; sarva-kiarya—everything necessary to be done;
karena—he does; dena—gives; vasa-sthana—residential places; Sivananda—Siva-
nanda; jane —knows; udiya-pathera—of the roads in Orissa; sandhana—the junc-
tions.
TRANSLATION
Sivananda Sena took care of all the necessities the devotees required. In
particular, he made arrangements for residential quarters, and he knew the
roads of Orissa.
TEXT 21
সে বৎসর প্রভু দেখিতে जव ঠাকুরাণী ।
চলিল। আচার্য-সঙ্গে অদ্যুত-জননী ॥ ২১ ॥
se vatsara prabhu dekhite saba thakurani
calila acarya-sange acyuta-janani
SYNONYMS
se vatsara—that year; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhite—to see;
saba thakurani—all the wives of the devotees; calila—went; acarya-sange —with
Advaita Acarya; acyuta-janani—the mother of Acyutananda.
TRANSLATION
That year also all the wives of the devotees [thakuranis] also went to see Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sitadevi, the mother of Acyutananda, went with
Advaita Acarya.
TEXT 22
ia পণ্ডিত-সঙ্গে চলিল। মালিনী ।
শিবানন্দ-সঙ্জে চলে কাহার গৃহিণী ॥ ২২ ॥
$rivasa pandita-sange calila malini
Sivananda-sange cale tanhara grhini


--- Page 172 ---
Text 24] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 169
SYNONYMS
$rivasa pandita-sange—with Srivasa Pandita; calila—went; malini—his wife,
Malint;  Sivananda-sarnge —with Sivananda Sena; cale—goes; tanhara—his;
grhini—wife.
TRANSLATION
Srivasa Pandita also took his wife, Malini, and the wife of Sivananda Sena
also went with her husband.
TEXT 23
শিবানন্দের বালক, নাম-_ চৈতন্তয-দাস |
(दङ्‌) চলিয়াছে প্রভুরে দেখিতে উল্লাস ॥ ২৩ ॥
Sivanandera balaka, nama ——caitanya-dasa
tenho caliyache prabhure dekhite ullasa
SYNONYMS
Sivanandera balaka—the son of Sivananda; nama—named; caitanya-dasa—
Caitanya dasa; tenho—he; caliyaiche—was going; prabhure—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dekhite—to see; ullasa—jubilantly.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya dasa, the son of Sivananda Sena, also jubilantly accompanied them
as they went to see the Lord.
TEXT 24
আচার্যরত্ন-সঙ্গে চলে তাঁহার গৃহিণী ।
তাহার প্রেমের কথা কহিতে না জানি ॥ ২৪ ॥
acaryaratna-sange cale tanhara grhini
tanhara premera katha kahite na jani
SYNONYMS
acaryaratna-sange —with Candrasekhara; cale—goes; tanhara—his; grhini—
wife; tanhara—his; premera katha—the description of the ecstatic love; kahite —
to speak; na jani—I do not know how.


--- Page 173 ---
170 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
The wife of Candrasekhara [Acaryaratnal also went. | cannot speak of the
greatness of Candrasekhara’s love for the Lord.
TEXT 25
সব ঠাকুরাণী মহাপ্রভুকে ow wes |
প্রভুর নানা প্রিয় कव निन ঘর হৈতে ॥ ২৫ ॥
saba thakurani mahaprabhuke bhiksa dite
prabhura nana priya dravya nila ghara haite
SYNONYMS
saba thakurani—all the wives of the great devotees; mahaprabhuke —to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhiksa dite—to offer food; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nana—various; priya dravya—pleasing foods; nila—took; ghara
haite —from home.
TRANSLATION
To offer Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu various types of food, all the wives of the
great devotees brought from home various things that pleased Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 26
শিবানন্দ-সেন করে जव সমাধান |
মার্টিয়াল প্রবোধি' দেন সবারে বাসা-স্থান ॥ ২৬ ॥
Sivananda-sena kare saba samadhana
ghatiyala prabodhi’ dena sabare vasa-sthana
SYNONYMS
divananda-sena—Sivananda Sena; kare —does; saba samadhana—all arrange-
ments; ghatiyala—the men in charge of levying taxes; prabodhi’—satisfying;
dena—gives; sabare—to everyone; vasa-sthana—resting places.
TRANSLATION
As stated, Sivananda Sena used to make all arrangements for the party’s
necessities. In particular, he used to pacify the men in charge of levying taxes,
and he found resting places for everyone.


--- Page 174 ---
Text 29] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 171
TEXT 27
ভক্ষ্য फिञ्च। করেন সবার সর্বত্র পালনে |
পরম আনন্দে যান প্রভুর দরশনে ॥ ২৭ ॥
bhaksya diya karena sabara sarvatra palane
parama dnande yana prabhura darasane
SYNONYMS
bhaksya diya—supplying food; karena—he does; sabara—of everyone; sar-
vatra—everywhere; palane—maintenance; parama anande—in great pleasure;
yana—he goes; prabhura darasane—to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Sivananda Sena also supplied food to all the devotees and took care of them
along the way. In this way, feeling great happiness he went to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 28
রেমবুণায় আসিয়। কৈল গোপীনাথ দরশন |
আচার্য করিল তাহ কীর্তন, নর্তন ॥ २४. ॥
remunaya asiya kaila gopinatha darasana
acarya karila tahan kirtana, nartana
SYNONYMS
remundya—to Remuna; asiya—after coming; kaila—performed; gopinatha
darasana—uvisiting the temple of Gopinatha; dcarya—Advaita Acarya; karila—
performed; tahan—there; kirtana—chanting; nartana—dancing.
TRANSLATION
When they all arrived at Remuna, they went to see Lord Gopinatha. In the
temple there, Advaita Acarya danced and chanted.
TEXT 29
নিত্যানম্দের পরিচয় जव সেবক সনে ।
AS সম্মান আসি” কৈল সেবকগণে ॥ ২৯ ॥


--- Page 175 ---
172 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
nityanandera paricaya saba sevaka sane
bahuta sammana asi’ kaila sevaka-gane
SYNONYMS
nityanandera—of Lord Nityananda Prabhu; paricaya—there was acquaintance;
saba—all; sevaka sane—with the priests of the temple; bahuta sammana—great
respect; dsi’—coming; kaila—offered; sevaka-gane—all the priests.
TRANSLATION
All the priests of the temple had been previously acquainted with Sri Nitya-
nanda Prabhu; therefore they all came to offer great respects to the Lord.
TEXT 30
সেই রাত্রি সব মহাম্ত खार्‌] य রহিলা |
বার ক্ষীর আনি” আগে সেবক ধরিল। ॥ ৩০ ॥
sei ratri 5303 mahanta tahani rahila
bara ksira ani’ age sevaka dharila
SYNONYMS
sei ratri—that night; saba mahanta—all the great devotees; tahani rahila—
remained there; bara—twelve pots; ksira—condensed milk; ani’—bringing;
age—in front of Nityananda Prabhu; sevaka—the priests; dharila—placed.
TRANSLATION
That night, all the great devotees remained in the temple, and the priests
brought twelve pots of condensed milk, which they placed before Lord Nitya-
nanda Prabhu.
TEXT 31
ক্ষীর বাটি” সবারে দিল প্রভু-নিত্যানন্দ।
ক্ষীর-প্রসাদ পাঞা সবার বাড়িল আলন্দ ॥ ৩১ ॥
ksira banti’ sabare dila prabhu-nityananda
ksira-prasada pana sabara badila ananda
SYNONYMS
ksira—the condensed milk; banti’—dividing; sabare—unto everyone; dila—
gave; prabhu-nityananda—Nityananda Prabhu; ksira-prasada—remnants of con-


--- Page 176 ---
Text 33] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 173
densed milk from the Deity; pana—getting; sabara—of everyone; badila—in-
creased; ananda—the transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
When the condensed milk was placed before Nityananda Prabhu, He dis-
tributed the prasada to everyone, and thus everyone's transcendental bliss in-
creased.
TEXT 32
মাধবপুরীর कव, গোপাল-স্থাপন |
তাহারে গোপাল যৈছে मानिन চন্দন ॥ ৩২ ॥
madhava-purira katha, gopala-sthapana
tanhare gopala yaiche magila candana
SYNONYMS
madhava-purira katha—the narration of Madhavendra Puri; gopala-sthapana—
installation of the Deity of Gopala; tanhare—unto him; gopala—Lord ০০313;
yaiche—just as; magila—He begged; candana—sandalwood.
TRANSLATION
They then all discussed the story of Sri Madhavendra Puri’s installation of
the Gopala Deity, and they discussed how Gopala begged sandalwood from
him.
TEXT 33
তার লাগি' গোপীনাথ ক্ষীর চুরি কৈল।
মহাপ্রভুর মুখে আগে এ কথা BFE ॥ ৩৩ ॥
tanra lagi’ gopinatha ksira curi kaila
mahaprabhura mukhe age e katha sunila
SYNONYMS
tanra lagi’—for him (Madhavendra Purl); gopinatha—the Deity named
Gopinatha; ksira—condensed milk; curi—stealing; kaila—performed;
mahaprabhura mukhe —from the mouth of इनं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ge —pre-
viously; € katha—this incident; sunila—heard.


--- Page 177 ---
174 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
It was Gopinatha who stole condensed milk for the sake of Madhavendra
Puri. This incident had been previously related by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Himself.
TEXT 34
সেই কথা সবার মধ্যে কহে নিত্যালম্দ |
শুনিয়। বৈষ্ণব-মনে বাড়িল আনন্দ ॥ ৩৪ ॥
sei katha sabara madhye kahe nityananda
Suniya vaispava-mane badila ananda
SYNONYMS
sei katha—that incident; sabara madhye —among all of them; kahe —says;
nityananda—Lord Nityananda Prabhu; suniya—hearing; vaisnava-mane—in the
minds of all the Vaisnavas; badila—increased; ananda—the transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
This same narration was again related by Lord Nityananda to all the devo-
tees, and their transcendental bliss increased as they heard the story again.
PURPORT
The words mahaprabhura mukhe, “from the mouth of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu,” are significant because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu first heard the
story of Madhavendra Puri from His spiritual master, Sripada Tévara Puri. For this
story refer to Madhya-lila, Chapter Four, verse eighteen. After staying at Sri
Adbvaita’s house in Santipura for some time, the Lord narrated the story of Madha-
vendra Puri to Nityananda Prabhu, Jagadananda Prabhu, Damodara Pandita and
Mukunda dasa. When they went to Remuna to the temple of Gopinatha, He de-
scribed Madhavendra Puri’s installation of the Gopala Deity as well as Gopinatha's
stealing condensed milk. Due to this incident, Lord Copinatha became well
known as Ksiracor3, the thief who stole condensed milk.
TEXT 35
এইমত চলি” চলি” কটক আইলা |
সাক্ষিগোপাল দেখি” जटव সে দিন রহিল ॥ ৩৫ ॥
ei-mata cali’ cali’ kataka aila
saksi-gopala dekhi’ sabe se dina rahila


--- Page 178 ---
Text 37] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 175
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; cali’ cali’—walking and walking; kataka aila—they
reached the town known as Kataka; saksi-gopala dekhi’—after seeing the Deity
known as Saksi-gopala; sabe—all the devotees; se dina—that day; rahila—
stayed.
TRANSLATION
Walking and walking in this way, the devotees arrived at the city of Kataka,
where they remained for a day and saw the temple of Saksi-gopala.
TEXT 36
সাক্ষিগোপালের কথা কহে নিত্যানন্দ |
শুনিয়া বৈষ্ণব-মনে বাড়িল আনন্দ ॥ ৩৬ ॥
saksi-gopalera katha kahe nityananda
Suniya vaisnava-mane badila ananda
SYNONYMS
saksi-gopalera—of the Deity known as Saksi-gopala; katha—the narration;
kahe—describes; nityananda—Nityananda Prabhu; Suniya—hearing; vaisnava-
mane —in the minds of all the Vaisnavas; badila—increased; ananda—the tran-
scendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
When Nityananda Prabhu described all the activities of Saksi-gopala, tran-
scendental bliss increased in the minds of all the Vaisnavas.
PURPORT
For these activities refer to Madhya-1ila, Chapter Five, verses 8-138.
TEXT 37
প্রভুকে মিলিতে সবার 8९ क$। অস্তরে |
শীঘ্র করি” আইল সবে জ্রীনীলাচলে ॥ ৩৭ ॥
prabhuke milite sabara utkantha antare
Sighra kari” aila sabe sri-nilacale
SYNONYMS
prabhuke milite—to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sabara—of everyone;
utkantha—anxiety; antare—within the heart; sighra kari’—making great haste;
aila—reached; sabe—all of them; sri-nilacale —)Jagannatha Puri.


--- Page 179 ---
176 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Everyone in the party was very anxious at heart to see Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; therefore they hastily went on to Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 38
আঠারনালাকে আইলা (भोज 3 निस ।
FE পাঠাইলা গো বিন্দ-হাতে দিয়া ॥ ৩৮ ॥
atharanalake aila gosani suniya
dui-mala pathaila govinda-hate diya
SYNONYMS
atharanalake —Atharanala; aili—they have reached; gosani—Sr Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; suniya—hearing; dui-mala—two garlands; pathaila—sent; govin-
da-hate diya—through the hands of Govinda.
TRANSLATION
When they all arrived at a bridge called Atharanala, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, hearing the news of their arrival, sent two garlands with Govin-
da.
TEXT 39
দুই Te (गो विन्न তুইজনে পরাইল |
दै, অবধূত-গোসাঞ্চি বড় স্থখ পাইল ॥ ৩৯ ॥
dui mala govinda dui-jane paraila
advaita, avadhata-gosani bada sukha paila
SYNONYMS
dui mala—the two garlands; govinda—Covinda; dui-jane paraila—placed on
the necks of two personalities; advaita—Advaita Acarya; avadhata-gosani—
Nityananda Prabhu; bada sukha paila—became very happy.
TRANSLATION
Govinda offered the two garlands to Advaita Acarya and Nityananda
Prabhu, and They both became very happy.
TEXT 40
তাহাঞ্ি আরম্ভ কৈল কৃষ্ণ-সংকীর্তন |
নাচিতে নাচিতে চলি” আইল দুইজন ॥ ৪০ ॥


--- Page 180 ---
Text 42] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 177
tahani arambha kaila krsna-sankirtana
nacite nacite cali’ aila dui-jana
SYNONYMS
tahani—on that very spot; drambha kaila—began; krsna-sarnkirtana—chanting
the holy name of Lord Krsna; nacite nacite—dancing and dancing; cali’—going;
aila—reached; dui-jana—both of Them.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, They began chanting the holy name of Krsna on that very spot, and,
dancing and dancing, both Advaita Acarya and Nityananda Prabhu reached
Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 41
পুনঃ মালা দিয়া স্বকূপাদি নিজগণ ।
আপু বাড়ি' পাঠাইল শচীর নন্দন ॥ ৪১ ॥
punah mala diya svarapadi nija-gana
agu badi’ pathaila sacira nandana
SYNONYMS
punah —again; mala—garlands; diya —offering; svarapa-adi—Svarapa
Damodara Gosvami and others; nija-gana—personal associates; agu badi’—going
forward; pathaila—sent; sacira nandana—the son of mother Saci.
TRANSLATION
Then, for the second time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent garlands through
Svaripa Damodara and other personal associates. Thus they went forward,
sent by the son of mother Saci.
TEXT 42
নরেন্দ্র আসিয়৷ তাহ সবারে जिनिन। ।
মহাপ্রভুর দত্ত মাল৷ সবারে পর৷ইল। ॥ ৪২ ॥
narendra asiya tahan sabare milila
mahaprabhura datta mala sabare paraila
SYNONYMS
narendra—to the lake named Narendra; asiya —coming; tahan —there;
sabare—everyone; milila—met; mahaprabhura—by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
datta—given; mala—garlands; sabare paraila—offered to everyone.


--- Page 181 ---
178 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
When the devotees from Bengal reached Lake Narendra, Svariipa Damodara
and the others met them and offered them the garlands given by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 43
সিংহদ্বার-নিকটে আইল निः গৌর রায় ।
আপনে আসিয়া প্রভু মিলিলা সবায় ॥ ৪৩ ॥
sirhha-dvara-nikate aila suni’ gauraraya
apane asiya prabhu milila sabaya
SYNONYMS
simha-dvara —the lion gate; nikate—near; aila—arrived; suni’—hearing;
gaurardya—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; apane —personally; asiya—coming;
prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; milila sabaya—met them all.
TRANSLATION
When the devotees finally reached the lion gate, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
heard the news and personally went to meet them.
TEXT 44
जव नग বকৈল জগন্নাথ-দরশন |
সবা Fpl আইলা পুলঃ আপন-ভবন ॥ 88 ॥
saba lana kaila jagannatha-darasana
saba lana aila punah apana-bhavana
SYNONYMS
saba lana—taking all of them; kaila—performed; jagannatha-darasana—seeing
Lord Jagannatha; saba lana—taking them all; diia—went back; punah—again;
apana-bhavana—to His own residence.
TRANSLATION
Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and all His devotees visited Lord Jagan-
natha. Finally, accompanied by them all, He returned to His own residence.


--- Page 182 ---
Text 47] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 179
TEXT 45
বাণীনাথ, কাশীমিশ্র প্রসাদ खोनिन |
স্বহস্তে সবারে প্রভু প্রসাদ খাওয়াইল ॥ ৪৫ ॥
৮3017380603, kasi-misra prasada anila
svahaste sabare prabhu prasada khaoyaila
SYNONYMS
vaninatha—Vaninatha; kasi-misra—Kasi Miéra; prasada anila—brought all kinds
of prasada; sva-haste—with His own hand; sabare—unto everyone; prabhu —5ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prasada—the remnants of the food of jagannatha;
khaoyaila—fed.
TRANSLATION
Vaninatha Raya and Kasi Misra then brought a large quantity of prasada, and
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu distributed it with His own hand and fed them all.
TEXT 46
পূর্ব বৎসরে यैत्र যেই বাসা-স্থান |
তাহ जद পাঠাঞা কর।ইল বিশ্রাম ॥ ৪৬ ॥
parva vatsare yanra yei vasa-sthana
tahan saba pathana karaila visrama
SYNONYMS
parva vatsare—in the previous year; yanra—of whom; yei—wherever; vasa-
sthana—place to stay; tahan—there; saba—all of them; pathana—sending;
karaila visrama—made them rest.
TRANSLATION
In the previous year, everyone had his own particular residence, and the
same residences were again offered. Thus they all went to take rest.
TEXT 47
এইমত ভক্তগণ রহিল। চারি মাস ।
প্রভুর সহিত করে কীর্তন-বিলাস ॥ ৪৭ ॥
ei-mata bhakta-gana rahila cari masa
prabhura sahita kare kirtana-vilasa


--- Page 183 ---
180 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; bhakta-gana—the devotees; rahila—remained; car
masa—for four months; prabhura sahita—with ১11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare —
performed; kirtana-vilasa—the pastimes of sankirtana.
TRANSLATION
For four continuous months all the devotees remained there and enjoyed
chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 48
পূর্ববৎ রথযাত্রা-কাল যবে আইল |
সবা Feel গুণ্ডিচা-মন্দির শ্রক্ষালিল ॥ ৪৮ ॥
pdarvavat ratha-yatra-kala yabe aila
saba lana gundica-mandira praksalila
SYNONYMS
parva-vat—as in the previous year; ratha-yatra-kala—the time for Ratha-yatra
festival; yabe —when; aila—arrived; saba lana—taking all of them; gundica-man-
dira—the temple of Gundica; praksalila—washed.
TRANSLATION
As in the previous year, they all washed the Gundica temple when the time
for Ratha-yatra arrived.
TEXT 49
কুলীনগ্রামী পট্রডোরী জগন্নাথে किन |
পুর্ববৎ রথ-অগ্রে নর্তন করিল ॥ ৪৯ ॥
kulina-grami patta-dori jagannathe dila
ptrvavat ratha-agre nartana karila
SYNONYMS
kulina-grami—the residents of Kulina-grama; patta-dori—silken ropes; jagan-
nathe dila—offered to Lord Jagannatha; pdrva-vat—Ilike the previous year; ratha-
agre—in front of the car; nartana karila—danced.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Kulina-grama delivered silken ropes to Lord Jagannatha,
and as previously they all danced before the Lord's car.


--- Page 184 ---
Text 52] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 181
TEXT 50
ag নৃত্য = পুনঃ एनिन উদ্ভানে ।
বাপী-তীরে ङ्‌] যাই” করিল বিশ্রামে ॥ ৫০ ॥
bahu nrtya kari’ punah calila udyane
vapi-tire tahan yai’ karila visrame
SYNONYMS
bahu nrtya kari’ —after dancing a great deal; punah —again; calila—started for;
udyane —the garden; vapi-tire—on the bank of the lake; tahan yai’—going there;
karila visrame —took rest.
TRANSLATION
After dancing a great deal, they all went to a nearby garden and took rest
beside a lake.
TEXT 51
রাড়ী এক विष्य, ভ্ঁহে। _নিত্যানন্দ দাস ।
মহা-ভাগ্যবান্‌ তেঁহে, নাম-_কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ৫১ ॥
13001 eka vipra, tenho——nityananda dasa
maha-bhagyavan tenho, nama——krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
radhi eka vipra—one brahmana resident of Radha-desa (where the Ganges
does not flow); tenho —he; nityananda dasa—servant of Lord Nityananda; maha-
bhagyavan—greatly fortunate; tenho—he; nama—named; krsnadasa—
Krsnadasa.
TRANSLATION
One brahmana named Krsnadasa, who was a resident of Ridha-desa and a
servant of Lord Nityananda’s, was a very fortunate person.
TEXT 52
ঘট ভরি” প্রভুর তেঁহে। অভিষেক टेकन्‌ |
তার অভিষেকে প্রভু মহা-তৃপ্ত হৈল ॥ ৫২ ॥
ghata bhari’ prabhura tenho abhiseka kaila
tanra abhiseke prabhu maha-trpta haila


--- Page 185 ---
182 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
ghata bhari’—filling one waterpot; prabhura—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tenho —he; abhiseka kaila—performed the bathing; tarira—his; abhiseke —by the
act of bathing the Lord; prabhu—S$i Caitanya Mahaprabhu; maha-trpta haila—
became very satisfied.
TRANSLATION
It was Krsnadasa who filled a great waterpot and poured it over the Lord
while He was taking His bath. The Lord was greatly satisfied by this.
TEXT 53
বলগঞ্ডি-ভোগের বহু প্রসাদ আইল |
সব৷। সঙ্গে মহাপ্রভু প্রসাদ AE ॥ ৫৩ ॥
balagandi-bhogera bahu prasada aila
saba sarige mahaprabhu prasada khaila
SYNONYMS
balagandi-bhogera—of the food offered at Balagandi; bahu prasada—a great
quantity of prasada; aila—arrived; saba sarige—with all the devotees;
mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prasiada—remnants of the food of
Jagannatha; khaila—ate.
TRANSLATION
The remnants of food offered to the Lord at Balagandi then arrived in great
quantity, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and all His devotees ate it.
PURPORT
In reference to Balagandi, see Madhya-lila (13.193).
TEXT 54
Hae त्रथयोल CFA দরশন |
হেরাপঞ্চমী-যাত্র৷ দেখে লঞ। ভক্তগণ ॥ ৫৪ ॥
parvavat ratha-yatra kaila darasana
hera-pancami-yatra dekhe lana bhakta-gana


--- Page 186 ---
Text 56] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 183
SYNONYMS
parva-vat—as in the previous year; ratha-yatra—the car festival; kaila
darasana—saw; hera-paficami-yatra—the festival of Hera-paficami; dekhe—He
sees; lana bhakta-gana—with all the devotees.
TRANSLATION
As in the previous year, the Lord, with all the devotees, saw the Ratha-yatra
festival and the Hera-pafncami festival as well.
TEXT 55
আচার্য-গোসাঞ্ি প্রভুর কৈল fama |
তার মধ্যে কৈল যৈছে ঝড়-বরিষণ ॥ ৫৫ ॥
acarya-gosani prabhura kaila nimantrana
tara madhye kaila yaiche jhada-varisana
SYNONYMS
acarya-gosani—Advaita Acarya; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kaila—made; nimantrapa—invitation; tara madhye —within that episode; kaila—
occurred; yaiche—just as; jhada-varisana—rainstorm.
TRANSLATION
Advaita Acarya then extended an invitation to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
and there was a great rainstorm connected with that incident.
TEXT 56
বিস্তারি” বর্ণিয়াছেন দাস-বৃন্দাবন |
Blain প্রভুরে তবে কৈল নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ৫৬ ॥
vistari’ varniyachena dasa-vrndavana
$rivasa prabhure tabe kaila nimantrana
SYNONYMS
vistari’—elaborating; varniyachena —has described; dasa-vrndavana —
Vrndavana dasa Thakura; srivasa—Srivasa; prabhure—to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tabe—then; kaila nimantrana—gave an invitation.


--- Page 187 ---
184 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
All these episodes have been elaborately described by Srila Vrndavana dasa
Thakura. Then one day Srivasa Thakura extended an invitation to the Lord.
PURPORT
Caitanya-bhagavata (Antya-lila, Chapter Eight) gives the following description.
One day Srila Advaita Acarya, having extended an invitation to Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, thought that if the Lord came alone He would feed Him to His great
satisfaction. It then so happened that when the other sannyasis were going to
Advaita Acarya’s to take lunch, there was a big rainstorm, and they could not
reach His house. Thus, according to Advaita Acarya’s desires, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu came alone and accepted the prasada.
TEXT 57
প্রভুর খ্জিয়-ব্যঞ্জন সব ब्रोटक्षन मानिनो |
SLE] দাসী”-অভিমান, “স্লেহেতে জননী” ॥ ৫৭ ॥
prabhura priya-vyanjana 5303 randhena /7731//771
‘bhaktye dasi’-abhimana, ‘snehete janani’
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; priya-vyarjana—favorite vegeta-
bles; saba—all; randhena—cooks; malini—the wife of Srivasa Thakura; bhaktye
dasi—in devotion she was just like a maidservant; abhimana—it was her concep-
tion; snehete—in affection; janani—exactly like a mother.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s favorite vegetables were cooked by Malinidevi, the wife of
Srivasa Thakura. She devotedly considered herself a maidservant of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's, but in affection she was just like a mother.
TEXT 58
আচার্যরত্ব-আদি বত মুখ্য ভক্তগণ |
মধ্যে মধ্যে প্রভুরে করেন নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ৫৮ ॥
acaryaratna-adi yata mukhya bhakta-gana
madhye madhye prabhure karena nimantrana


--- Page 188 ---
Text 60] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 185
SYNONYMS
acaryaratna—Candradekhara; adi—and others; yata—all; mukhya bhakta-
gana—chief devotees; madhye madhye—at intervals; prabhure—to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena nimantrana—gave invitations.
TRANSLATION
All the chief devotees, headed by Candrasekhara [Acaryaratnal used to ex-
tend invitations to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu periodically.
TEXT 59
ए ङ्मौ -खट ख পুনঃ নিত্যানন্দে न] |
কিবা gies করে নিত্য fags ami ॥ ৫৯ ॥
caturmasya-ante punah nityanande lana
kiba yukti kare nitya nibhrte vasiya
SYNONYMS
caturmasya-ante—at the end of Caturmasya; punah—again; nityanande—Sri
Nityananda Prabhu; 12758 —taking into confidence; kiba—what; yukti kare —They
consult; nitya—daily; nibhrte—in a solitary place; vasiya—sitting.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the four-month Caturmasya period, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
again consulted with Nityananda Prabhu daily in a solitary place. No one
could understand what Their consultation was about.
TEXT 60
আচার্য-গোসা ঞ্ প্রভুকে কহে ঠারে-ঠোরে |
আচার্য তর্জা পড়ে, কেহ বুঝিতে ন৷ পারে ॥ ৬০ ॥
acarya-gosani prabhuke kahe thare-thore
dcdrya tarja pade, keha bujhite na pare
SYNONYMS
acarya-gosani—Advaita Acarya; prabhuke—unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kahe—speaks; thare-thore—by indications; acarya—Advaita Acarya; tarja
pade —reads some poetic passages; keha—anyone; bujhite—to understand; na
pare—was not able.


--- Page 189 ---
186 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Then Srila Advaita Acarya said something to Caitanya Mahaprabhu through
gestures and read some poetic passages, which no one understood.
TEXT 61
তার गुथ দেখি” হাসে শচীর নন্দন |
অঙীকার জান্গি আচার্য করেন নর্তন ॥ ৬১ ॥
tanra mukha dekhi’ hase sacira nandana
angikara jani’ acarya karena nartana
SYNONYMS
tanra mukha—His face; dekhi’—seeing; hase —smiles; sacira nandana—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; angikara jani’—understanding the acceptance; acarya—
Advaita Acarya; karena—performed; nartana—dancing.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the face of Advaita Acarya, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled.
Understanding that the Lord had accepted the proposal, Advaita Acarya
started to dance.
TEXT 62
কিবা প্রার্থনা, किव। আজ্ঞা কেহু नां বুঝিল |
আলিঙ্গন করি” প্রভু ভারে বিদায় দিল ॥ ৬২ ॥
kiba prarthana, kiba ajna——keha na bujhila
alingana kari’ prabhu tanre vidaya dila
SYNONYMS
kiba—what; prarthana—the request; kiba—what; ajna—the order; keha—
anyone; na bujhila—did not know; alingana kari’—embracing; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre —to Him; vidaya dila—bade farewell.
TRANSLATION
No one knew what Advaita Acarya requested or what the Lord ordered.
After embracing the Acarya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade Him farewell.
TEXT 63
নিত্যানম্দে কহে প্রভু, नङ, প্রীপাদ |
এই আমি মাগি, তুমি করহ व्थमोन ॥ ৬৩ ॥


--- Page 190 ---
Text 64] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 187
nityanande kahe prabhu, —sunaha, sripada
ei ami magi, tumi karaha prasada
SYNONYMS
nityanande—unto Sri Nityananda Prabhu; kahe—says; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sunaha—please hear; sri-pada—O holy man; ei—this; ami—I;
magi—request; tumi—You; karaha—kindly show; prasada—mercy.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then told Nityananda Prabhu, ‘‘Please hear Me, O
holy man: I now request something of You. Kindly grant My request.
TEXT 64
প্রতিবর্ধ নীলাচলে তুমি न আসিবা।
(नद्‌ রহি” মোর ইচ্ছ। সফল করিব! ॥ ৬৪ ॥
prati-varsa nilacale tumi na asiba
gaude rahi’ mora iccha saphala kariba
SYNONYMS
prati-varsa—every year; nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; tumi—You; na asiba—do
not come; gaude rahi’—staying in Bengal; mora icchai—My desire; sa-phala
kariba—make successful.
TRANSLATION ड
‘‘Do not come to Jagannatha Puri every year, but stay in Bengal and fulfill
My desire.”
PURPORT
The mission of ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu is to spread the only medicine effec-
tive in this fallen age of Kali—the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
Following the orders of His mother, $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu was residing at
Jagannatha Puri, and the devotees were coming to see Him. However, the Lord
felt that this message must be spread very elaborately in Bengal, and in His ab-
sence there was not a second person capable of doing it. Consequently the Lord
requested Nityananda Prabhu to stay there and broadcast the message of Krsna
consciousness. The Lord also entrusted a similar preaching responsibility to Rapa
and Sanatana. Nityananda Prabhu was requested not to come every year to
Jagannatha Puri, although seeing Lord Jagannatha greatly benefits everyone. Does
this mean that the Lord was refusing Nityananda Prabhu a fortunate opportunity?
No. One who is a faithful servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu must execute His


--- Page 191 ---
188 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
order, even if one has to sacrifice going to Jagannatha Puri to see Lord Jagannatha
there. In other words, it is a greater fortune to carry out Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
order than to satisfy one’s senses by seeing Lord Jagannatha.

Preaching Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s cult throughout the world is more important
than staying in Vrndavana or Jagannatha Puri for one’s own personal satisfaction.
Spreading Krsna consciousness is Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mission; therefore
His sincere devotees must carry out His desire.

prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama
sarvatra pracara haibe mora nama
The devotees of Lord Caitanya must preach Krsna consciousness in every village
and town in the world. That will satisfy the Lord. It is not that one should act
whimsically for his own personal satisfaction. This order comes down through the
parampara system, and the spiritual master presents these orders to the disciple so
that he can spread the message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It is the duty of
every disciple to carry out the order of the bona fide spiritual master and spread
Lord Caitanya’s message all over the world.
TEXT 65
खां] সিদ্ধি করে- হেন wD al দেখিয়ে |
আমার FHA कर्म, (SIAN হৈতে হয়ে ॥ ৬৫ ॥
tahan siddhi kare —hena anye na dekhiye
amara ‘duskara’ karma, toma haite haye
SYNONYMS

tahan—there; siddhi—success; kare—makes; hena—such; anye —other per-
son; na—not; dekhiye—I| see; amara—My; duskara—difficult to perform; kar-
ma—work; toma—You; haite—from; haye —becomes successful.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, “You can perform a task that even ॥
cannot do. But for You, | cannot find anyone in Gauda-desa who can fulfill My
mission there.”

PURPORT

Lord Caitanya’s mission is to deliver the fallen souls of this age. In this age of
Kali, practically cent percent of the population is fallen. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
certainly delivered many fallen souls, but His disciples mainly came from the up-


--- Page 192 ---
Text 65] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 189
per classes. For example, He delivered Srila Ripa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami, Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya and many others who were socially elevated but fallen
from the spiritual point of view. Srila 1২03 and Sanatana Gosvamis were situated
in government service, and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was the topmost scholar of
India. Similarly, Prakasananda Sarasvati was a leader of many thousands of
Mayavadi sannyasis. It was Srila Nityananda Prabhu, however, who delivered per-
sons like Jagai and Madhai. Therefore, Lord Caitanya says, amara ‘duskara’ karma,
toma haite haye. Jagai and Madhai were delivered solely by Nityananda Prabhu’s
mercy. When they injured Nityananda Prabhu, Lord Caitanya became angry and
decided to kill them with His Sudarsana cakra, but Nityananda Prabhu saved them
from the Lord's wrath and delivered them. In the incarnation of Gaura-Nitdi, the
Lord is not supposed to kill demons but deliver them by preaching Krsna con-
sciousness. In the case of Jagai and Madhai, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so
angry that He would have immediately killed them, but Nityananda Prabhu was
so kind that He not only saved them from death but elevated them to the tran-
scendental position. Thus what was not possible for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was carried out by Nityananda Prabhu.

Similarly, if one is true to Gaura-Nitai's service in the disciplic succession, he can
even excel Nityananda Prabhu’s service. This is the process of disciplic succession.
Nityananda Prabhu delivered Jagai and Madhai, but a servant of Nityananda
Prabhu, by His grace, can deliver many thousands of Jagai’'s and Madhai's. That is
the special benediction of the disciplic succession. One who is situated in the dis-
ciplic succession can be understood by the result of his activities. This is always
true as far as the activities of the Lord and His devotees are concerned. Therefore
Lord Siva says:

aradhananarm sarvesarm
visnor aradhanarh pararh
tasmat paratararn devi
tadiyanarm samarcanam
“Of all types of worship, worship of Lord Visnu is best, and better than the wor-
ship of Lord Visnu is the worship of His devotee, the Vaisnava.” (Padma Purana)

By the grace of Visnu, a Vaisnava can render better service than Visnu; that is
the special prerogative of a Vaisnava. The Lord actually wants to see His servants
work more gloriously than Himself. For instance, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra,
Sri Krsna provoked. Arjuna to fight because all the warriors on the battlefield were
to die by Krsna's plan. Krsna Himself did not want to take credit; rather, He
wanted Arjuna to take credit. Therefore He asked him to fight and win fame.

tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitva satran bhunksva rajyar samrddham


--- Page 193 ---
190 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
mayaivaite nihatah parvam eva
nimitta-matrarh bhava savyasacin
“Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies, you will
enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement,
and you, O Savyasacin, can be but an instrument in the fight” (Bg. 11.33)
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives credit to a devotee who per-
forms any heavy task perfectly. Hanumanji, or Vajrangaji, the servant of Lord
Ramacandra, also serves as another example. It was Hanumanji who jumped over
the sea in one leap and reached the shore of Lanka from the shore of Bharata-
varsa. When Lord Ramacandra chose to go there, He paved the way with stones,
although by His will the stones were able to float on the sea. If we simply follow
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s instructions and follow in the footsteps of Sri Nitya-
nanda Prabhu, this Krsna consciousness movement can advance, and even more
difficult tasks can be performed by the preachers remaining faithful to the service
of the Lord.
TEXT 66
নিত্যানন্দ কহে, _ আমি “দেহ” fae’ |
“দেহ” প্রোণ” ভিন্ন নহে,-_এই © প্রমাণ ॥ ৬৬ ॥
nityananda kahe, —ami ‘deha’ tumi ‘prana’
‘deha’ ‘prana’ bhinna nahe, — ei ta pramana
SYNONYMS
nityananda kahe—Lord Nityananda Prabhu said; ami—I; deha—the body;
tumi—You; prana—the life; deha—the body; prana—the life; bhinna nahe —not
separate; ei ta pramana—this is the evidence.
TRANSLATION
Nityananda Prabhu replied, “0 Lord, You are the life, and | am the body.
There is no difference between the body and life itself, but life is more impor-
tant than the body.
TEXT 67
অচিন্ত্যশক্তেয কর ভুমি তাহার ঘটন |
যে कन्नो, সেই করি, নাহিক নিয়ম ॥ ৬৭ ॥
acintya-saktye kara tumi tahara ghatana
ye karaha, sei kari, nahika niyama


--- Page 194 ---
Text 67] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 191
SYNONYMS

acintya-saktye —by inconceivable energy; kara—do; tumi—You; tahara—of
that relationship; ghatana—the operation; ye —whatever; karaha—You make Me
do; sei—that; kari—I| do; nahika—there is not; niyama—restriction.

TRANSLATION

‘‘By Your inconceivable energy, You can do whatever You like, and whatever

You make Me do, | do without restriction.”
PURPORT

As stated in the beginning of $rimad-Bhagavatam: tene brahma hrda ya adi-
kavaye. Lord Brahma is the first living creature within this universe, and he is also
the creator of this universe. How is this possible? Although he is the first living en-
tity, Lord Brahma is not in the category of vispu-tattva. Rather, he is part of the
jiva-tattva. Nonetheless, by the grace of the Lord, who instructed him through the
heart (tene brahma hrda), Lord Brahma could create a huge universe. Those who
are actually pure devotees of the Lord are instructed by the Lord through the
heart, where the Lord is always situated. I$varah sarva-bhatanar hrd-dese ‘riuna
tisthati (Bg. 18.61). If he follows the instructions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the living entity, even though an insignificant creature, can perform the
most difficult tasks by the Lord's grace. This also is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:

tesa satata-yuktanarn
bhajatar priti-parvakam
dadami buddhi-yogari tam
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, | give the
understanding by which they can come to Me.” (Bg. 10.10)

Everything is possible for a pure devotee because he acts under the instructions
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Through His inconceivable energy, a pure
devotee can perform tasks that are supposed to be very, very difficult. He can per-
form tasks not even previously performed by the Lord Himself. Therefore Nitya-
nanda Prabhu told $f Caitanya Mahaprabhu, ye karaha, sei kari, nahika niyama: “|
do not know by what regulative principle | am carrying out this wonderful work,
but | know for certain that | will do whatever You desire.” Although the Lord
wants to give all credit to His devotee, the devotee himself never takes credit, for
he acts only under the Lord’s direction. Consequently all credit goes to the Lord.
This is the nature of the relationship between the Lord and His devotee. The Lord
wants to give all credit to His servant, but the servant does not take any credit, for
he knows that everything is carried out by the Lord.


--- Page 195 ---
192 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 68
তারে বিদায় দিল প্রভু করি” আলিঙ্গন ৷
এইমত বিদায় দিল जव ভক্তগণ ॥ ৬৮ ॥
(3/7)/65 vidaya dila prabhu kari’ alingana
ei-mata vidaya dila saba bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
tanre—unto Him (Nityananda Prabhu); viddya dila—bade farewell; prabhu—
Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kari’—doing; alingana—embracing; ei-mata—in
this way; viddya dila—bade farewell; saba—to all; bhakta-gana—the devotees.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced Nityananda Prabhu and
bade Him farewell. He then bade farewell to all the other devotees.
TEXT 69
কুলীনগ্রামী शरर्वद< टे कन নিবেদন |
“প্রভু, Bigs] কর, আমার কর্তব্য সাধন” ॥ ৬৯ ॥
kulina-grami parvavat kaila nivedana
“prabhu, 5/7 kara, —amara kartavya sadhana”
SYNONYMS
kulina-grami—one of the residents of Kulina-grama; parva-vat—like last year;
kaila—submitted; nivedana—petition; prabhu—my Lord; कतके kara—order;
amara—my; kartavya —necessary; sadhana—performance.
TRANSLATION
As in the previous year, one of the inhabitants of Kulina-grama submitted a
petition to the Lord, saying, ‘My Lord, kindly tell me what my duty is and how
॥ should execute it.”
TEXT 70
HG কহে, “टवसभ्व-८जय, নাম-সংকীর্তন |
তুই কর, My পাবে छ कसऽ-छएद्र 1” १० ॥
prabhu kahe, — “vaispava-seva, nama-sankirtana
dui kara, Sighra pabe sri-krsna-carana”


--- Page 196 ---
Text 72] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 193
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; vaisnava-seva—service to the Vaisnavas;
nama-sarikirtana—chanting the holy name of the Lord; dui kara—you perform
these two things; sighra—very soon; pabe—you will get; sri-krspa-carana—
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, Sri Krsna.
TRANSLATION
The Lord replied, ‘You should engage yourself in the service of the servants
of Krsna and always chant the holy name of Krsna. If you do these two things,
you will very soon attain shelter at Krsna’s lotus feet.”
TEXT 71
ঙেঁহো ITH, — ^८क বৈষ্ণব, कि তার লক্ষণ ?”
তবে হাসি” কহে প্রভু জানি” তার মন ॥ ৭১ ॥
teriho kahe, — “ke vaisnava, ki tarra laksana?’
tabe hasi’ kahe prabhu jani’ tanra mana
SYNONYMS
teriho kahe —he said; ke—who; vaisnava—a Vaisnava; ki—what; tarira—of
him; laksana —the symptoms; tabe—thereafter; hasi’—smiling; kahe—says;
prabhu—5r7 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jani’—knowing; tarira mana—his mind.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitant of Kulina-grama said, ‘‘Please let me know who is actually a
Vaisnava and what his symptoms are.” Understanding his mind, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu smiled and gave the following reply.
TEXT 72
“কৃষ্ণনাম নিরস্তর যাহার awe |
সেই বৈষ্ণব-শ্রেষ্ঠ, ভজ SIE চরণে ॥ ৭২ ॥
“krspa-nama nirantara yanhara vadane
sei vaisnava-srestha, bhaja tanhara carane
SYNONYMS
krsna-nama—the holy name of Lord Krsna; nirantara—incessantly; yanhara—
whose; vadane—in the mouth; sei—such a person; vaisnava-srestha—a first-class
Vaisnava; bhaja—worship; tanhara carane—his lotus feet.


--- Page 197 ---
194 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION

“A person who is always chanting the holy name of the Lord is to be con-

sidered a first-class Vaisnava, and your duty is to serve his lotus feet.”
PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that any Vaisnava who is con-
stantly chanting the holy name of the Lord should be considered to have attained
the second platform of Vaisnavism. Such a devotee is superior to a neophyte
Vaisnava who has just learned to chant the holy name of the Lord. A neophyte
devotee simply tries to chant the holy name, whereas the advanced devotee is
accustomed to chanting and takes pleasure in it. Such an advanced devotee is
called madhyama-bhagavata, which indicates that he has attained the intermedi-
ate stage between the neophyte and the perfect devotee. Generally a devotee in
the intermediate stage becomes a preacher. A neophyte devotee or an ordinary
person should worship the madhyama-bhagavata, who is a via medium.

In his Upadesamrta Srila Rapa Gosvami says: pranatibhis ca bhajantam sam.
This means that madhyama-adhikari devotees should exchange obeisances be-
tween themselves.

The word nirantara, meaning “without cessation, continuously, constantly,” is
very important in this verse. The word antara means “interval.” If one has desires
other than a desire to perform devotional service—in other words, if one some-
times engages in devotional service and sometimes strives for sense gratifica-
tion —his service will be interrupted. A pure devotee, therefore, should have no
other desire than to serve Krsna. He should be above fruitive activity and specula-
tive knowledge. In his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Srila Rapa Gosvami says:

anyabhilasita-sanyam
jAana-karmady-anavrtam
anukalyena krsnanu-
Silanam bhaktir uttama
This is the platform of pure devotional service. One should not be motivated by
fruitive activity or mental speculation but should simply serve Krsna favorably.
That is first-class devotion.

Another meaning of antara is "this body.” The body is an impediment to self-
realization because it is always engaged in sense gratification. Similarly, antara
means “money.” If money is not used in Krsna’s service, it is also an impediment.
Antara also means janata, “people in general.” The association of ordinary persons
may destroy the principles of devotional service. Similarly, antara may mean
“greed,” greed to acquire more money or enjoy more sense gratification. Finally,
the word antara may also mean “atheistic ideas” by which one considers the


--- Page 198 ---
Text 72] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 195
temple Deity to be made of stone, wood or gold. All of these are impediments.
The Deity in the temple is not material —He is the Supreme Personality of God-
head Himself. Similarly, considering the spiritual master an ordinary human being
(gurusu nara-matih) is also an impediment. Nor should one consider a Vaisnava a
member of a particular caste or nation. Nor should a Vaisnava be considered ma-
terial. Caranamrta should not be considered ordinary drinking water, and the holy
name of the Lord should not be considered an ordinary sound vibration. Nor
should one look on Lord Krsna as an ordinary human being, for He is the origin of
all visnu-tattvas; nor should one regard the Supreme Lord as a demigod. Intermin-
gling the spiritual with the material causes one to look on transcendence as ma-
terial and the mundane as spiritual. This is all due to a poor fund of knowledge.
One should not consider Lord Visnu and things related to him as being different.
All this is offensive.

In the Bhakti-sandarbha (265), Srila Jiva Gosvami writes: namaikam yasya vaci
smarana-patha-gatam ityadau deha-dravinadi-nimittaka-‘pasanda’-sabdena ca
dasa aparadha laksyante, pasandamayatvat tesam.

The Mayavadis look on Visnu and Vaisnavas imperfectly due to their poor fund
of knowledge, and this is condemned. In S$rimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.46), the inter-
mediate Vaisnava is described as follows:

isvare tad-adhinesu
balisesu dvisatsu ca
prema-maitri-krpopeksa
yah karoti sa madhyamah
“The intermediate Vaisnava has to love God, make friends with the devotees, in-
struct the innocent and reject jealous people.” These are the four functions of the
Vaisnava in the intermediate stage. In Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.64) Sri
Sanatana Gosvami is taught:
Sraddhavan jana haya bhakti-adhikari
‘uttama’, ‘madhyama’, ‘kanistha’——sraddha-anusari
“One who is faithful is a proper candidate for devotional service. In terms of one’s
degree of faith in devotional service, one is a first-class, second-class or neophyte
Vaishnava.”
Sastra-yukti nahi jane 01003, sraddhavan
‘madhyama-adhikari’ sei maha-bhagyavan
“One who has attained the intermediate stage is not very advanced in $astric
knowledge, but he has firm faith in the Lord. Such a person is very fortunate to be
situated on the intermediate platform.” (Cc. Madhya 22.67)


--- Page 199 ---
196 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
rati-prema-taratamye bhakta—tara-tama
“Attraction and love are the ultimate goal of devotional service. The degrees of
such attraction and love for God distinguish the different stages of devotion—
neophyte, intermediate and perfectional.”” (Cc. Madhya 22.71) An intermediate
devotee is greatly attracted to chanting the holy name, and by chanting he is ele-
vated to the platform of love. If one chants the holy name of the Lord with great
attachment, he can understand his position as an eternal servant of the spiritual
master, other Vaisnavas and Krsna Himself. Thus the intermediate Vaisnava con-
siders himself krspa-dasa, Krsna's servant. He therefore preaches Krsna conscious-
ness to innocent neophytes and stresses the importance of chanting the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra. An intermediate devotee can identify the nondevotee or
motivated devotee. The motivated devotee or the nondevotee are on the mate-
rial platform, and they are called prakrta. The intermediate devotee does not mix
with such materialistic people. However, he understands that the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and everything related to Him are on the same transcenden-
tal platform. Actually none of them are mundane.
TEXT 73

বর্ষ স্তরে পুলঃ Sil Gre @ देकन |

বৈষ্ণবের তারতম্য প্রভু শিখাইল ॥ ৭৩ ॥

varsantare punah tanra aiche prasna kaila

vaisnavera taratamya prabhu sikhaila

SYNONYMS
varsantare —after one year; punah—again; tanra—they (the inhabitants of
Kulina-grama); aiche —such; prasna—a question; kaila—made; vaisnavera—of
Vaisnavas; taratamya—upper and lower gradations; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sikhaila—taught.
TRANSLATION
The following year, the inhabitants of Kulina-grama again asked the Lord
the same question. Hearing this question, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again
taught them about the different types of Vaisnavas.
TEXT 74
যাহার দর্শনে মুখে আইসে FRA |
তাহারে জানিহ তুমি “বৈষ্ণব-প্রধান? ॥ ৭৪ ॥


--- Page 200 ---
Text 74] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 197
yanhdra darsane mukhe aise krsna-nama
tanhare janiha tumi ‘vaispava-pradhana’
SYNONYMS
yanhara darsane—by the sight of whom; mukhe—in the mouth; aise —auto-
matically awakens; krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna; tanhare—him; janiha—
must know; tumi—you; vaisnava-pradhana—the first-class Vaisnava.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “A first-class Vaisnava is he whose very
presence makes others chant the holy name of Krsna.”
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that if an observer immediately
remembers the holy name of Krsna upon seeing a Vaisnava, that Vaisnava should
be considered a maha-bhagavata, a first-class devotee. Such a Vaisnava is always
aware of his Krsna conscious duty, and he is enlightened in self-realization. He is
always in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and this love is
without adulteration. Because of this love, he is always awake to transcendental
realization. Because he knows that Krsna consciousness is the basis of knowledge
and action, he sees everything connected with Krsna. Such a person is able to
chant the holy name of Krsna perfectly. Such a maha-bhagavata Vaisnava has the
transcendental eyes to see who is sleeping under the spell of maya, and he
engages himself in awakening sleeping conditioned beings by spreading the
knowledge of Krsna consciousness. He opens eyes that are closed by forgetful-
ness of Krsna. Thus the living entity is liberated from the dullness of material en-
ergy and is engaged fully in the service of the Lord. The madhyama-adhikari
Vaisnava can awaken others to Krsna consciousness and engage them in duties
whereby they can advance. It is therefore said in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya-
lila, Chapter Six, verse 279):
lohake yavat sparsi’” hema nahi kare
tavat sparsa-mani keha cinite na pare
“One cannot understand the value of touchstone until it turns iron into gold.”
One should judge by action, not by promises. A maha-bhagavata can turn a living
entity from abominable material life to the Lord's service. This is the test of a
maha-bhagavata. Although preaching is not meant for a maha-bhagavata, a maha-
bhagavata can descend to the platform of madhyama-bhagavata just to convert
others to Vaisnavism. Actually a maha-bhagavata is fit to spread Krsna conscious-
ness, but he does not distinguish where Krsna consciousness should be spread


--- Page 201 ---
198 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
from where it should not. He thinks that everyone is competent to accept Krsna
consciousness if the chance is provided. A neophyte and intermediate devotee
should always be anxious to hear the maha-bhagavata and serve him in every
respect. The neophyte and intermediate devotees can gradually rise to the plat-
form of uttama-adhikari and become first-class devotees. Symptoms of a first-
class devotee are given in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.45) :
sarva-bhatesu yah pasyed
bhagavad-bhavam atmanah
bhatani bhagavaty atmany
esa bhagavatottamah
When teaching Sanatana Gosvami, the Lord further said:

Sastra-yuktye sunipuna, drdha-sraddha yanra

‘uttama-adhikari’ se taraye sarhsara
“If one is expert in Vedic literature and has full faith in the Supreme Lord, then he
is an uttama-adhikari, a first-class Vaisnava, a topmost Vaisnava who can deliver
the whole world and turn everyone to Krsna consciousness.”
(Cc. Madhya 22.65) With great love and affection, the maha-bhagavata observes
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, devotional service and the devotee. He ob-
serves nothing beyond Krsna, Krsna consciousness and Krsna's devotees. The
maha-bhagavata knows that everyone is engaged in the Lord's service in different
ways. He therefore descends to the middle platform to elevate everyone to the
Krsna conscious position.

TEXT 75
व्कम कत्रि" কহে প্রভু “বৈষ্ণব”-লক্ষণ |
TTB, “বৈষ্ণবতর', আর “বৈষ্ণবতম” ॥ १९ ॥
krama kari’ kahe prabhu ‘vaisnava’-laksana
‘vaispava’, ‘vaispavatara’, ara ‘vaispavatama’
SYNONYMS
krama kari’—dividing according to grades; kahe prabhu—Sri Caitanya

Mahaprabhu spoke; vaisnava-laksana—the symptoms of Vaisnavas; vaisnava—
the ordinary Vaisnava (the positive platform); vaisnava-tara—the better Vaisnava
(the comparative platform); ara—and; vaisnava-tama—the best Vaisnava (the
superlative platform).


--- Page 202 ---
Text 771 The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 199
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed different types of
Vaisnavas —the Vaisnava, Vaisnavatara and Vaisnavatama. He thus suc-
cessively explained all the symptoms of a Vaisnava to the inhabitants of
Kulina-grama.
TEXT 76
এইমত जव বৈষ্ণব গৌড়ে চলিল। |
विष्टानिषि সে seam নীলাদ্বি রহিলা ॥ ৭৬ ॥
ei-mata 5303 vaispava gaude calila
vidyanidhi se vatsara niladri rahila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; saba—all; vaispava—devotees; gaude calila—returned
to Bengal; vidyanidhi—Pundarika Vidyanidhi; se vatsara—that year; niladri
rahila—remained at Niladri, Jagannatha Puri.
TRANSLATION
Finally all the Vaisnavas returned to Bengal, but that year Pundarika
Vidyanidhi remained at Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 77
স্বরূপ-সহিত তার হয় সখ্য-প্রীতি।
তুই-জনায় कुस कष्या ग्न একত্রই স্থিতি ॥ ৭৭ ॥
svartipa-sahita tanra haya sakhya-priti
dui-jandya krsna-kathaya ekatra-i sthiti
SYNONYMS
svarapa-sahita—with Svaripa Damodara Gosvami; tarra—his; haya—there is;
sakhya-priti—very intimate friendship; dui-jandaya—both of them; krsna-
kathaya—in topics of Krsna; ekatra-i—on the same level; sthiti—position.
TRANSLATION
Svariipa Damodara Gosvami and Pundarika Vidyanidhi had a friendly, inti-
mate relationship, and as far as discussing topics about Krsna, they were situ-
ated on the same platform.


--- Page 203 ---
200 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 78
গদাধর-পণ্ডিতে তেঁহো शुनः মন্ত্র দিল |
ওড়ন-ষ্র দিনে যাত্র| যে দেখিল ॥ ৭৮ ॥
gadadhara-pandite tenho punah mantra dila
odana-sasthira dine yatra ye dekhila
SYNONYMS
gadadhara-pandite—unto Gadadhara Pandita; tenho —Pundarika Vidyanidhi;
punah —again, the second; mantra—initiation; dila—gave; odana-sasthira dine —
on the day of performing the Odana-sasthi function; yatra—festival; ye—indeed;
dekhila—he saw.
TRANSLATION
Pundarika Vidyanidhi initiated Gadadhara Pandita for the second time, and
on the day of Odana-sasthi he saw the festival.
PURPORT
At the beginning of winter, there is a ceremony known as the Odana-sasthr.
This ceremony indicates that from that day forward, a winter covering should be
given to Lord Jagannatha. That covering is directly purchased from a weaver. Ac-
cording to the arcana-marga, a cloth should first be washed to remove all the
starch, and then it can be used to cover the Lord. Pundarika Vidyanidhi saw that
the priest neglected to wash the cloth before covering Lord Jagannatha. Since he
wanted to find some fault in the devotees, he became indignant.
TEXT 79
জগন্নাথ পরেন তথা Tig AP वजन |
com! সম্বণ হৈল বিদ্যানিধির মন ॥ ৭৯ ॥
jagannatha parena tatha ‘maduya’ vasana
dekhiya saghrpa haila vidyanidhira mana
SYNONYMS
jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; parena—puts on; tatha—there; maduya
vasana—cloth with starch; dekhiya—seeing; sa-ghrpa—with hatred; haila—was;
vidyanidhira mana—the mind of Vidyanidhi.


--- Page 204 ---
Text 82] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 201
TRANSLATION
When Pundarika Vidyanidhi saw that Lord Jagannatha was given a starched
garment, he became a little hateful. In this way his mind was polluted.
TEXT 80
সেই রাত্র্যে জগল্লাথ-বলাই Sf ।
তুই-ভাই চড়া ন কারে হাসিয়। হাসিয়। ॥ ৮০ ॥
sei ratrye jagannatha-balai asiya
dui-bhai cada’na tanre hasiya hasiya
SYNONYMS
sei ratrye—on that night; jagannatha—Lord Jagannatha; balai—Lord Balarama;
asiya—coming; dui-bhai—both brothers; cada’na—slapped; tarre—him; hasiya
hasiya—smiling.
TRANSLATION
That night the brothers Lord Jagannatha and Balarama came to Pundarika
Vidyanidhi and, smiling, began to slap him.
TEXT 81
গাল ফুলিল, আচার্থ অন্তরে উল্লাস |
বিস্তারি” বর্ণিয়াছেন বৃজ্দাবন-দাস ॥ ৮১ ॥
gala phulila, acarya antare ullasa
vistari’ varpiyachena vrndavana-dasa
SYNONYMS
gala—the cheeks; phulila—became swollen; acarya—Pundarika Vidyanidhi;
antare—within the heart; ullasa—very happy; vistari’—elaborating; var-
niyachena—has narrated; vrndavana-dasa—>Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
TRANSLATION
Although his cheeks were swollen from the slapping, Pundarika Vidyanidhi
was very happy within. This incident has been elaborately described by
Thakura Vrndavana dasa.
TEXT 82
এইমত প্রত্যন্দ আইসে গোৌড়ের ভক্তগণ |
প্রভু-সঙ্গে AR করে যাত্রা-দরশন ॥ ৮২ ॥


--- Page 205 ---
202 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
ei-mata pratyabda aise gaudera bhakta-gana
prabhu-sange rahi’ kare yatra-darasana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; prati-abda—every year; aise—come; gaudera—of
Bengal; bhakta-gana—the devotees; prabhu-sarnge—with Lord Sri Caitanya
Prabhu; rahi’—residing; kare—do; yatra-darasana—observing the Ratha-yatra
festival.
TRANSLATION
Every year the devotees of Bengal would come and stay with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu to see the Ratha-yatra festival.
TEXT 83
তার মধ্যে যে যে বর্ষে আছয়ে বিশেষ ।
বিস্তারিয়৷ আগে Stel কহিব নিঃশেষ ॥ ৮৩ ॥
tara madhye ye ye varse achaye visesa
vistariya age taha kahiba nihsesa
SYNONYMS
tara madhye—within those episodes; ye ye—whatever; varse—in years;
achaye—there is; visesa—particular occurrence; vistariya—elaborating; age—
ahead; taha—that; kahiba—I shall say; nihsesa—completely.
TRANSLATION
Whatever happened during those years that is worth noting shall be de-
scribed later.
TEXT 84
এইমত মহাপ্রভুর চারি বৎসর cote |
দক্ষিণ যাএ আসিতে দুই বৎসর লাগিল ॥ ৮৪ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhura cari vatsara gela
daksina yana asite dui vatsara lagila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhura—of जातं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cari—four;
vatsara—years; gela—passed; daksina yana—after touring southern India; asite —
to come back; dui vatsara lagila—He took two years.


--- Page 206 ---
Text 87] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 203
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed four years. He spent the first two
years on His tour in South India.
TEXT 85
আর দুই বৎসর চাহে বৃন্দাবন যাইতে |
রামানন্দ-হুঠে প্রভু ন। পারে চলিতে ॥ ৮৫ ॥
ara dui vatsara cahe vrndavana ydite
ramananda-hathe prabhu na pare calite
SYNONYMS
ara dui vatsara—another two years; cahe—He wanted; vrndavana yaite—to go
to Vrndavana; ramananda-hathe—by the tricks of Ramananda Raya; prabhu—
Lord ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na pare—was not able; calite—to go.
TRANSLATION
The other two years, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to go to Vrndavana,
but He could not leave Jagannatha Puri because of [২3131131103 Raya’s tricks.
TEXT 86
পঞ্চম বঙৎসরে গোৌড়ের ভক্তগণ আইলা |
রথ দেখি” না| রহিলা, গৌড়েরে চলিল। ॥ ৮৬ ॥
paficama vatsare gaudera bhakta-gana aila
ratha dekhi’ na rahila, gaudere calila
SYNONYMS
paficama vatsare—on the fifth year; gaudera—of Bengal; bhakta-gana—the
devotees; dila—came; ratha dekhi’—seeing the Ratha-yatra festival; na rahila—
did not stay; gaudere calila—returned to Bengal.
TRANSLATION
During the fifth year, the devotees from Bengal came to see the Ratha-yatra
festival. After seeing it, they did not stay but returned to Bengal.
TEXT 87
তবে প্রভু সার্বভৌম-রামানন্দ-স্থানে |
আলিঙ্গন করি” কহে মধুর বচমনে ॥ ৮৭ ॥


--- Page 207 ---
204 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
tabe prabhu sarvabhauma-ramananda-sthane
alingana kari’ kahe madhura vacane
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sarvabhauma-ramananda-
sthane —before Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Ramananda Raya; alingana kari’—
embracing; kahe —says; madhura vacane —sweet words.
TRANSLATION
Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu placed a proposal before Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya and Ramananda Raya. He embraced them and spoke sweet words.
TEXT 88
ws TF! CNT যাইতে TEA |
তোমার হঠে দুই व< जन्न না LFF oH ॥ ৮৮ ॥
bahuta utkantha mora yaite vrndavana
tomara hathe dui vatsara na kailun gamana
SYNONYMS
bahuta utkantha—great anxiety; mora—My; vyaite vrndavana—to go to
Vrndavana; tomara hathe —by your tricks; dui vatsara—for two years; na kailun—
1 did not do; gamana—going.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “My desire to go to Vrndavana has very much
increased. Because of your tricks, | have not been able to go there for the past
two years.
TEXT 89
অবশ্য চলিব, দুহে করহ সম্মতি |
তোমা-দু'হ। चिन। মোর নাহি অন্য গতি ॥ ৮৯ ॥
avasya caliba, dunhe karaha sammati
toma-dunha vina mora nahi anya gati
SYNONYMS
avasya—certainly; caliba—I shall go; dunhe—both of you; karaha sammati—
kindly agree to this proposal; toma-dunha vina—except you two; mora—My;
nahi—there is not; anya gati—other resort.


--- Page 208 ---
Text 92] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 205
TRANSLATION
“This time | must go. Will you please give Me permission? Save for you
two, | have no other resort.
TEXT 90
গোৌড়-দেশে হুয় মোর “তুই সমাশ্রয়”।
“জননী” कारवी रे তুই দয়াময় ॥ ৯০ ॥
gauda-dese haya mora ‘dui samasraya’
‘janani’ ‘jahnavi’, —ei dui dayamaya
SYNONYMS
gauda-dese—in Bengal; haya—there are; mora—My; dui—two; samasraya—
shelters; janani—the mother; jahnavi—mother Canges; ei dui—these two; daya-
maya—very merciful.
TRANSLATION
“In Bengal | have two shelters —my mother and the River Ganges. Both of
them are very merciful.
TEXT 91
গৌড়-দেশ দিয়। যাব তঁ।-সবা cfm |
তুমি टट আজ্ঞ। দেহ” “AAT 2431 ॥ >> ॥
gauda-desa diya yaba tan-saba dekhiya
tumi dunhe 2/7 deha’ parasanna hana
SYNONYMS
gauda-desa—the country known as Bengal; diya—through; yaba—I shall go;
tan-saba—both of them; dekhiya—seeing; tumi dunhe—both of you; ajna
deha’—give Me permission; parasanna hana —being very pleased.
TRANSLATION
‘I shall go to Vrndavana through Bengal and see both My mother and the
River Ganges. Now would you two be pleased to give Me permission?’’
TEXT 92
শুনিয়া প্রভুর বাণী মনে বিচারয় ।
প্রভু-সলে অতি হঠ क्क्‌ ভাল নয় ॥ ৯২ ॥


--- Page 209 ---
206 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
Suniya prabhura vani mane vicaraya
prabhu-sane ati hatha kabhu bhala naya
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing; prabhura—of Lord जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vani—the
words; mane—in their minds; vicaraya—considered; prabhu-sane—with Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ati—very much; hatha—tricks; kabhu—at any time; bhala
naya—is not very good.
TRANSLATION
When Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Ramananda Raya heard these words,
they began to consider that it was not at all good that they played so many
tricks on the Lord.
TEXT 93
टद কহে, ट्व বর্ষা, চলিতে নারিবা ।
বিজয়া-দশমী আইলে অবশ্য एलिव। ॥ ৯৩ ॥
durihe kahe, —ebe varsa, calite nariba
vijaya-dasami aile avasya caliba
SYNONYMS
dunhe kahe—both of them said; ebe—now; varsa—rainy season; calite
nariba—You will not be able to go; vijaya-dasami—the Vijaya-dasami day; aile—
when it arrives; avasya—certainly; caliba— You will go.
TRANSLATION
They both said, “Now that the rainy season is here, it will be difficult for
You to travel. It is better to wait for Vijaya-dasami before departing for
Vrndavana.”’
TEXT 94
আনন্দে AGG IG] देकल সমাধান।
বিজয়।-দশমী-দিনে করিল পয়ান ॥ ৯৪ ॥
anande mahaprabhu varsa kaila samadhana
vijaya-dasami-dine karila payana
SYNONYMS
anande—in great pleasure; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; varsa—
the rainy season; kaila samadhana—passed; vijaya-dasami-dine—on Vijaya-


--- Page 210 ---
Text 96] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 207
dasami, the day when the victory was won by Lord Ramacandra; karila payana—
He departed.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased to thus receive their permission.
He waited until the rainy season passed, and when the day of Vijaya-dasami
arrived, He departed for Vrndavana.
TEXT 95
জগল্পাথের প্রসাদ প্রভু যত পাঞ্াছিল ।
কড়ার, চন্দন, ডোর, সব সঙ্গে লৈল ॥ ৯৫ ॥
jagannathera prasada prabhu yata panachila
kadara, candana, dora, saba sarge laila
SYNONYMS
jagannathera—of Lord Jagannatha; prasada—the remnants of food; prabhu—
ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yata—all; panachila—had obtained; kadara—a kind of
tilaka; candana—sandalwood; dora—ropes; saba—all; sarge laila—He took with
Him.
TRANSLATION
The Lord collected whatever remnants of food were left by Lord Jagannatha.
He also took remnants of the Lord’s kadara ointment, sandalwood and ropes
with Him.
TEXT 96
জগন্নাথে আজ্ঞা মাগি” প্রভাতে চলিলা ।
উড়িয়া-ভক্তগণ সঙ্গে পাছে চলি” আইলা ॥ ৯৬ ॥
jagannathe ajna magi’ prabhate calila
udiya-bhakta-gana sarge pache cali’ aila
SYNONYMS
jagannathe —from Lord Jagannatha; ajna magi’—taking permission; prabhate —
early in the morning; calila—departed; udiya-bhakta-gana—all the devotees of
Orissa; sange—with Him; pache —following; cali’ aila—went.
TRANSLATION
After taking Lord Jagannatha’s permission early in the morning, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu departed, and all the devotees of Orissa began following Him.


--- Page 211 ---
208 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-Iila, Ch. 16
TEXT 97
উড়িয়।-ভক্তগণে প্রভু যত্রে নিবারিলা |
নিজগণ-সঙ্গে व्यद “ভবানীপুর আইলা ॥ ৯৭ ॥
udiya-bhakta-gane prabhu yatne nivarila
nija-gana-sange prabhu ‘bhavanipura’ aila
SYNONYMS
udiya-bhakta-gane—the devotees of Orissa; prabhu—S$ri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; yatne—with great care; nivarila—stopped; nija-gana-sarge —with
His personal associates; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhavanipura aila—
came to Bhavanipura.
TRANSLATION
It was with great care that Caitanya Mahaprabhu forbade the Orissa devo-
tees to follow Him. Accompanied by personal associates, He first went to
Bhavanipura.
PURPORT
One goes through Bhavanipura before reaching a well-known place named
Jankadei-pura, or Janakidevi-pura.
TEXT 98
রামানন্দ আইল। পাছে দোলায় চড়িয়া।
বাণীনাথ व्क প্রসাদ দিল পাঠাঞ। ॥ ৯৮ ॥
ramananda aila pache dolaya cadiya
vaninatha bahu prasada dila pathana
SYNONYMS
ramananda—Ramananda Raya; dila—came; pache—behind; dolaya cadiya—
riding on a palanquin; vaninatha—Vaninatha Raya; bahu—a large quantity of;
prasada—remnants of the food of Jagannatha; dila—gave; pathana—sending.
TRANSLATION
After Lord Caitanya reached Bhavanipura, Ramananda Raya arrived on his
palanquin, and Vaninatha Raya had a large quantity of prasada sent to the
Lord.


--- Page 212 ---
Text 101] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 209
TEXT 99
গ্রলাদ ভোজন করি” তথায় রহিলা।
প্রাতঃকালে চলি” প্রভু “ভুবনেশ্বর” আইল। ॥ >> ॥
prasada bhojana kari’ tathaya rahila
pratah-kale cali’ prabhu ‘bhuvanesvara’ aila
SYNONYMS
prasada bhojana kari’—after taking the prasada; tathaya rahila—He stayed
there; pratah-kale—early in the morning; cali’—walking; prabhu—S$r Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhuvanesvara aila—reached the place known as Bhuvanesvara.
TRANSLATION
After taking prasada, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained there for the
night. Early in the morning, He began walking and finally reached
Bhuvanes$vara.
TEXT 100
“কটকে” আসিয়া কৈল “গোপাল” দরশন |
স্বপ্লেশ্বর-বিপ্র কৈল প্রভুর নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১০০ ॥
‘katake’ asiya kaila ‘gopala’ darasana
svapnesvara-vipra kaila prabhura nimantrana
SYNONYMS
katake—to the city of Kataka; asiya—coming; kaila—did; gopala darasana—
seeing Lord Gopala; svapnesvara-vipra—the brahmana named Svapnesvara;
kaila—did; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nimantrana—invitation.
TRANSLATION
After reaching the city of Kataka, He saw the temple of Gopala, and a
brahmana there named Svapnesvara invited the Lord to eat.
TEXT 101
রামানন্দ-রায় সব-গণে निगलिन्‌ |
বাহির উত্যানে আসি” প্রভু বাসা CEFN ১০১॥


--- Page 213 ---
210 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
ramananda-raya saba-gane nimantrila
bahira udyane asi’ prabhu vasa kaila
SYNONYMS
ramananda-riya—Ramananda Raya; saba-gane—all the followers of ला
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nimantrila—invited; bahira udyane—in an outside
garden; asi’—coming; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vasa kaila—made His
resting place.
TRANSLATION
Ramananda Raya invited all the others for their meals, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu made His resting place in a garden outside the temple.
| TEXT 102
few! করি” বকুল-তলে कत्रिन। Ra
व्यङानक्रल-४ ऽ রায় করিল ATR ॥ ১০২ ॥
bhiksa kari’ bakula-tale karila visrama
prataparudra-thani raya karila payana
SYNONYMS
bhiksa kari’—after taking lunch; bakula-tale—underneath a bakula flower tree;
karila visrama—took rest; prataparudra-thani—to the presence of Maharaja Pra-
taparudra; rdya—Ramananda Raya; karila payana—departed.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was taking rest beneath a bakula tree,
Ramananda Raya immediately went to Maharaja Prataparudra.
TEXT 103
শুনি” আনন্দিত রাজ৷ অতিশীঘ আইলা |
প্রভু দেখি” पवर ভুমেতে পড়িলা ॥ ১০৩॥
Suni’ anandita raja ati-sighra aila
prabhu dekhi’ dandavat bhamete padila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; anandita—very pleased; raja—the King; ati-sighra—hastily;
aila—came; prabhu dekhi’—seeing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dandavat—
obeisances offered falling flat; bhamete—on the ground; padila—fell down.


--- Page 214 ---
Text 106] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 211
TRANSLATION
The King was very happy to hear the news, and he hastily went there. Upon
seeing the Lord, he fell flat to offer Him obeisances.
TEXT 104
পুনঃ উঠে, পুলঃ পড়ে ত্রণয়-বিহরল |
FS করে, পুলকাঙ্গ, পড়ে অশ্রুজল ॥ ১০৪ ॥
[00730 0106, punah pade pranaya-vihvala
stuti kare, pulakanga, pade asru-jala
SYNONYMS
punah —again; uthe—he arose; punah—again; pade —he fell down; prapaya-
vihvala—overwhelmed with love; stuti kare—offers prayers; pulaka-arnga—the
entire body quivering in joy; pade—fell down; asru-jala—tears.
TRANSLATION
Being overwhelmed with love, the King again and again got up and fell
down. When he offered prayers, his whole body shivered, and tears fell from
his eyes.
TEXT 105
তার ভক্তি দেখি” প্রভুর তুষ্ট হৈল मन ।
উঠি” মহাপ্রভু Sica टेकल। আলিঙন ॥ soe ॥
tanra bhakti dekhi’ prabhura tusta haila mana
uthi’ mahaprabhu tanre kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
tanra bhakti—his devotion; dekhi‘—seeing; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tusta—pleased; haila—was; mana—mind; uthi’—standing up;
mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre —him; kaila alingana—embraced.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased to see the King’s devotion, and
He therefore stood up and embraced him.
TEXT 106
পুনঃ खडि করি” রাজ। করয়ে প্রণাম |
SGT TELS তার দেহ হৈল प्रान ॥ ১০৬ ॥


--- Page 215 ---
212 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
punah stuti kari’ raja karaye pranama
prabhu-krpa-asrute tarnra deha haila snana
SYNONYMS
punah—again; stuti kari’— offering prayers; raja—the King; karaye pranama—
offered obeisances; prabhu krpa—of the mercy of the Lord; asrute —by the tears;
tanra—of the Lord; deha—the body; haila—became; snana—bathed.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord embraced the King, the King again and again offered prayers
and obeisances. In this way, the Lord’s mercy brought tears from the King,
and the Lord’s body was bathed with these tears.
TEXT 107
RE করি, রামানন্দ রাজারে বসাইলা |
কায়মনোবাকেয AG ভারে কৃপা বকৈলা ॥ ১০৭ ॥
sustha kari, ramananda rajare vasaila
kaya-mano-vakye prabhu tanre krpa kaila
SYNONYMS
sustha kari—comforting him; ramananda—Raya Ramananda; rajare vasaila—
made the King sit down; kaya-mano-vakye—with body, mind and words;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre—unto the King; krpa kaili—showed
His mercy.
TRANSLATION
Finally Ramananda Raya pacified the King and made him sit down. The Lord
also bestowed mercy upon him through His body, mind and words.
TEXT 108
এঁছে তাহারে Foil কৈল che ।
“প্রভাপরুদ্র-সংত্রাত।” নাম হৈল যায় ॥ ১০৮ ॥
aiche tanhare krpa kaila gauraraya
“prataparudra-santrata’” nama haila yaya
SYNONYMS
aiche —such; tanhare—unto the King; krpa—mercy; kaila—showed;
gauraraya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pratiparudra-santrati—the deliverer of
Maharaja Prataparudra; nama—the name; haila—became; yaya—by which.


--- Page 216 ---
Text 111] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 213
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed such mercy to the King that from that day
on the Lord became known as Prataparudra-santrata, the deliverer of Maharaja
Prataparudra.
TEXT 109
রাজ-পাত্রগণ বকৈল প্রভুর বন্দন |
রাজারে বিদায় किल শচীর নন্দন ॥ ১০৯ ॥
raja-patra-gana kaila prabhura vandana
rajare vidaya dila sacira nandana
SYNONYMS
raja-patra-gana—the officers of the King; kaila—did; prabhura vandana—
glorifying the Lord; rajare —unto the King; vidaya dila—bade farewell; sacira nan-
dana—the son of mother Saci.
TRANSLATION
All the governmental officers also paid their respects to the Lord, and finally
the King and his men were bade farewell by the son of mother $Saci.
TEXT 110
বাহিরে खाजिः त्रोक। আজ্ঞা-পত্র লেখাইল |
নিজ-রাজেযে যত “খিষয়ী” তাহারে পাঠাইল ॥ ১১০ ॥
bahire asi’ raja 3/83-03073 lekhaila
nija-rajye yata ‘visayi’, tahare pathaila
SYNONYMS
bahire asi’—coming outside; raja—the King; ajna-patra—letters of command;
lekhaila—had written; nija-rajye —in his own kingdom; yata—all; visayi—govern-
ment servants; tahare—unto them; pathaila—sent.
TRANSLATION
The King then went outside and had orders written down and sent to the
government servants within his kingdom.
TEXT 111
্ামে-গ্রামে” Toa আবাস করিবা।
পাচ-সাত নব্যগৃহে সামগ্য্যে ভরিবা ॥ ১১১ ॥


--- Page 217 ---
214 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
‘grame-grame’ natana avasa kariba
panca-sata navya-grhe samagrye bhariba
SYNONYMS
grame-grame—in every village; natana—new; avasa—residential places;
kariba—you should construct; panca-sata—five to seven; navya-grhe —in new
houses; samagrye —with food; bhariba—you should fill.
TRANSLATION
His orders read: “In every village you should construct new residences, and
in five or seven new houses, you should store all kinds of food.
TEXT 112
আপনি প্রভুকে লঞ্ जार] উত্তরিবা।
রাত্রি-দিবা বেতহস্তে সেবায় রহিবা ॥ ১১২ ॥
apani prabhuke lana tahan uttariba
ratri-diba vetra-haste sevaya rahiba
SYNONYMS
apani—personally, yourself; prabhuke —S$i Caitanya Mahaprabhu; lana —tak-
ing; tahan uttariba—you should go there; ratri-diba—night and day; vetra-
haste —with a cane in the hands; sevaya rahiba—should remain engaged in His
service.
TRANSLATION
‘“You should personally take the Lord to these newly constructed houses.
Day and night you should engage in His service with a stick in your hands.”
TEXT 113
তুই মহাপাত্র,-“হুরিচঞ্দন”, "मर्ण त्रौ ज्‌? |
ভারে আজ্ঞা দিল রাজা! — “कञ्चि সর্ব কায ॥ ১১৩ ॥
dui maha-patra, — ‘haricandana’, ‘mardaraja’
tanre ajna dila raja—'kariha sarva kaya
SYNONYMS
dui maha-patra—two respectable officers; haricandana—Haricandana; mar-
daraja—Mardaraja; tanre—to them; 2/7 dila—gave orders; raja—the King;
kariha—do; sarva kaya—everything needed.


--- Page 218 ---
Text 116] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 215
TRANSLATION
The King ordered two respectable officers named Haricandana and Mar-
daraja to do whatever was necessary to carry out these orders.
TEXTS 114-115
এক নব্য-লৌকা৷ खानि রাখহ নদী-তীরে |
TE स्नान করি' প্রভু যা'ন নদী-পারে ॥ ১১৪ ॥
তাহা স্তম্ভ রোপণ কর ALSIP করি” ।
নিত্য স্থান করিব তাই, তাই যেন মরি ॥ ১১৫ ॥
eka navya-nauka ani’ rakhaha nadi-tire
yahan snana kari’ prabhu ya’na nadi-pare
tahan stambha ropana kara ‘maha-tirtha’ kari’
nitya snana kariba tahan, tahan yena mari
SYNONYMS
eka—one; navya—new; nauka—boat; ani’—bringing; rakhaha—keep; nadi-
tire—on the bank of the river; yahan—where; snana kari’—taking bath; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ya’na—goes; nadi-pare—on the other bank of the
river; tahan—there; stambha—a memorial column; ropana kara—establish;
maha-tirtha kari’—making that place a great place of pilgrimage; nitya—daily;
snana kariba—I shall bathe; tahan—there; tahan—there; yena mari—let me die.
TRANSLATION
The King also ordered them to maintain a new boat on the banks of the
river, and wherever Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took His bath or crossed to the
other side of the river, they should establish a memorial column and make that
place a great place of pilgrimage. “Indeed,” said the King, “1 will take my
bath there. And let me also die there.”
TEXT 116
চতুত্বণরে করহ উত্তম নব্য বাস |
রামানন্দ, যাহ ভুমি মহা প্রভু-পাশ ॥ ১১৬ ॥
caturdvare karaha uttama navya vasa
ramananda, yaha tumi mahaprabhu-pasa


--- Page 219 ---
216 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
caturdvare—at the place named Caturdvara; karaha—make; uttama—very
nice; navya vasa—new residential quarters; ramananda—Ramananda Raya; ১৭09
tumi—you please go; mahaprabhu-pasa—near 5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The King continued, ‘At Caturdvara, please construct new residential quar-
ters. Now, Ramananda, you can return to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.’””
TEXT 117
সন্ধ্যাতে চলিবে প্রভু, नृगैखि निल ।
ङ्खो-खनेत्र ङोच्शृटङ স্্রীগণে চড়াইল ॥ ১১৭ ॥
sandhyate calibe prabhu, ----/111221 Sunila
hasti-upara tambu-grhe stri-gane cadaila
SYNONYMS
sandhyate —in the evening; calibe prabhu—the Lord will start; nrpati sunila—
the King heard; hasti-upara—upon the backs of elephants; tambu-grhe —in tents;
stri-gane—all the ladies; cadaila—made get up.
TRANSLATION
When the King heard that the Lord was leaving that evening, he im-
mediately made arrangements for some elephants with small tents on their
backs to be brought there. Then all the ladies of the palace got on the
elephants.
TEXT 118
প্রভুর চলিবার পথে রহে সারি ङग ।
সন্ধ্যাতে চলিলা প্রভু নিজগণ न ॥ ১১৮ ॥
prabhura calibara pathe rahe sari hana
sandhyate calila prabhu nija-gana lana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of the Lord; calibara pathe—on the route of walking; rahe—
remained; sari hana —being in a line; sandhyate —in the evening; calila prabhu—
the Lord departed; nija-gana lana —taking His own men.


--- Page 220 ---
Text 120] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 217
TRANSLATION
All these ladies went to the road the Lord was taking and remained there in
aline. That evening, the Lord departed with His devotees.
TEXT 119
“कटिं ९नैन।-नौ' আসি” ঘাটে टेकल wis |
মহিযীসকল দেখি” TACT धनाम ॥ ১১৯ ॥
‘citrotpala-nadi’ asi’ ghate kaila snana
mabhisi-sakala dekhi’ karaye pranama
SYNONYMS
citrotpala-nadi—to the river named Citrotpala; asi‘—coming; ghate—on the
bank; kaila snana—took a bath; mahisi-sakala—all the queens and ladies of the
palace; dekhi’—seeing; karaye pranama—offered their obeisances.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the bank of the River Citrotpala to
take His bath, all the queens and ladies of the palace offered their obeisances
to Him.
TEXT 120
প্রভুর দরশনে সবে হৈল প্রেমময় |
“কৃষ্ণ' FP কহে, নেত্র TEP বরিষয় ॥ ১২০ ॥
prabhura darasane sabe haila premamaya
‘krsna’ ‘krsna’ kahe, netra asru varisaya
SYNONYMS
prabhura darasane—by seeing the Lord; sabe—all of them; haila—became;
prema-maya—overwhelmed with love; krspa krspa kahe—chanted the holy
name of Krsna; netra—the eyes; asru—tears; varisaya—poured.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the Lord, they all felt themselves overwhelmed with love of
Godhead, and, tears pouring from their eyes, they began to chant the holy
name, “Krsna! Krsna!’’


--- Page 221 ---
218 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 121
এমন কৃপান্যু নাহি শুনি लिद्ूवटम ।
FCAT] হয় যার দুর দরশনে ॥ ১২১ ॥
emana krpalu nahi suni tribhuvane
krsna-prema haya yarra dara darasane
SYNONYMS
emana krpalu—such a merciful person; nahi—not; suni—we hear; tri-
bhuvane—within the three worlds; krsna-prema haya—one gets love of Krsna;
yanra—of whom; dara darasane—by seeing from a distance.
TRANSLATION
There is no one as merciful as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu within all three
worlds. Simply by seeing Him from a distance, one is overwhelmed with love
of Godhead.
TEXT 122
লৌকাতে চড়িয়া প্রভু হৈল নদী পার |
জোযোৎস্নাবতী রাত্র্যে চলি” আইল एष गतर SM
naukate cadiya prabhu haila nadi para
jyotsnavati ratrye cali’ aila caturdvara
SYNONYMS
naukate cadiyi—getting on the boat; prabhu—S$r Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
haila—was; nadi para—across the river; jyotsnavati—lighted by the full moon;
ratrye—in the night; cali’—walking; aila—came; caturdvara—to Caturdvara.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then got into a new boat and crossed the river. Walking in the full
moonlight, He finally reached the town known as Caturdvara.
TEXT 123
রাত্র্যে তথা রহি” প্রাতে FIFE) टेकन्‌ |
হেনকালে জগন্নাথের মহাগ্রসাদ আইল ॥ ১২৩ ॥
ratrye tatha rahi’ prate snana-krtya kaila
hena-kale jagannathera maha-prasada aila


--- Page 222 ---
Text 125] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 219
SYNONYMS
ratrye —on that night; tatha rahi’ —staying there; prate—in the morning; snana-
krtya kaila—took His bath; hena-kale—at that time; jagannathera—of Lord Jagan-
natha; maha-prasada aila—remnants of food arrived.
TRANSLATION
The Lord spent the night there and in the morning took His bath. At that
time, remnants of Lord Jagannatha’s food arrived.
TEXT 124
রাজার আজ্ঞায় नकिष পাঠায় দিনে-দিনে |
वक्र প্রসাদ পাঠায় দিয় বছ-জনে ॥ ১২৪ ॥
rajara ajndya padicha pathaya dine-dine
bahuta prasada pathaya diya bahu-jane
SYNONYMS
rajara ajndya—by the order of the King; padicha—the superintendent of the
temple; pathaya—sent; dine-dine—day after day; bahuta prasada—a large quan-
tity of food; pathaya—he sent; diya bahu-jane —carried by many persons.
TRANSLATION
Following the King’s orders, the superintendent of the temple sent large
quantities of prasada every day, and it was carried by many persons.
TEXT 125
স্বগণ-সহিতে প্রভু প্রসাদ অঙ্গীকরি”।
উঠিয়। চলিল৷ প্রভু বলি” “হরি” “হরি” ॥ ১২৫ ॥
svagana-sahite prabhu prasada angikari’
uthiya calila prabhu bali’ ‘hari’ ‘hari’
SYNONYMS
sva-gana-sahite—with His personal associates; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; prasada—the remnants of food; angikari’—accepting; uthiya—
standing up; calila—started; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bali’—uttering;
hari hari—Hari, Hari.


--- Page 223 ---
220 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
After accepting the prasada, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up and started
to go, chanting the holy names, ‘Hari! Hari!"
TEXT 126
রামানন্দ, মর্দরাজ, জ্রীহরিচন্দন |
সঙ্গে সেব। করি” চলে এই তিন জন ॥ ১২৬ ॥
ramananda, mardardaja, sri-haricandana
sange seva kari’ cale ei tina jana
SYNONYMS
ramananda—Ramananda; mardaraja—Mardaraja; $ri-haricandana --6त Harican-
dana; sange—in company; seva kari’—rendering service; cale—went; ei tina
jana—these three gentlemen.
TRANSLATION
Ramananda Raya, Mardaraja and Sri Haricandana always went with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and rendered various services.
TEXTS 127-129
প্রভু-সঙ্গে পুরী-গোসাঞ্ি, স্বরূপ-দামোদর ।
TT, মুকুন্দ, গো चिन्न, কাশীশ্বর ॥ ১২৭ ॥
হরিদাস-ঠাকুর, আর পণ্ডিত-বক্তেশ্বর |
গোপীনাথাচার্য, আর পণ্ডিত-দামোদর ॥ ১২৮ ॥
রামাই, HE, আর বহু ভক্তগণ |
প্রধান FG, সবার কে করে গণন ॥ ১২৯ ॥
prabhu-sange puri-gosani, svarapa-damodara
jagadananda, mukunda, govinda, kasisvara
haridasa-thakura, ara pandita-vakresvara
gopinathacarya, ara pandita-damodara
ramai, nandai, ara bahu bhakta-gana
pradhana kahilun, sabara ke kare ganana


--- Page 224 ---
Text 130] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 221
SYNONYMS

prabhu-sange—with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; puri-gosani—Paramananda
Puri;  svardgpa-damodara—Svaripa Damodara; jagadananda—)agadananda;
mukunda—Mukunda;  govinda—GCovinda;  kasisvara—Kasiévara; haridasa-
thakura—Haridasa Thakura; ara—and; pandita-vakresvara—Pandita Vakresvara;
gopinatha-acarya—Gopinatha Acarya; dra—and; pandlita-damodara—Pandita
Damodara; ramai—Ramai; nandai—Nandai; ara—and; bahu bhakta-gana—many
devotees; pradhana—the chief; kahilun—| have mentioned; sabara—of all of
them; ke—who; kare ganana—can make an account.

TRANSLATION

Paramananda Puri Gosvami, Svaripa Damodara, Jagadananda, Mukunda,
Govinda, Kasiévara, Haridasa Thakura, Vakres$vara Pandita, Gopinatha Acarya,
Damodara Pandita, Ramai, Nandai and many other devotees accompanied the
Lord. | have mentioned only the chief devotees. No one can describe the total
number.

TEXT 130
গদাধর-পণ্ডিত যবে जटकटङ एनिन्‌। |
“ক্ষেত্র-সন্ল্যাস না ছাড়িহ”_ প্রভু निटसथिन्‌। ॥ ১৩০ ॥
gadadhara-pandita yabe sangete calila
‘ksetra-sannyasa na chadiha’——prabhu nisedhila
SYNONYMS

gadadhara-pandita—Gadadhara Pandita; yabe—when; sangete—with Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calila—started to go; ksetra-sannyasa—the renounced
order of life at a holy place of pilgrimage; na chadiha—do not give up; prabhu
nisedhila—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu forbade.

TRANSLATION

When Gadadhara Pandita started to go with the Lord, he was forbidden to

come and was asked not to give up the vow of ksetra-sannyasa.
PURPORT

When one takes ksetra-sannyasa, he leaves his household life and goes to a
place of pilgrimage devoted to Lord Visnu. Such places include Purusottama
(Jagannatha Puri), Navadvipa-dhama and Mathura-dhama. The ksetra-sannyasi
lives in these places alone or with his family. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura considers


--- Page 225 ---
222 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
ksetra-sannyasa to be the preferable vanaprastha situation in this age of Kali. Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya lived in this way, and he has been called a ksetra-
sannyasi—that is, a sannyasi living in Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 131
পণ্ডিত कटङ,-“य) ई] তুমি, সেই নীলাচল |
স্ষেত্রসন্যাস মোর যাউক রসাতল ॥” ১৩১ ॥
pandita kahe, — “yahan tumi, sei nilacala
ksetra-sannyasa mora yauka rasatala”
SYNONYMS
pandita kahe —Gadadhara Pandita said; yahan—wherever; tumi—You are situ-
ated; sei—that; nildcala—Jagannatha Puri; ksetra-sannyasa—vow to remain in a
holy place of pilgrimage; mora—my; yauka—let it go; rasatala—to hell.
TRANSLATION
When he was requested to return to Jagannatha Puri, Gadadhara Pandita
told the Lord, “Wherever You are staying is Jagannatha Puri. Let my so-called
ksetra-sannyasa go to hell.”
TEXT 132
প্রভু TCE — “BF কর গোপীনাথ সেবন” |
পণ্ডিত কহে,-_“কোর্টি-সেব। ত্বৎপাদ-দর্শন” ॥ ১৩২॥
prabhu kahe, — “inha kara gopinatha sevana”
pandita kahe, — "koti-seva tvat-pada-darsana”
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; inha—here; kara—just do;
gopinatha sevana—worship of Gopinatha; pandita kahe —the pandita said; koti-
seva—millions of times the service; tvat-pada-darsana—seeing Your lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Gadadhara Pandita to remain at
Jagannatha Puri and engage in Gopinatha’s service, Gadadhara Pandita
replied, “One renders service to Gopinatha a million times simply by seeing
Your lotus feet.”


--- Page 226 ---
Text 135] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 223
TEXT 133
প্রভু TT, — «(नव ছাড়িবে, আমায় লাগে দোষ |
ইহ রহি” সেবা कन, আমার সন্তোষ ॥” ১৩৩ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “seva chadibe, amaya lage dosa
inha rahi’ seva kara, —amdara santosa”’
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; seva chadibe—you will give
up the service; amaya—to Me; lage —will attach; dosa—fault; inha rahi’—staying
here; seva kara—just be engaged in service; amara—My; santosa—satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, “If you abandon His service, it will be
My fault. It is better that you remain here and render service. That will be My
satisfaction.”
TEXT 134
পণ্ডিত Fre, “जव (णास আমার উপর |
তোমা-সঙ্গে न। যাইব, যাইব একেখ্বর ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
pandita kahe, — “saba 005 amara upara
toma-sange na yaiba, yaiba ekesvara
SYNONYMS
pandita kahe—the Pandita said; saba—all; dosa—fault; amara upara—upon
me; toma-sange—with You; na ydiba—! shall not go; yaiba—I| shall go;
ekesvara—alone.
TRANSLATION
The Pandita replied, ‘‘Do not worry. All the faults will be on my head. 1 shall
not accompany You but shall go alone.
TEXT 135
আই”কে দেখিতে যাইব, না যাইব তোমা लाजिः।
“প্রতিজ্ঞা'--সেবা-ত্যাগ-দেষ, তার আমিভাগী ॥”১৩৫


--- Page 227 ---
224 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
ai‘ke dekhite yaiba, na yaiba toma lagi’
‘pratijia’-‘seva’-tyaga-dosa, tara ami bhagi”’

SYNONYMS
ai’ke—mother Sacidevi; dekhite —to see; yaiba—I shall go; na yaiba—I shall
not go; toma lagi’—for Your sake; pratijna-seva—the vow and service to

Copinatha; tyaga-dosa—the fault of giving up; tara—for that; ami bhagi—!I am

responsible.

TRANSLATION
“1 shall go to see Sacimata, but ॥ shall not go for Your sake. | shall be
responsible for the abandoning of my vow and service to Gopinatha.”
TEXT 136
এত वनिः नखिङ-८नोजा यः jag एनिन। |
কটক আসি” প্রভু তারে Ace ख।नाटेग॥ ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
eta bali’ pandita-gosani prthak calila
kataka asi’ prabhu tanre sange anaila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; pandita-gosani—Gadadhara Pandita; prthak calila—pro-
ceeded separately; kataka dsi’—when He came to Kataka; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tarnre—him; sange—with Him; anaila—brought.
TRANSLATION
Thus Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami traveled alone, but when they all arrived
at Kataka, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called him, and he went in the Lord’s
company.
TEXT 137
পণ্ডিতের (नौब्राक-८८यम বুঝন না যায়।
“প্রতিজ্ঞা, “লীকুষ্ণ-সেবা” ছাড়িল छने न्न ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
panditera gauranga-prema bujhana na yaya
‘pratijia’, ‘sri-krsna-seva’ chadila trna-praya


--- Page 228 ---
Text 139] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 225
SYNONYMS
panditera—of Gadadhara Pandita; gauranga-prema—the love for Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bujhana—understanding; na yaya—is not possible; pratijia—a
vow; sri-krspna-seva—the service of the Lord; chadila—gave up; trna-praya—
almost like straw.
TRANSLATION
No one can understand the loving intimacy between Gadadhara Pandita and
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Gadadhara Pandita gave up his vow and service to
Gopinatha just as one gives up a piece of straw.
PURPORT
Just to get Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s association, Gadadhara Pandita gave up
his life’s vow to engage in Gopinatha’s service. This kind of loving affection can be
understood only by very confidential devotees. Ordinarily, no one can under-
stand its purport.
TEXT 138
তাহার চরিত্রে SF অস্তরে ACH |
তাহার হাতে ধরি” কহে করি” প্রণয়-রোষ ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
tanhara caritre prabhu antare santosa
tanhara hate dhari’ kahe kari’ pranaya-rosa
SYNONYMS
tanhara caritre—in his behavior; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; antare —
within His heart; santosa—very satisfied; tanhara hate dhari’—catching his hand;
kahe —says; kari’—exhibiting; pranaya-rosa—anger in love.
TRANSLATION
Gadadhara Pandita’s behavior was very pleasing to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s heart. Nevertheless, the Lord took his hand and spoke to him,
displaying the anger of love.
TEXT 139
“প্রতিজ্ঞা”, जवां" ছাড়িবে, - এ তোমার “উদ্দেশ” |
সে সিদ্ধ হইল- ছাড়ি” আইলা দুর দেশ ॥ ১৩৯ ॥


--- Page 229 ---
226 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
‘pratijna’, ‘seva’ chadibe, —e tomara ‘uddesa’
se siddha ha-ila——chadi’ aila dara desa
SYNONYMS
pratijia—the vow; seva—and service; chadibe—will give up; e—this;
tomara—your; uddesa—purpose; se—that; siddha—complete; ha-ila—has be-
come; chadi’—giving up; aila—have come; dara desa—to a distant place.
TRANSLATION
‘“You have abandoned Gopinatha’s service and broken your vow to live in
Puri. All that is now complete because you have come so far.
TEXT 140
আমার সঙ্গে রহিতে Gig, — Tig নিজ-স্থখ |
তোমার দুই ধর্ম যায়, _ আমার হয় Bed’ ॥ ১৪০ ॥
amara sange rahite caha,——vancha nija-sukha
tomara dui dharma yaya,——amara haya ‘duhkha’
SYNONYMS
amara sarge—with Me; rahite—to remain; caha—you want; vaficha—you
desire; nija-sukha—your own sense gratification; tomara—your; dui dharma—
two principles; ydya—go away; amara—of Me; haya—there is; duhkha—unhap-
piness.
TRANSLATION
‘Your wanting to go with Me is simply a desire for sense gratification. In
this way, you are breaking two religious principles, and because of this | am
very unhappy.
TEXT 141
মোর FY চাহ षि, নীলাচলে एन |
আমার শপথ, यिं আর কিছু বল ॥ 585 ॥
mora sukha caha yadi, niiacale cala
amara sapatha, yadi ara kichu bala
SYNONYMS
mora—of Me; sukha—the satisfaction; caha—you want; yadi—if; nilacale
cala—go back to Jagannatha Puri (Nilacala); amara sapatha—My condemnation;
yadi—if; ara—more; kichu—something; bala—you say.


--- Page 230 ---
Text 143] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 227
TRANSLATION
‘‘If you want My happiness, please return to Nilacala. You will simply con-
demn Me if you say any more about this matter.’’
TEXT 142
এত বলি” মহাপ্রভু নৌকাতে চড়িল৷ |
মুচ্ছিত ₹<3। পণ্ডিত তথাই পড়িল। ॥ ১৪২ ॥
eta bali” mahaprabhu naukate cadila
marcchita hana pandita tathai padila
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; naukate
cadila—got on a boat; marcchita hana—fainting; pandita—Gadadhara Pandita
Gosvami; tathai—there; padila—fell down.
TRANSLATION
Saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got into a boat, and Gadadhara Pan-
dita immediately fell down in an unconscious state.
TEXT 143
পণ্ডিতে sep! য।ইতে সার্বভৌমে আজ্ঞা! দিল। |
ভট্টাচার্য कटङ, “TF, এঁছে প্রভুর লীল। ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
pandite lana yaite sarvabhaume ajia dila
bhattacarya kahe, — “utha, aiche prabhura lila
SYNONYMS
pandite lana-—taking the Pandita; yaite—to go; sarvabhauma—unto Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya; ajna dila—gave an order; bhattacarya kahe—Sar-
vabhauma Bhattacarya said; utha—please get up; aiche—such; prabhura lila—
the way of the Lord's pastimes.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya to take
Gadadhara Pandita with him. The Bhattacarya told Gadadhara Pandita, ‘Get
up! Such are the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 231 ---
228 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 144
তুমি জান, কৃষ্ণ নিজ-প্রতিজ্ঞা wife ।
ভক্ত কৃপা-বশে ভীক্মের শতিজ্ঞ! JET ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
tumi jana, krsna nija-pratijia chadila
bhakta krpa-vase bhismera pratijia rakhila
SYNONYMS
tumi jana—you know; krspa—Lord Krsna; nija-pratijia—His own promise;
chadila—gave up; bhakta krpa-vase —being obliged by the devotional service of
a devotee; bhismera—of Grandfather Bhisma; pratijia rakhila—kept the promise.
TRANSLATION
‘You should know that Lord Krsna Himself violated His own promise just to
keep the promise of Grandfather Bhisma.
TEXT 145
স্বনিগমমপহায় মৎপ্রতিজ্ঞ।-
ম্ৃতমধিকতুমবল্ুতে। রথস্থঃ ।
ধৃতরখথচরণোহইভ্যয়াচ্চলদ্‌গু-
হঁরিরিব হস্তমিভং গতোত্তরীয়ঃ ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
svanigamam apahaya mat-pratijiam
rtam adhikartum avapluto ratha-sthah
dhrta-ratha-carano ‘bhyayac caladgur
harir iva hantum ibharh gatottariyah
SYNONYMS
sva-nigamam—His own promise not to take a weapon and fight on behalf of
the Pandavas; apahaya—giving up; mat-pratijiam—my promise; rtam—true;
adhikartum—to make more; avaplutah—having jumped down; ratha-sthah—
who was on the chariot (Lord Krsna); dhrta—who took up; ratha-caranah—the
wheel of the chariot; abhyayat—ran forward; calat-guh—making the entire
planet tremble; harih—a lion; iva—like; hantum—to kill; ibham—an elephant;
gata-uttariyah —losing the outer garment.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Intending to make my promise true, Lord Krsna broke His own promise
not to take up a weapon at Kuruksetra. With His outer garment falling off,


--- Page 232 ---
Text 1471 The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 229
Lord Sri Krsna jumped from His chariot, picked up a wheel and came running
at me to kill me. Indeed, He rushed at me like a lion going to kill an elephant,
and He caused the whole earth to tremble.’
PURPORT
Lord Krsna promised not to fight in the battle of Kuruksetra or even take up a
weapon. But when Bhisma wanted to keep his own promise to break the promise
of the Lord, the Lord immediately got down from the chariot, and to make
Bhisma’s promise true He picked up a chariot wheel and rushed forward to kill
him. This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.9.37).
TEXT 146
এইমত প্রভু তোমার বিচ্ছেদ সহিয়৷ |
তোমার প্রতিজ্ঞা রক্ষ৷ কৈল যত্ন করিয়। ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
ei-mata prabhu tomara viccheda sahiya
tomara pratijia raksa kaila yatna kariya”
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; prabhu -_ ডা Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tomara—of you; vic-
cheda sahiya—tolerating the separation; tomadra pratijia—your vow; raksa
kaila—protected; yatna kariya—with great endeavor.
TRANSLATION
“Similarly, tolerating your separation, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has pro-
tected your vow with great endeavor.”
TEXT 147
এইমত কহি' Sica প্রবোধ क्रिन्‌ |
তুইজনে শোকাকুল নীলাচলে আইল ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
ei-mata kahi’ tarnre prabodha karila
dui-jane sokakula nilacale aila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; kahi’—speaking; tarnre—him; prabodha karila—awoke;
dui-jane —the two persons; soka-akula—overwhelmed with grief; nilacale—to
Jagannatha 1201; aila—went back.


--- Page 233 ---
230 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
In this way Sarvabhauma Bhattiacarya revived Gadadhara Pandita. Then both
of them, very much grief-stricken, returned to Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala.
TEXT 148
প্রভু লাগি” ধর্ম-কর্ম ছাড়ে ভক্তগণ |
ভক্ত-ধর্ম-হানি প্রভুর না৷ হয় সহন ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
prabhu lagi’ dharma-karma chade bhakta-gana
bhakta-dharma-hani prabhura na haya sahana
SYNONYMS
prabhu lagi’—for the sake of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dharma-karma—all
prescribed duties; chade —give up; bhakta-gana—all the devotees; bhakta-dhar-
ma—of the duty of a devotee; hani—the abandonment; prabhura—to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na haya—is not; sahana—tolerable.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees would abandon all kinds of duties for Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s sake, yet the Lord did not like the devotees’ giving up their
promised duties.
TEXT 149
दन्न विव" ইহ। শুনে যেই जन 1
অচিরে মিলিয়ে তারে চৈতদ্তয-চরণ ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
‘premera vivarta’ 103 sune yei jana
acire miliye tanre caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
premera vivarta—the misgivings of loving affairs; iha—this; sune—listens; yei
jana—any person who; acire—very soon; miliye—meet; tanre —him; caitanya-
carana—the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
All these are the misgivings of loving affairs. Whoever listens to these inci-
dents gets Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s shelter very soon.


--- Page 234 ---
Text 150] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 231
TEXT 150
তুই রাজপাত্র যেই প্রভু-সঙ্গে TH |
“াজপুতরন” আসি” প্রভু তারে দিলেন বিদায় ॥ see ॥
dui raja-patra yei prabhu-sarnge yaya
‘yajapura’ asi’ prabhu tare dilena vidaya
SYNONYMS
dui raja-patra—the two government officers; yei—who; prabhu-sarige—with
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ydya—go; ydjapura asi’—when coming to Yajapura;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tare—unto them; dilena vidaya—bade
farewell.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His party arrived at Yajapura, the Lord
asked the two government officers who had come with Him to return.
PURPORT
The place called Yajapura is very well known in Orissa. It is a subdivision of the
Kataka district and is situated on the southern side of the Vaitarani River. Formerly
great sages performed sacrifices on the northern bank of the Vaitarani River; con-
sequently the place is known as Yajapura— “the place where sacrifices are per-
formed.” Some people say that this was one of the capital cities of King Yayati and
that from the name Yayati-nagara the name Yajapura has come. As stated in
Mahabharata (Vana-parva Chapter 114):
ete kalingah kaunteya
yatra vaitarani nadi
yatrayajata dharmo ‘pi
devan saranam etya vai
atra vai rsayo ‘nye ca
pura kratubhir ijire
According to the Mahabharata, great sages formerly performed sacrifices in this
place. There are still many temples of demigods and incarnations there, and there
is also a Deity of Sri Varahadeva. This Deity is especially important and is visited
by many pilgrims. Those who worship the Supreme Lord’s energy worship Varah,
Vaisnavi and Indrani, as well as many similar forms of Devi, the internal energy.
There are many deities of Lord Siva, and there are many places along the river


--- Page 235 ---
232 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
known as Dasasvamedha-ghata. Sometimes Yajapura is also called Nabhi-gaya or
Viraja-ksetra.
TEXT 151
প্রভু বিদায় দিল, রায় যায় তার সনে |
কৃষ্ণকথা রামানজ্দ-সনে রাত্রি-দিনে ॥ ১৫১ ॥
prabhu vidaya dila, raya yaya tanra sane
krspa-katha ramananda-sane ratri-dine
SYNONYMS
prabhu vidaya dila—the Lord bade them farewell; raya—Ramananda Raya;
ydya—goes; tanra sane—with Him; krspa-katha —discussion of topics of Lord
Krsna; ramananda-sane—with Ramananda; ratri-dine—day and night.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to the officers, and Raya Raman-
anda continued on with the Lord. The Lord talked to Ramananda Raya about
Sri Krsna day and night.
TEXT 152
শ্রতিগ্রামে রাজ-আসজ্ঞায় ATG Site |
নব্য গৃহে নানা-দ্রেব্যে করয়ে সেবন ॥ ১৫২ ॥
prati-grame raja-ajndya raja-bhrtya-gana
navya grhe nana-dravye karaye sevana
SYNONYMS
prati-grame—in each village; raja-ajidya—by the order of the King; raja-
bhrtya-gana—the government servants; navya grhe—in newly constructed
houses; nana-dravye —with all kinds of food grains; karaye sevana—rendered ser-
vice.
TRANSLATION
In each and every village, in compliance with the King’s order, government
officers constructed new houses and filled each of them with stocks of grains.
Thus they served the Lord.


--- Page 236 ---
Text 154] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 233
TEXT 153
এইমত চলি” প্রভু ‘CTI আইলা |
তথা হৈতে রামানম্দ-রায়ে বিদায় Fon ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
ei-mata cali’ prabhu 17987704031 aila
tatha haite ramananda-raye vidaya dila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; cali’—walking; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
remuna dila—came to Remuna; tatha haite—from there; ramananda-raye —unto
Ramananda Raya; vidaya dila—bade farewell.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu finally arrived at Remuna, where He bade farewell
to Sri Ramananda Raya.
PURPORT
It was stated in the First Chapter of Madhya-lila, verse 149, that Ramananda
Raya was bade farewell from Bhadraka. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
states that in those days the place called Remuna also included Bhadraka.
TEXT 154
LACS পড়িলা রায় নাহিক চেতন |
রায়ে কোলে করি” প্রভু করয়ে कम््न ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
bhamete padila raya nahika cetana
raye kole kari’ prabhu karaye krandana
SYNONYMS
bhamete padila—fell down on the ground; rdya—Ramananda Raya; nahika
cetana—there was no consciousness; raye —Ramananda Raya; kole kari’—taking
on the lap; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karaye krandana—began crying.
TRANSLATION
When Ramananda Raya fell to the ground and lost consciousness, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu took him upon His lap and began to cry.


--- Page 237 ---
234 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 155
রায়ের বিদায়-ভাব না যায় जङ्न |
কহিতে না পারি এই তাহার বর্ণন ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
rdyera vidaya-bhava na yaya sahana
kahite na pari ei tahara varpana
SYNONYMS
rayera vidaya-bhava—feelings of separation from Ramananda Raya; na yaya—
not possible; sahana—to tolerate; kahite—to speak; na pari—| am not able; ei—
this; tahara—of that; varpana—a description.
TRANSLATION
Ramananda Raya’s separation from Caitanya Mahaprabhu is very difficult to
describe. It is almost intolerable, and therefore | cannot describe it further.
TEXT 156
তবে “ওঢ্‌,দেশ-সীমা'” প্রভু চলি” আইলা |
তথা রাজ-অধিকারী প্রভুরে মিলিল। sev ॥
tabe ‘odhra-desa-sima’ prabhu cali’ aila
tatha raja-adhikari prabhure milila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; odhra-desa-sima—the boundary of Orissa; prabhu—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cali’—taveling; aila—reached; tatha—there; raja-
adhikari—a government officer; prabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; milila—
met.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu finally arrived at the border of the state of
Orissa, a government officer came there to meet Him.
TEXT 157
দিন দুই-চারি তেঁহে। করিল সেবন ।
আগে চলিবারে সেই কহে বিবরণ ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
dina dui-cari tenho karila sevana
age calibare sei kahe vivarana


--- Page 238 ---
Text 159] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 235
SYNONYMS
dina dui-cari—two or four days; tenho—he; karila sevana—served the Lord;
age—forward; calibare—for going; sei—that officer; kahe—spoke; vivarana—
detailed information.
TRANSLATION
For two or four days, the government officer served the Lord. He also gave
the Lord detailed information of what was ahead.
TEXT 158
गणनं যবন-রাজার SCH অধিকার |
তার ভয়ে পথে কেহ নারে চলিবার ॥ ०९४ ॥
madyapa yavana-rajara age adhikara
tanra bhaye pathe keha nare calibara
SYNONYMS
madyapa—drunkard; yavana—Mohammedan; rajara—of a king; age—ahead;
adhikara—the government; tanra bhaye —being afraid of such a king; pathe —on
the road; keha—anyone; nare—not able; calibara—to travel.
TRANSLATION
He informed the Lord that the territory ahead was ruled by a Moslem gover-
nor, who was a drunkard. Out of fear for this king, no one could walk the road
freely.
TEXT 159
পিছলদ। পর্যন্ত সব ঙার অধিকার ।
ভার ভয়ে নদী কেহ হৈতে নারে পার ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
pichalada paryanta saba tanra adhikara
tanra bhaye nadi keha haite nare para
SYNONYMS
pichalada—the place named Pichalada; paryanta—up to; saba—everything;
tanra—of him; adhikara—under the authority; tanra bhaye —because of fear of
him; nadi—the river; keha—anyone; haite—to cross; nare—not able; para—to
the other side.


--- Page 239 ---
236 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
The jurisdiction of the Mohammedan government extended up to
Pichalada. Due to fear of the Mohammedans, no one would cross the river.
PURPORT
During the old days, Pichalada was part of Tamaluka and Bengal. Pichalada is
located about fourteen miles south of Tamaluka. The River Ripa-narayana is well
known in Tamaluka, and Pichalada was situated on the bank of the Rapa-
narayana River.
TEXT 160
निन কত রহ - সন্ধি कच्चि" Sta সনে ।
তবে স্থখে নৌকাতে করাইব গমনে ॥ ১৬০ ॥
dina kata raha——sandhi kari’ tanra sane
tabe sukhe naukate karaiba gamane
SYNONYMS
dina kata raha—stay here for a few days; sandhi kari’—making peaceful
negotiations; tanra sane —with him; tabe—then; sukhe—in happiness; naukate—
on the boat; karaiba gamane —I will help You start.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prataparudra’s government officer further informed Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu that He should stay at the Orissa border for some days so that a
peaceful agreement could be negotiated with the Mohammedan governor. In
that way, the Lord would be able to cross the river peacefully in a boat.
TEXT 161
সেই কালে সে যবনের এক অপুচর |
“উড়িয়া-কটকে' আইল করি” বেশাস্তর ॥ ১৬১ ॥
sei kale se yavanera eka anucara
‘udiya-katake’ aila kari’ vesantara
SYNONYMS
sei kale—at that time; se yavanera—of the Mohammedan governor; eka
anucara—one follower; udiya-katake—to the camp of Orissan soldiers; aila—
came; kari’ vesa-antara—changing the dress.


--- Page 240 ---
Text 164] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 237
TRANSLATION
At that time, a follower of the Mohammedan governor arrived at the Orissa
encampment dressed in disguise.
TEXTS 162-163
প্রভুর সেই অদ্ভুত চরিত্র FT ।
হিন্দু-চর কহে সেই ষবন-পাশ গিয়া ॥ ১৬২ ॥
এক সন্ন্যাসী আইল জগন্নাথ হইতে |
অনেক সিদ্ধ-পুরুষ হুয় তাঁহার সহিতে ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
prabhura sei adabhuta caritra dekhiya
hindu-cara kahe sei yavana-pasa giya
‘eka sannyasi aila jagannatha ha-ite
aneka siddha-purusa haya tanhara sahite
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sei—that; adabhuta caritra—wonder-
ful characteristics; dekhiya—seeing; hindu-cara—the Hindu spy; kahe—says;
sei—that; yavana-pasa giya—going to the Mohammedan king; eka sannyasi—
one mendicant; a&ila—has come; jagannatha ha-ite —from Jagannatha Puri;
aneka—many; siddha-purusa—liberated persons; haya—are; tanhara sahite —
with Him.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan spy saw the wonderful characteristics of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and when he returned to the Mohammedan governor, he told
him, “A mendicant has come from Jagannatha Puri with many liberated per-
sons.
TEXT 164
নিরস্তর করে সবে কৃষ্ণ-সংকীর্তন |
ALT হাসে, নাচে, গায়, FACT TFA ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
nirantara kare sabe krspa-sankirtana
sabe hase, nace, gaya, karaye krandana
SYNONYMS
nirantara—without stopping; kare —perform; sabe—all; krspa-sankirtana—
chanting of the holy name of the Lord; sabe—all of them; hase —laugh; nace—
dance; gaya—sing; karaye krandana—and cry.


--- Page 241 ---
238 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
‘/All these saintly people incessantly chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra,
and they all laugh, dance, chant and cry.
TEXT 165
লক্ষ লক্ষ লোক SECA তাহ। দেখিবারে ।
Sica দেখি” পুলরপি যাইতে নারে খরে ॥ sve ॥
laksa laksa loka aise (303 dekhibare
tanre dekhi’ punarapi yaite nare ghare
SYNONYMS
laksa laksa—millions upon millions; loka—people; aise —come; taha—that;
dekhibare —to see; tanre dekhi’—after seeing Him; punarapi—again; ydite —to
go; nare—are not able; ghare —home.
TRANSLATION
‘“Many millions upon millions of people come to see Him, and after they see
Him, they cannot return home.
TEXT 166
সেই সব লোক হয় বাউলের প্রায়।
“কৃষ্ণ কহি” নাচে, कोटन्न, গড়াগড়ি যায় ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
sei saba loka haya baulera praya
‘krsna’ kahi’ nace, kande, gadagadi yaya
SYNONYMS
sei saba loka—all those persons; haya—are; baulera praya—almost like mad-
men; (८१5८2 kahi’—chanting the holy name of Krsna; nace —they dance; kande —
they cry; gadagadi yaya—they roll on the ground.
TRANSLATION
‘‘All these people become like madmen. They simply dance and chant the
holy name of Krsna. Sometimes they even cry and roll on the ground.
TEXT 167
কহিবার কথা নহে-_-দেখিলে সে জানি ।
তাহার প্রভাবে তারে ঈশ্বর” করি” মানি ॥ ১৬৭ ॥


--- Page 242 ---
Text 169] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 239
kahibara katha nahe —dekhile se jani
tanhara prabhave tanre ‘isvara’ kari’ mani’
SYNONYMS
kahibara katha—describable topic; nahe —this is not; dekhile —if one sees; se
jani—he can understand; tarnhara prabhave —by His influence; tarire—Him; isvara
kari’—as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mani—I accept.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Actually these things cannot even be described. One can understand them
only by seeing. By His influence, | accept Him as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.”
TEXT 168
এত কহি' সেই চর “হরি” “কৃষ্ণ গায়।
হাসে, কান্দে, নাচে, গায় বাউলের প্রায় ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
eta kahi’ sei cara ‘hari’ ‘krspa’ gaya
hase, kande, nace, gaya baulera praya
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; sei cara—that messenger; hari—Hari; krsna—Krsna;
gaya—chants; hase—laughs; kande—cries; nace—dances; gaya—sings; baulera
praya—just like a madman.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, the messenger began to chant the holy names of Hari and
Krsna. He also began to laugh and cry, dance and sing exactly like a madman.
TEXT 169
এত শুনি” যবনের मन ফিরি” গেল |
আপন-বিশ্বাস” উড়িয়। স্থানে পাঠাইল ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
eta Suni’ yavanera mana [20 gela
apana-‘visvasa’ udiya sthane pathaila
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—after hearing this; yavanera—of the Mohammedan governor;
mana—the mind; phiri’ gela—became changed; apana—own; visvasa—secre-


--- Page 243 ---
240 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
tary; udiya—of the representative of the Orissan government; sthane—to the
place; pathaila —sent.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this, the mind of the Mohammedan governor was changed.
He then sent his own secretary to the representative of the Orissan govern-
ment.
TEXT 170
‘frat सोजिग्र] প্রভুর চরণ বন্দিল।
Fa ‘Fw কহি” প্রেমে विद्वन হইল ॥ ১৭০ ॥
visvasa’ asiya prabhura caranpa vandila
‘krsna’ ‘krsna’ kahi’ preme vihvala ha-ila
SYNONYMS
visvasa—the secretary; asiyi—coming; prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; carana—the lotus feet; vandila—worshiped; krsna krsna—the holy
name of the Lord, Krsna, Krsna; kahi’—uttering; preme—in ecstasy; vihvala—
overwhelmed; ha-ila—became.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan secretary came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When
he offered his respects to the Lord’s lotus feet and uttered the holy name of
the Lord, “Krsna, Krsna,”” he also was overwhelmed with ecstatic love.
TEXT 171
ধৈর্য হুঞ। উড়িয়াকে কহে নমস্করি”।
‘CITT পাঠাইল। ম্লেচ্ছ অধিকারী ॥ ১৭১ ॥
dhairya hana udiyake kahe namaskari’
‘toma-sthane pathaila mleccha adhikari
SYNONYMS
dhairya hana—becoming calm; udiyake —to the representative of the Orissan
government; kahe—says; namaskari’—offering respect; toma-sthane—to your
place; pathaila—has sent; mleccha—the Mohammedan; adhikari—governor.


--- Page 244 ---
Text 173] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 241
TRANSLATION
After calming down, the Mohammedan secretary offered his respects and
informed the representative of the Orissan government, “The Mohammedan
governor has sent me here.
TEXT 172
তুমি वरि আজ্ঞা দেহ? এথাকে আসিয়া ।
खयन অধিকারী যায় প্রভুকে মিলিয়। ॥ ১৭২ ॥
tumi yadi 2/0 deha’ ethake asiya
yavana adhikari yaya prabhuke miliya
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; yadi—if; ajaia—order; deha’—give; ethake —here; asiya—coming;
yavana adhikari—the Mohammedan governor; ydya—may go; prabhuke—Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; miliya—after meeting.
TRANSLATION
“If you agree, the Mohammedan governor will come here to meet Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and then return.
TEXT 173
বহুত উৎকণ্ঠা छन्न, কর্যাছে বিনয়।
তোমা-সনে এই সন্ধি, নাহি যুদ্ধ-ভয় ॥” ১৭৩ ॥
bahuta utkantha tanra, karyache vinaya
toma-sane ei sandhi, nahi yuddha-bhaya’
SYNONYMS
bahuta—very much; utkantha—anxiety; tanra—his; karyache—has made;
vinaya—submissive petition; toma-sane—with you; ei—this; sandhi—a peace
proposal; nahi—there is not; yuddha-bhaya—fear of fighting.
TRANSLATION
‘The Mohammedan governor is very eager, and he has submitted this peti-
tion with great respect. It is a proposal for peace. You need not fear that we
will fight.”


--- Page 245 ---
242 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 16
TEXT 174
of মহাপাত্র কহে ङ] বিস্ময় ।
नमनं যবনের চিত্ত এছে কে করয় ! ১৭৪ ॥
Suni’ maha-patra kahe hana vismaya
‘madyapa yavanera citta aiche ke karaya!
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; maha-patra—the representative of the Orissan government;
kahe—says; hana vismaya—becoming astonished; madyapa—drunkard;
yavanera—of the Mohammedan; citta—the heart; aiche—in this way; ke
karaya —who has made.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this proposal, the representative of the Orissan government,
the maha-patra, was very astonished. He thought, “The Mohammedan gover-
nor is a drunkard. Who has changed his mind?
TEXT 175
আপনে মহাপ্রভু তার मन ফিরাইল |
দর্শন-স্মরণে যার জগৎ তারিল ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
apane mahaprabhu (3/7/3 mana phiraila
darsana-smarane yanra jagat tarila’
SYNONYMS
apane—personally; mahaprabhu—Sri  Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarra—his;
mana—mind; phirdila—changed; darsana—by a personal visit; smarane —by
remembrance; yanra—of whom; jagat—the whole world; tarila—He has
delivered.
TRANSLATION
“It must be Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself who has changed the
Mohammedan’s mind. Due to His presence and even due to His
remembrance, the whole world is liberated.”
PURPORT
From this we can understand that the Mohammedan governor was a drunkard
(madyapa). Ordinarily, there was no chance that he would change, but Lord जा


--- Page 246 ---
Text 176] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 243
Caitanya Mahaprabhu could turn anyone's mind to Krsna consciousness. One can
be delivered from material existence simply by remembering Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s holy name or by visiting Him. This Krsna consciousness movement
is being spread throughout the world, but not even one yavana or mleccha ad-
dicted to drinking could have changed and accepted Krsna consciousness with-
out ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s grace. People are often astonished to see many
thousands of Westerners converted to Vaisnavism. Generally Westerners are ad-
dicted to meat-eating, drinking, gambling and illicit sex; therefore their taking up
Krsna consciousness is astonishing. In India, especially, there is much astonish-
ment at this. The answer, however, is given here: darsana-smarane yarnra jagat
tarila. This change is made possible simply by the remembrance of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. The Western devotees are very sincerely chanting the holy names
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates: sri-krspa-caitanya prabhu nitya-
nanda $ri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. By the mercy of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates, people are being purified and their con-
sciousness directed from maya to Krsna.

The word visvasa refers to a secretary. This title is generally found among the
kayastha caste in the Hindu community. In Bengal, the title visvasais still used by
the kayasthas. The word visvasa means “faithful,” and a visvasi is a person in
whom one can place faith. Sri Bhaktivinoda Thakura states that during the
Mohammedan reign in Bengal, there was a secretariat entitled visvasa-khana. The
office of visvasa-khana was a secretariat office in which only the most reliable
people were employed. They were elected from the kayastha community, a com-
munity that is still very expert in managing business and government affairs. The
secretariat, or visvasa-khana, is generally a very reliable and faithful servant.
Whenever some confidential service was needed, these officers were employed.

TEXT 176
এত বলি” বিশ্বাসেরে কহিল বচন ।
“ভাগ্য তঁার--আসি' করুক প্রভ্ুদরশনমন ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
eta bali’ visvasere kahila vacana
“bhagya tanra——asi’ karuka prabhu darasana
SYNONYMS

eta bali’—saying this; viSvasere—unto the secretary of the Mohammedan
governor; kahila vacana—spoke the following words; bhagya—great fortune;
tanra—his; asi’—coming; karuka—let him do; prabhu darasana—visiting Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 247 ---
244 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
After thinking this, the maha-patra immediately informed the Moham-
medan secretary, “It is a great fortune for your governor. Let him come visit
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 177
প্রতীত করিয়ে যদি faam zl |
আসিবেকঝ পাচ-সাত ভূত্য সঙ্গে ABI” ১৭৭ ॥
pratita kariye——yadi nirastra hana
asibeka panca-sata bhrtya sange lana?”
SYNONYMS
pratita—understood; kariye—| make; yadi—if; nirastra haiia—being without
weapons; asibeka—he will come; panca-sata—five to seven; bhrtya—servants;
sange—in company; lana —taking.
TRANSLATION
“However, let me make it understood that he should come here without
weapons. He may bring with him five or seven servants.”
TEXT 178
“বিশ্বাস” যাঞা তাহারে সকল কহিল ।
হিন্দুবেশ ধরি” সেই यवन्‌ আইল ॥ ১৭৮. ॥
visvasa’ yana tanhare sakala kahila
hindu-vesa dhari’ sei yavana aila
SYNONYMS
visvasa—the secretary; yana—returning; tanhare—unto the Mohammedan
governor; sakala kahila—told everything; hindu-vesa dhari’—accepting the dress
of a Hindu; sei yavana—that Mohammedan governor; aila—came.
TRANSLATION
The secretary returned to the Mohammedan governor and informed him of
this news. Dressing himself like a Hindu, the Mohammedan governor then
came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 248 ---
Text 181] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 245
TEXT 179
দুর হৈতে প্রভু (कचि, ভুমেতে পড়িয়া |
eae করে অশ্রম্পুলকিত হুঞ। ॥ ১৭৯ ॥
dara haite prabhu dekhi’ bhamete padiya
dandavat kare asru-pulakita hana
SYNONYMS
dara haite—from a distance; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhi’—
seeing; bhamete padiya—falling down on the ground; dandavat kare —offered
obeisances; asru—tears; pulakita—jubilant; hana —becoming.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu from a distant place, the Moham-
medan governor fell to the ground and offered obeisances. Tears came to his
eyes, and he was jubilant with ecstatic emotions.
TEXT 180
মহাপানত্র আমিল Sica করিয়৷। সম্মান ।
যোড়হাতে প্রভভু-আগে লয় FRA ॥ ১৮০ ॥
maha-patra anila tanre kariya sammana
yoda-hate prabhu-age laya krsna-nama
SYNONYMS
maha-patra—the Orrisan representative; anila—brought; tanre—him; kariya
sammana—showing great respect; yoda-hate —with folded hands; prabhu-age—
before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; laya krsna-nama—chanted the holy name of
Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Arriving in that way, the Mohammedan governor was respectfully brought
before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by the maha-patra. The governor then stood
before the Lord with folded hands, and he chanted the holy name of Krsna.
TEXT 181
“অধম যবনকুলে কেন জন্ম टङ्न |
বিধি মোরে হিন্দুকুলে কেন না জন্মাইল ॥ ১৮১ ॥


--- Page 249 ---
246 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
“adhama yavana-kule kena janma haila
vidhi more hindu-kule kena na janmaila
SYNONYMS
adhama—low; yavana-kule—in the family of a Mohammedan; kena—why;
janma haila—there was birth; vidhi—providence; more —me; hindu-kule —in the
family of a Hindu; kena—why; na—not; janmaila—caused to be born.
TRANSLATION
The governor then submissively asked, “Why was | born in a Mohammedan
family? This is considered a low birth. Why didn’t supreme Providence grant
me a birth in a Hindu family?
TEXT 182
হিন্দু হেলে পাইতাম তোমার চরণ-সন্লিধান।
ব্যর্থ মোর এই দেহ, যাউক পরাণ ॥” ১৮২ ॥
‘hindu’ haile paitama tomara carana-sannidhana
vyartha mora ei deha, yauka parana”
SYNONYMS
hindu haile—if | was born in a Hindu family; paitama—I would have gotten;
tomara—of You; carana—of the lotus feet; sannidhana—proximity; vyartha—
useless; mora—my; ei—this; deha—body; yauka parana—let me die im-
mediately.
TRANSLATION
“If 1 had taken birth in a Hindu family, it would have been easy for me to
remain near Your lotus feet. Since my body is now useless, let me die im-
mediately.”
TEXT 183
এত শুনি” মহাপাত্র আবিষ্ট ङ्ग |
প্রভুকে করেন BIS চরণে ধরিয়া ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
eta Suni’ maha-patra avista hana
prabhuke karena stuti carane dhariya


--- Page 250 ---
Text 185] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 247
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; maha-patra—the representative of the Orissan govern-
ment; avista haAa—being overwhelmed; prabhuke—unto Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena—makes; stuti—prayers; carane dhariya—catching His feet.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing the governor's submissive statement, the maha-patra was
overwhelmed with joy. He clasped the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and began to offer the following prayers.
TEXT 184
‘vate - পবিত্র যার ল্রীনাম-শ্রবণে |
হেন-তোমার এই জীব न॑। देन দরশনে ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
‘canddla——pavitra yanra sri-nama-sravane
hena-tomara ei jiva paila darasane
SYNONYMS
candala—the dog-eater, the lowest of mankind; pavitra—purified; yanra—of
whom; sri-nama-sravane —by hearing the holy name; hena-tomara—of such a
one as You; ei jiva—this conditioned living entity; padila—has gotten; darasane —
the personal visit.
TRANSLATION
‘Simply by hearing Your holy name, a candala, lowest of men, can be
purified. Now this conditioned soul has received Your personal interview.
TEXT 185
Tula যে এই গতি, ইথে कि বিস্ময় ?
তোমার দর্শন-প্রভাব এইমত হয় ॥' ১৮৫ ॥
inhara ye ei gati, ithe ki vismaya?
tomadara darsana-prabhava ei-mata haya’
SYNONYMS
inhara—of this Mohammedan governor; ye—which; ei—this; gati—result;
ithe—in this; ki—what; vismaya—the wonder; tomara—of You; darsana-
prabhava—influence of seeing; ei-mata haya—is like this.


--- Page 251 ---
248 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
‘It is no wonder that this Mohammedan governor has attained such results.
Simply by seeing You, all this is possible.
TEXT 186
যন্নামধেয়শ্বণাহুকীর্তনাদ্‌
R&A হবণাদ্‌ যৎস্মরণাদপি ক্কচিত ৷
শ্বাদোহপি मणः সবনায় FACS
FS: পুনস্ত্রে ভগবন্ন, THAT ॥ ১৮৬ ॥
yan-namadheya-sravananukirtanad
yat-prahvanad yat-smaranad api kvacit
৩৮30০ ‘pi sadyah savanaya kalpate
kutah punas te bhagavan nu darsanat
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; namadheya—of the name; sravana—from hearing;
anukirtanat—and thereafter from chanting; yat—to whom; prahvanat—from
offering respects; yat—of whom; smaranat—from simply remembering; api—
also; kvacit—sometimes; svadah—a dog-eater; api—even; sadyah—im-
mediately; savanaya—for performing Vedic sacrifices; kalpate—becomes eligible;
kutah—what to speak; punah—again; te—of You; bhagavan—O Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; nu—certainly; darsanat—from seeing.
TRANSLATION
^“ (० say nothing of the spiritual advancement of persons who see the
Supreme Person face to face, even a person born in a family of dog-eaters be-
comes immediately eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices if he once utters the
holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or chants about Him, hears
about His pastimes, offers Him obeisances or even remembers Him.’ ^“
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.6). According to this verse, it
doesn’t matter what position a person holds. One may be the lowest of the low —
a candala, or dog-eater—but if he takes to chanting and hearing the holy name of
the Lord, he is immediately eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices. This is especially
true in this age of Kali.


--- Page 252 ---
Text 187] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 249
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
(Brhan-naradiya Purana, 38.126)
A person born in a brahmana family cannot perform Vedic sacrifices until he is
properly purified and has attained his sacred thread. However, according to this
verse, it is understood that even a lowborn person can immediately perform
sacrifices if he sincerely chants and hears the holy name of the Lord. Sometimes
envious people ask how Europeans and Americans in this Krsna consciousness
movement can become brahmanas and perform sacrifices. They do not know that
the Europeans and Americans have already been purified by chanting the holy
name of the Lord—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This is the proof. ৩৮৪০০ ‘pi sadyah savanaya
kalpate. One may be born in a family of dog-eaters, but he can perform sacrifices
simply by chanting the maha-mantra.

Those who find fault in the Western Vaisnavas should consider this statement
from S$rimad-Bhagavatam and the commentary on this verse by Srila Jiva Gosvami.
In this regard, Srila Jiva Gosvami has stated that to become a brahmana, one has to
wait for purification and undergo the sacred thread ceremony, but a chanter of
the holy name does not have to wait for the sacred thread ceremony. We do not
allow devotees to perform sacrifices until they are properly initiated in the sacred
thread ceremony. Yet according to this verse, an offenseless chanter of the holy
name is already fit to perform a fire ceremony, even though he is not doubly ini-
tiated by the sacred thread ceremony. This is the verdict given by Lord Kapiladeva
in His instructions to His mother, Devahiti. It was Lord Kapiladeva who instructed
Devahiiti in pure Sankhya philosophy.

TEXT 187
তবে মহাপ্রভু ভারে কৃপা-দৃষ্টি করি”।
আশ্বাসিয়া কহে,- তুমি কহ “কৃষ্ণ 'হুরি” ॥ ১৮৭ ॥
tabe mahaprabhu tanre krpa-drsti kari’
asvasiya kahe,—tumi kaha ‘krsna’ ‘hari’
SYNONYMS

tabe —thereafter; mahaprabhu —Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre—unto him;
krpa-drsti kari’—glancing with mercy; asvasiya—giving assurance; kahe —says;
tumi—you; kaha—utter; krspa—the holy name Krsna; hari—the holy name Hari.


--- Page 253 ---
250 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then glanced with mercy at the Mohammedan
governor. Giving him assurance, He asked him to chant the holy names Krsna
and Hari.
PURPORT
It is Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mercy that He advises everyone —even can-
dalas, mlecchas and yavanas—to chant the holy name of the Lord. In other words,
one who has taken to chanting the holy names Krsna and Hari has already
received Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mercy. The Lord's request to chant the holy
name of Krsna is now extended to everyone in the world through this Krsna con-
sciousness movement. Whoever follows Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's instructions
will certainly be purified, and one who sincerely chants the holy name
offenselessly is already more than a brahmana. Unfortunately there are many fools
and rascals in India who do not allow Western Vaisnavas to enter certain temples.
Such rascals do not clearly understand the Vedas. As stated previously: yan-
namadheya-sravananukirtanad.
TEXT 188
সেই कटर “মোরে যদি কৈল। অঙীকার |
এক আজ্ঞা! (कङ्‌, (जव করি যে তোমার ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
sei kahe, — ‘more yadi kaila angikara
eka ajna deha,—seva kari ye tomara
SYNONYMS
sei kahe—the Mohammedan governor said; more—me; yadi—if; kaila
angikara—You have accepted; eka ajia—one order; deha—give; seva—service;
kari—1 may render; ye—so that; tomdara— Your.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan governor then said, ‘Since You have so kindly accepted
me, please give me some order so that | can render You some service.”
PURPORT
If one is purified by following इ Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s orders —that is, by
chanting the holy name of Krsna—one must certainly be eager to render service
to the Lord. This is the test. When one engages enthusiastically in the Lord's ser-
vice, it is to be understood that he is reaping the results of chanting the names of
Krsna and Hari.


--- Page 254 ---
Text 190] The Lord's Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 251
TEXT 189
গো-ত্রাহ্মণ-বৈষ্ণবে হিংসা কর্যাছি অপার ৷
সেই পাপ হইতে মোর হউক লিস্টার ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
go-brahmana-vaispave himsa karyachi apara
sei papa ha-ite mora ha-uka nistara
SYNONYMS
go-brahmana-vaispnave—to the cows, brahmanas and Vaisnavas; (11175 --
violence and envy; karyachi—I have done; apara—unlimitedly; sei papa ha-ite —
from those sinful activities; mora—my; ha-uka—Ilet there be; nistara—liberation.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan governor then prayed for liberation from the unlimited
sinful activities he had previously incurred by being envious of brahmanas
and Vaisnavas and killing cows.
PURPORT
By chanting the holy names Krsna and Hari, one is certainly liberated from sinful
activities, such as killing cows or insulting brahmanas and Vaisnavas. It is most sin-
ful to kill cows and insult brahmanas and Vaisnavas. The karma incurred by such
activity is very great, but one can immediately nullify all this karma by surrender-
ing to Lord Krsna and chanting His holy name. After being released from one’s sin-
ful reactions (karma), one becomes eager to serve the Lord. This is the test. Since
the Mohammedan governor was immediately purified in the presence of Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he could utter the names of Krsna and Hari. Consequently
he was anxious to render some service, and the Lord, anxious to fulfill his desires,
immediately had the devotee Mukunda Datta inform the governor that there was
some service to render.
TEXT 190
তবে YF দত্ত F(Z, — ‘QA, মহাশয় |
গঙ।তীর যাইতে মহাপ্রভুর मन হয় ॥ ১৯০ ॥
tabe mukunda datta kahe, — ‘Suna, mahasaya
ganga-tira yaite mahaprabhura mana haya
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; mukunda datta kahe—Mukunda Datta, a devotee of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: Suna mahasaya—my dear sir, kindly hear me; garga-


--- Page 255 ---
252 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
tira yaite—to go to the bank of the Ganges; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; mana—the mind or desire; haya—is.
TRANSLATION
Mukunda Datta then told the Mohammedan governor, “ভি dear sir, please
hear. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wishes to go to the bank of the Ganges.
TEXT 191
তাহ যাইতে কর তুমি সহায়-প্রকার |
এই বড় আজ্ঞা, এই বড় উপকার ॥” ১৯১ ॥
tahan yaite kara tumi sahaya-prakara
ei bada djia, ei bada upakara’
SYNONYMS
tahan yaite—to go there; kara—do; tumi—you; sahdya-prakara—all kinds of
assistance; ei bada ajna—this is a great order; ei bada upakara—this is a great
favor.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Please give Him all assistance so that He can go there. This is your first
great order, and if you can comply, you will render a great service.”
TEXT 192
जटव সেই মহাপ্রভুর চরণ Af |
সবার চরণ वन्न চলে হুষ্ট खथ] ॥ ১৯২ ॥
tabe sei mahaprabhura carana vandiya
sabdra carana vandi’ cale hrsta hana
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter; sei—the governor; mahaprabhura—of ऽत Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; carana vandiya—after worshiping the lotus feet; sabara carana van-
di’—offering respect to the feet of all the other devotees; cale—departed; hrsta
hana—being very pleased.
TRANSLATION
_ After this, the Mohammedan governor offered prayers to the lotus feet of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as well as to the lotus feet of all His devotees. After
that, the governor departed. Indeed, he was very pleased.


--- Page 256 ---
Text 195] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 253
TEXT 193
মহাপাত্র ভার সনে কৈল কোলাকুলি ।
অনেক সামগ্রী দিয় করিল মিতালি ॥ ১৯৩ ॥
maha-patra tanra sane kaila kolakuli
aneka samagri diya karila mitali
SYNONYMS
maha-patra—the Orissan representative; tanra sane—with him; kaila—per-
formed; kolakuli—embracing; aneka—various; samagri—materials; diya—giving
as gift; karila mitali—established friendship.
TRANSLATION
Before the governor left, the maha-patra embraced him and offered him
many material gifts. He thus established a friendship with him.
TEXT 194
প্রাতঃকালে সেই বছ নৌকা সাজাঞ। |
প্রভুকে আমিতে দিল বিশ্বাস পাঠাঞ। ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
pratah-kale sei bahu nauka sajana
prabhuke anite dila visvasa pathana
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; sei—the governor; bahu—many; nauka—boats;
sajana—decorating; prabhuke —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; anite—to bring; dila—
gave; visvasa—the secretary; pathana—sending.
TRANSLATION
The next morning the governor sent his secretary with many nicely deco-
rated boats to bring $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to the other side of the river.
TEXT 195
মহাপাত্র চলি” আইল।৷ মহাপ্রভুর সনে |
ম্লেচ্ছ আসি” दकल প্রভুর চরণ বন্দনে ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
maha-patra cali’ aila mahaprabhura sane
mleccha asi’ kaila prabhura carana vandane


--- Page 257 ---
254 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
maha-patra—the (2115521 government representative; cali"—moving; aila—
went; mahaprabhura sane —with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mleccha—the gover-
nor of the other side; asi’—coming; kaila—performed; prabhura carana van-
dane —worshiping the lotus feet of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The maha-patra crossed the river with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and when
they reached the other shore, the Mohammedan governor personally received
the Lord and worshiped His lotus feet.
TEXT 196
এক নবীন নৌকা, তার মধ্যে ঘর |
স্বগণে চড়াইল।৷ প্রভু তাহার উপর ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
eka navina nauka, tara madhye ghara
svagane cadaila prabhu tahara upara
SYNONYMS
eka—one; navina—new; naukd—boat; tara—of which; madhye—in the mid-
dle; ghara—a room; sva-gane—with His associates; cadaila—put on board;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tahara upara—on it.
TRANSLATION
One of the boats had been newly constructed, and it had a room in the mid-
dle. It was on this boat that they put Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His asso-
ciates.
TEXT 197
মহাপাত্রে মহাপ্রভু করিল৷ चिक्तोस्र ।
কাল্দিতে কান্দিতে সেই তীরে রহি'” চায় ॥ ১৯৭ ॥
maha-patre mahaprabhu karila vidaya
kandite kandite sei tire rahi’ caya
SYNONYMS
maha-patre —unto the maha-patra; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
karila vidaya—bade farewell; kandite kandite—crying and crying; sei—that
maha-patra; tire—on the bank; rahi’ caya—stood and watched.


--- Page 258 ---
Text 199] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 255
TRANSLATION
Finally Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to the maha-patra. Standing
on the river bank and looking at the boat, the maha-patra began to cry.
TEXT 198
जलफर्श्टस्न (AE यवन एलिन |
দশ নৌকা खि বছ সৈন্য সঙ্গে নিল ॥ ১৯৮ ॥
jala-dasyu-bhaye sei yavana calila
dasa nauka bhari’ bahu sainya sange nila
SYNONYMS
jala-dasyu-bhaye —because of fearing pirates; sei—that; yavana—Moham-
medan governor; calila—went along; dasa nauka bhari’—filling ten boats; bahu —
many; sainya—soldiers; sarige—with him; nila—took.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan governor then personally accompanied Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Because of pirates, the governor took ten boats, which were full
with many soldiers.
TEXT 199
মেন্তেশ্বর'-তুষ্টলদে পার TAB |
“পিছল্দা” পর্যন্ত সেই सवन WILT ॥ ১৯৯ ॥
‘mantresvara’-dusta-nade para karaila
‘pichalda’ paryanta sei yavana dila
SYNONYMS
mantresvara—named Mantre$vara; dusta-nade—at a dangerous spot in the
river; para karaila—arranged to cross; pichalda paryanta—up to the place named
Pichalda; sei—that; yavana—Mohammedan governor; &ila—accompanied Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The Mohammedan governor accompanied Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu past
Mantre$vara. This place was very dangerous due to pirates. He took the Lord
to a place named Pichalda, which was near Mantresvara.


--- Page 259 ---
256 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
PURPORT
The very wide mouth of the Ganges near present-day Diamond Harbor was
called Mantreévara. Through the Ganges, the boat entered the Rupa-narayana
River and reached the village of Pichalda. Pichalda and Mantresvara are located
very close together. After passing Mantreévara, the Mohammedan governor ac-
companied the Lord as far as Pichalda.
TEXT 200
-
Sica বিদায় দিল প্রভু সেই গ্রাম হৈতে।
সে-কালে তার প্রেম-চেষ্টা না পারি বর্ণিতে ॥२००॥
tanre vidaya dila prabhu sei grama haite
se-kale tanra prema-cesta na pari varnite
SYNONYMS
tanre—unto the governor; viddya dila—bade farewell; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sei grama haite—from the village known as Pichalda; se-kale—in
those days; tarira—his; prema-cesta—activities in ecstatic love; na pari—Il am not
able; varnite—to describe.
TRANSLATION
Finally Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade the governor farewell. The intense
ecstatic love exhibited by the governor cannot be described.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to the Mohammedan governor at
Pichalda. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami herein states that the governor experienced
symptoms of ecstatic love due to being separated from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
These symptoms, he admits, cannot be described.
TEXT 201
অলোকিক Merl করে জীকৃষ্ণচৈতন্তয।
যেই ইহা শুনে তাঁর कचा, দেহ ধন্য ॥ ২০১ ॥
alaukika lila kare sri-krsnpa-caitanya
yei 103 sune tanra janma, deha dhanya


--- Page 260 ---
Text 203] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 257
SYNONYMS
alaukika—uncommon; lila—pastimes; kare —performs; $ri-krsna-caitanya—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yei—anyone who; iha—this; sune—hears; tanra—his;
janma—birth; deha—body; dhanya—glorified.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s pastimes are all uncommon. Whoever
listens to His activities becomes glorious, and his life becomes perfect.
TEXT 202
সেই নৌকা চড়ি' द wie “পানিহাটি”।
নাবিকেরে পরাইল নিজ-কূপা-সাট্টা ॥ ২০২ ॥
sei nauka cadi’ prabhu aila ‘panihati’
navikere paraila nija-krpa-sati
SYNONYMS
sei nauka cadi’—boarding the same boat; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
aila—reached; panihati—the place named Panihati; navikere—the captain of the
boat; paraila—He put on; nija-krpa-sati—His own used cloth as special mercy.
TRANSLATION
The Lord finally reached Panihati, and, as an act of mercy, He gave the cap-
tain of the boat one of His personal garments.
TEXT 203
প্রভু আইলা” বলি” লোকে হৈল কোলাহল |
মনুষ্য ভরিল সব, foal জল, স্থল ॥ ২০৩ ॥
‘prabhu aila’ bali’ loke haila kolahala
manusya bharila saba, kiba jala, sthala
SYNONYMS
prabhu aila—the Lord has arrived; bali’—saying; loke—among the residents;
haila—there was; kolahala—great broadcasting; manusya—all kinds of men;
bharila—filled; saba—all; kiba jala—either on the water; sthala—or on land.


--- Page 261 ---
258 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
The place called Panihati was located on the bank of the Ganges. After hear-
ing that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had arrived, all kinds of men assembled
both on land and on the water.
PURPORT
The village of Panihati is situated on the banks of the Ganges near Khadadaha.
TEXT 204
রাঘব-পণ্ডিত আসি” প্রভু sas] গেলা |
পথে যাইতে লোকভিড়ে কষ্টে-স্থষ্ট্যে আইল ॥২০৪॥
raghava-pandlita asi’ prabhu lana gela
pathe yaite loka-bhide kaste-srstye aila
SYNONYMS
raghava-pandita—Raghava Pandita; asi’—coming; prabhu—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; lana —taking; gela—went to his place; pathe yaite —passing on the
road; loka-bhide—in the crowd of men; kaste-srstye—with great difficulty;
aila—reached.
TRANSLATION
At length Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was taken away by Raghava Pandita.
There was a great crowd assembled along the way, and the Lord reached
Raghava Pandita’s residence with great difficulty.
TEXT 205
একদিন প্রভু তথা করিয়। নিবাস ।
প্রাতে কুমারহট্টে আইলা, যাহ Afar ॥ ২০৫ ॥
eka-dina prabhu tatha kariya nivasa
prate kumarahatte aila, — yahan srinivasa
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; prabhu —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tatha—there; kariya
nivasa—residing; prate—in the morning; kumarahatte—the town . named
Kumarahatta; aila—reached; yahan—where; srinivasa—the home of Srinivasa
Thakura.


--- Page 262 ---
Text 206] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 259
TRANSLATION

The Lord stayed at Raghava Pandita’s place for only one day. The next

morning, He went to Kumarahatta, where Srivasa Thakura lived.
PURPORT

The present name of Kumarahatta is Halisahara. After Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
accepted sannyasa, Srivasa Thakura—due to separation from Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu—left Navadvipa and went to Halisahara to live.

From Kumarahatta, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Kafcanapalli (known as
Kancadapada), where Sivananda Sena lived. After staying two days at Sivananda’s
house, the Lord went to the house of Vasudeva Datta. From there He went to the
western side of Navadvipa to the village called Vidyanagara. From Vidyanagara
He went to Kuliya-grama and stayed at Madhava dasa’s house. He stayed there
one week and excused the offenses of Devananda and others. Due to Kaviraja
Cosvami’s mentioning the name of Santipuracarya, some people think that Kuliya
is a village near Kancadapada. Due to this mistaken idea, they invented another
place known as New Kuliyara Pata. Actually such a place does not exist. Leaving
the house of Vasudeva Datta, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the house of
Advaita Acarya. From there He went to the western side of Navadvipa to
Vidyanagara and stayed at the house of Vidya-vacaspati. These accounts are
given in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Caitanya-mangala, Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka
and Caitanya-carita-kavya. Srila Kavirdja Gosvami has not vividly described this
entire tour; therefore, on the basis of Caitanya-caritamrta, some unscrupulous
people have invented a place called Kuliyara Pata near Kancadapada.

TEXT 206
তাহ হৈতে আগে গেলা भियां मम्-चज्च ।
বাস্থছেব-গৃহে পাছে আইলা ঈশ্বর ॥ ২০৬ ॥
tahan haite age gela sivananda-ghara
vasudeva-grhe pache aila isvara
SYNONYMS

tahan haite—from there; age—ahead; gelda—Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
proceeded; sivinanda-ghara—to the house of Sivananda Sena; vasudeva-grhe —
to the house of Vasudeva Datta; pache —after this; aila—came; isvara—the Lord.

TRANSLATION

From the house of Srivasa Thakura, the Lord went to the house of Sivananda

Sena and then to the house of Vasudeva Datta.


--- Page 263 ---
260 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 207
“বা एन्ग छखि-शृटङ' প্রভু যেমতে রহিল |
লোক-ভিড় ভয়ে বৈছে “কুলিয়।” আইল! ॥ ২০৭ ॥
‘vacaspati-grhe’ prabhu yemate rahila
loka-bhida bhaye yaiche ‘kuliya’ aila
SYNONYMS

vacaspati-grhe —at the house of Vidya-vacaspati; prabhu—the Lord; yemate—
as; rahila—stayed there for some time; loka-bhida bhaye—due to fear of crowds
of people; yaiche—just as; kuliya aili—He came to Kuliya, the present city of
Navadvipa.

TRANSLATION

The Lord remained some time at the house of Vidya-vacaspati, but then, be-

cause it was too crowded, He went to Kuliya.
PURPORT

The house of Vidya-vacaspati was located at Vidyanagara, which was near
Koladvipa, or Kuliya. It was here that Devananda Pandita was residing. This infor-
mation is found in Caitanya-bhagavata (Madhya-lila, Chapter Twenty-one). In
Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka, the following statement is given about Kuliya. Tatah
kumarahatte srivasa-pandita-vatyam abhyayayau: “From there the Lord went to
the house of Srivasa Pandita in Kumarahatta.” Tato ‘dvaita-vatim abhyetya
haridasenabhivanditas tathaiva tarani-vartmana navadvipasya pare kuliya-nama-
grame madhava-dasa-vatyam uttirnavan. evar sapta-dinani tatra sthitva punas
tata-vartmana eva calitavan: “From the house of Srivasa Acarya, the Lord went to
the house of Advaita Acarya, where He was offered obeisances by Haridasa
Thakura. The Lord then took a boat to the other side of Navadvipa to a place
called Kuliya, where He stayed seven days at the house of Madhava dasa. He then
proceeded along the banks of the Ganges.”

In the Sri Caitanya-carita-maha-kavya, it is stated, anyedyuh sa sri-navadvipa-
bhameh pare garngar pascime kvapi dese, sriman sarva-praninarm tat-tad-angair
netranandarn samyag agatya tene: “The Lord went to the eastern side of the
Canges at Navadvipa, and everyone was pleased to see the Lord coming.”

In the Caitanya-bhagavata (Antya-khanda, Chapter Three), it is stated, sarva-
parisada-sange sri-gaurasundara/ acambite asi’ uttarila tanra ghara: “The Lord sud-
denly came to Vidyanagara with a full party and stayed there in the house of
Vidya-vacaspati,” Navadvipadi sarva-dike haila dhvani: “Thus throughout
Navadvipa, the Lord's arrival was made known.” Vdcaspati-ghare aila nyasi-


--- Page 264 ---
Text 207] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 261

cadamani: “Thus the chief of all the sannyasis, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, arrived

at the house of Vidya-vacaspati.” As further stated:
ananta arbuda loka bali’ ‘hari’ ‘hari’
calilena dekhibare gauranga sri-hari
patha nahi paya keho lokera gahale
vanadala bhangi’ loka dasa-dike cale
lokera gahale yata aranya achila
ksaneke sakala divya pathamaya haila
ksaneke aila saba loka kheya-ghate
kheyari karite para padila sankate
satvare asila vacaspati mahasaya
karilena aneka naukara samuccaya
naukara apeksa ara keho nahi kare
nana mate para haya ye yemate pare
hena-mate ganga para ha-i’ sarva-jana
sabhei dharena vacaspatira carana
lukana gela prabhu kuliya-nagara
kuliyaya ailena vaikuntha-isvara
sarva-loka ‘hari’ bali’ vacaspati-sange
sei-ksane sabhe calilena maha-range
kuliya-nagare ailena nyasi-mani
sei-ksane sarva-dike haila maha-dhvani
sabe ganga madhye nadiyaya-kuliyaya
Suni’ matra sarva-loke mahanande dhaya
vacaspatira grame (vidyanagare) chila yateka gahala
tara koti koti-gune parila sakala
laksa laksa nauka va aila kotha haite
na jani kateka para haya kata-mate
laksa laksa loka bhase jahnavira jale
sabhe para hayena parama kutahale


--- Page 265 ---
262 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
gangadya hana para apana-apani
kolakoli kari’ sabhe kare hari-dhvani
ksaneke kuliya-grama——nagara prantara
pariparna haila sthala, nahi avasara
ksaneke aila mahasaya vacaspati
tenho nahi payena prabhura kotha sthiti
kuliyaya prakase yateka papi chila
uttama, madhyama, nica, — sabe para haila
kuliya-gramete asi’ sri-krspa-caitanya
hena nahi, yare prabhu na karila dhanya
“When जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at Vidya-vacaspati’s house, many
hundreds and thousands of people went to see Him and chant the holy name of
Hari. It was so crowded that people could not even find a place to walk; therefore
they made room by clearing out the jungles near the village. Many roads were
automatically excavated, and many people also came by boat to see the Lord. So
many came that it was difficult for the boatmen to get them across the river.
When Vidya-vacaspati suddenly arrived, he made arrangements for many boats
to receive these people, but the people would not wait for the boats. Somehow
or other they crossed the river and hurried toward the house of Vidya-vacaspati.
Due to this great crowd, ऽते Caitanya Mahaprabhu secretly went to Kuliya-nagara.
After the Lord left Vidyanagara, however, all the people heard news of His leav-
ing. They then accompanied Vacaspati to Kuliya-nagara. Since the news of the
Lord's arrival was immediately broadcast, large crowds arrived and greeted Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu with great jubilation. Indeed, when the crowd went to see
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, it increased ten thousand times in number. No one
could say how many people crossed the river to see Him, but many hundreds of
thousands made a great tumult when crossing the River Ganges. After crossing
the river, everyone began to embrace one another because they heard the good
news of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s arrival. Thus all the inhabitants of Kuliya, the
sinful, intermediate, and spiritually advanced, were delivered and glorified by ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.”
As stated in Caitanya-bhagavata (Antya-khanda, Chapter Six):
khanayoda, badagachi, ara dogachiya
garigara opara kabhu yayena ‘kuliya’
As stated in Caitanya-marigala:
gariga-snana kari prabhu radha-desa diya
krame krame uttarila nagara ‘kuliya’


--- Page 266 ---
Text 208] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 263
mayera vacane punah gela navadvipa
varakona-ghata, nija vadira samipa
In the commentary of Premadasa it is said:
nadiyara majhakhane, sakala lokete
jane, 'kuliya-pahadapura’ name sthana.
Sri Narahari Cakravarti, or Ghanasyama dasa, has written in his Bhakti-ratnakara:
kuliya pahadapura dekha srinivasa
[001৮5 ‘koladvipa’-parvataikhya—e pracara
In a book named Navadvipa-parikrama, also written by Ghanasyama dasa, it is
stated: kuliya-pahadapura grama puarve koladvipa-parvatakhyananda nama.
Therefore one can conclude that the present-day city of Navadvipa and the
places known as Bahirdvipa, Kolera Ganja, Kola-amada, Kolera Daha, Gadakhali,
etc. were known as Kuliya, but the so-called Kuliyara Pata is not the original
Kuliya.
TEXT 208
মাধবদাস-গৃহে তথা শচীর নন্দন |
লক্ষ-কোটি লোক তথা পাইল দরশন ॥ ২০৮ ॥
madhava-dasa-grhe tatha sacira nandana
laksa-koti loka tatha paila darasana
SYNONYMS
madhava-dasa-grhe —at the house of Madhava dasa; tathd—there; sacira nan-
dana—the son of mother ৩৪0; laksa-koti loka—many hundreds and thousands of
people; tatha—there; paila darasana—got His audience.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord stayed at the house of Madhava dasa, many hundreds and
thousands of people came to see Him.
PURPORT
Madhava dasa is identified as follows. In the family of $rikara Cattopadhyaya,
Yudhisthira Cattopadhyaya took his birth. Formerly, he and his family members
lived in Bilvagrama and Patdali. From there he went to Kuliya Pahadapura, formerly
known as Padapura. The eldest son of Yudhistira Cattopadhyaya is known as
Madhava dasa, the second son was called Haridasa, and the youngest son was


--- Page 267 ---
264 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
called Krsnasampatti Cattopadhyaya. The three brothers’ nicknames were
Chakadi, Tinakadi and Dukadi. The grandson of Madhava dasa was named
Varnéivadana, and his grandson Ramacandra and their descendants are still living
at Vaghnapada, or Vaifici.
TEXT 209
সাত দিন রহি” তথা লোক नि त्रिन। ।
जव অপরাধিগণে প্রকারে তারিলা ॥ ২০৯ ॥
sata dina rahi’ tatha loka nistarila
saba aparadhi-gane prakare tarila
SYNONYMS
sata dina—seven days; rahi’—staying; tatha—there; loka—the people;
nistarila—He liberated; saba—all; aparadhi-gane—the offenders; prakare—in
some fashion; tarila—delivered.
TRANSLATION
The Lord stayed there for seven days and delivered all kinds of offenders
and sinners.
TEXT 210
শান্তিপুরাচার্য-গৃহে এছে আইলা |
শচী-মাতা মিলি” সার দুঃখ খণ্ডাইল। ॥ ২১০ ॥
‘santipuracarya’-grhe aiche aila
saci-mata mili’ tanra duhkha khandaila
SYNONYMS
santipura-acarya—of Advaita Acarya; grhe—to the house; aiche—similarly;
aila—went; saci-mata—mother Saci; mili’—meeting; tanra—her; duhkha—
unhappiness; khandaila—pacified.
TRANSLATION
After leaving Kuliya, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited the house of Advaita
Acarya at Santipura. It was there that the Lord’s mother, Sacimata, met Him
and was thus relieved of her great unhappiness.


--- Page 268 ---
Text 213] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 265
TEXT 211
তবে 'রামকেলি'”-গ্রামে প্রভু যৈছে (भन |
SBA হৈতে প্রভু পুনঃ ফিরি” खरेल ॥ ২১১ ॥
tabe ‘ramakeli’-grame prabhu yaiche gela
‘natasala’ haite prabhu punah phiri’ ila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; ramakeli-grame —in the village known as Ramakeli; prabhu —
Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yaiche —similarly; geld—went; natasala—the
place known as Kanai Natasala; haite —from; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
punah—again; phiri’ aila—returned.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then visited the village known as Ramakeli and the place known as
Kanai Natasala. From there He returned to Santipura.
TEXT 212
শাস্তিপুরে পুনঃ কৈল দশ-দিন वाज |
বিস্তারি” বর্ণিয়াছেন বৃন্দাবন-দাস ॥ ২১২ ॥
santipure punah kaila dasa-dina vasa
vistari’ varniyachena vrndavana-dasa
SYNONYMS
$antipure —at Santipura; punah —again; kaila—made; dasa-dina—for ten days;
vasa—residence; vistari’—elaborating; varniyachena—has described; vrndavana-
dasa—Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed in Santipura for ten days. This has all been
described very elaborately by Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
TEXT 213
অতএব दे] তার না टेक বিস্তার |
পুলকরুক্তি হয়, গ্রন্থ বাড়য়ে অপার ॥ ২১৩ ॥


--- Page 269 ---
266 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
ataeva ihan tara na kailun vistara
punarukti haya, grantha badaye apara
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; ihari—here; tara—of that incident; na kailun—I did not
give; vistara—elaboration; punarukti —repetition; haya—it is; grantha—the book;
badaye—increases; apara—unlimitedly.
TRANSLATION
1 will not narrate these incidents because they have already been described
by Vrndavana dasa Thakura. There is no need to repeat the same information,
for such repetition would unlimitedly increase the size of this book.
TEXTS 214-215
তার মধ্যে মিলিল। Lace কূপ-সনাতন |
লৃসিংহানন্দ কৈল CATT পথের সাজন ॥ ২১৪ ॥
TEACH; সেই লীল৷ আমি ত' বর্ণিল্ু* ।
অতএব পুলঃ তাহা 8&1 न। লিখিল্দু' ॥ ২১৫ ॥
tara madhye milila yaiche rapa-sanatana
nrsimhananda kaila yaiche pathera sajana
satra-madhye sei lila ami ta’ varnilun
ataeva punah taha ihan na likhilun
SYNONYMS
tara madhye—within that; milila —He met; yaiche —how; rapa-sanatana—the
two brothers Rapa and Sanatana; nrsirhhananda—Nrsimhananda; kaila—did;
yaiche —how; pathera sajana—decoration of the road; satra-madhye—in the
synopsis; sei lila—those pastimes; ami—I; ta’—indeed; varnilunn—have de-
scribed; ataeva—therefore; punah —again; taha—that; iharn—here; na likhilun—I\
have not written.
TRANSLATION
Those narrations tell how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu met the brothers Ripa
and Sanatana and how Nrsirmhananda decorated the road. | have already de-


--- Page 270 ---
Text 217] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 267
scribed these in an earlier synopsis of this book; therefore I will not repeat the
narrations here.
PURPORT
This information is given in Adi-lila (Chapter Ten, verse 35) and Madhya-lila
(Chapter One, verses 155-162 and 175-226).
TEXT 216
পুনরপি थद्‌ যদি “শাস্তিপুর' widen |
রঘুন।থ-দাস আসি' প্রভুরে মিলিলা ॥ ২১৬ ॥
punarapi prabhu yadi “%3/771120/31 aila
raghunatha-dasa asi’ prabhure milila
SYNONYMS
punarapi—again; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yadi—when; santipura
aila—came to Santipura; raghunatha-dasa—Raghunatha dasa; asi’—coming;
prabhure milila—met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to Santipura, Raghunatha dasa
came to meet Him.
TEXT 217
“दिन,” ‘Cat वर्धन, - দুই সহোদর |
সপ্তগ্রামে বারলক্ষ মুদ্বোর ঈশ্বর ॥ ২১৭ ॥
‘hiranya’, ‘govardhana’,——dui sahodara
saptagrame bara-laksa mudrara isvara
SYNONYMS
hiranya—Hiranya; govardhana—Govardhana; dui sahodara—two brothers;
saptagrame —in the village named Saptagrama; bara-laksa—1,200,000;
mudrara—of coins; isvara—the masters.
TRANSLATION
Two brothers named Hiranya and Govardhana, who were residents of Sap-
tagrama, had an income of 1,200,000 rupees.


--- Page 271 ---
268 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
PURPORT

Hiranya and Govardhana were inhabitants of Saptagrama in the district of
Hugali. Actually they were inhabitants not of Saptagrama, but a nearby village
named Krsnapura. They took their birth in a big kayastha family, and although
their family title has not been ascertained, it is known that they came from an
aristocratic family. The elder brother's name was Hiranya Majumadara, and the
younger brother's name was Govardhana Majumadara. $ri Raghunatha dasa was
the son of Govardhana Majumadara. Their family priest was Balarama Acarya,
who was a favorite of Haridasa Thakura's, and the family’s spiritual master was
Yadunandana Acarya, a favorite of Vasudeva Datta’s.

The village of Saptagrama is located on the eastern railway from Calcutta to
Burdwan, and presently the railway station is called 11159818178. In those days there
was a large river there known as the Sarasvati, and present-day Trisabigha is a
great port. In 1592, the Pathanas invaded, and due to a flooding of the Sarasvati
River in the year 1632, this great port was partially destroyed. It is said that in the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, Portuguese businessmen used to come
aboard their ships. In those days, Saptagrama, situated on the southern side of
Bengal, was very rich and popular. The merchants, who were the principal resi-
dents, were called Saptagrama suvarna-vanik. There were very many rich people
there, and Hiranya Majumadara and Govardhana Majumadara belonged to the
kayastha community. They also were very rich, so much so that it is mentioned in
this verse that their annual income as landlords amounted to 1,200,000 rupees. In
this connection, one may refer to Adi-lila (Chapter Eleven, verse 41), which de-
scribes Uddharana Datta, who also belonged to the Saptagrami suvarna-vanik
community.

TEXT 218
মইৈম্বর্যযুক্ত 7 02 —A 1D, AME |
সদাচারী, সৎকুলীন, ধাশিকাঞ্রগণ্য ॥ ২১৮ ॥
mahaisvarya-yukta durnhe —vadanya, brahmanya
sadacari, satkulina, dharmikagra-ganya
SYNONYMS

maha-aisvarya-yukta—very opulent in riches; durnhe—both the brothers;
vadanya—very magnanimous; brahmanya—devoted to brahminical culture; sat-
acari—well-behaved; sat-kulina—aristocratic; dharmika-agra-ganya—on the top
of the list of religious persons.

TRANSLATION

Both Hiranya Majumadara and Govardhana Majumadara were very opulent

and magnanimous. They were well-behaved and devoted to brahminical


--- Page 272 ---
Text 220] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 269
culture. They belonged to an aristocratic family, and among religionists they
were predominant.
TEXT 219
নদীয়া-বাসী लाक्तटनन्र উপজীব্য-প্রায় |
অর্থ, ভুমি, গ্রাম wal করেন সহায় ॥ ২১৯ ॥
nadiya-vasi, brahmanera upajivya-praya
artha, bhami, grama diya karena sahaya
SYNONYMS
nadiya-vasi—inhabitants of Nadia; brahmanera—of all brahmanas; upajivya-
praya—almost the entire source of income; artha—money; bhami—Iland;
grama—uvillages; diya—giving as charity; karena sahaya—give help.
TRANSLATION
Practically all the brahmanas residing in Nadia were dependent on the
charity of Hiranya and Govardhana, who gave them money, land and villages.
PURPORT
Although Navadvipa was very opulent and populous during Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s time, practically all the brahmanas depended on the charity of
Hiranya and Govardhana. Because the brothers highly respected the brahmanas,
they very liberally gave them money.
TEXT 220
नोना amas! - আরাধ্য দু'হার |
চক্রবর্তী করে REIT “ভ্রাতৃ'-ব্যবহ।র ॥ ২২০ ॥
nilambara cakravarti—aradhya dunhara
cakravarti kare dunhaya ‘bhratr’-vyavahara
SYNONYMS
nilambara cakravarti—the grandfather of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; aradhya
dunhara—very worshipable for these two; cakravarti—Nilambara Cakravartt;
kare—does; dunhaya—to the two of them; bhratr-vyavahara—treating as
brothers.


--- Page 273 ---
270 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Nilambara Cakravarti, the grandfather of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, was
much worshiped by the two brothers, but Nilambara Cakravarti used to treat
them as his own brothers.
TEXT 221
जिद्यै-नू्म्नटनतद्र পূর্বে করঢাছেন সেবনে |
অতএব প্রভু ভাল জ।নে দুইজনে ॥ ২২১ ॥
misra-purandarera parve karyachena sevane
ataeva prabhu bhala jane dui-jane
SYNONYMS
misra-purandarera—to Purandara Misra, the father of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
parve —previously; karyachena sevane—had rendered service; ataeva—
therefore; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhala—very well; jane —knew;
dui-jane—the two brothers.
TRANSLATION
Formerly, these two brothers rendered much service to Misra Purandara,
the father of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Because of this, the Lord knew them
very well.
TEXT 222
সেই গোবধনের পুত্র - जघून। यं দাস |
বাল্যকাল হৈতে তেঁহে। বিষয়ে উদাল ॥ २२२ ॥
sei govardhanera putra—raghunatha dasa
balya-kala haite tenho visaye udasa
SYNONYMS
sei—that; govardhanera putra—son of Govardhana Majumadara; raghunatha
dasa—Raghunatha dasa; balya-kala haite—from his very childhood; tenho—he;
visaye udasa—indifferent to material happiness.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa was the son of Govardhana Majumadara. From childhood,
he was uninterested in material enjoyment.


--- Page 274 ---
Text 225] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 271
TEXT 223
সন্ন্যাস করি' थद्‌ যবে नखि আইলা |
তবে আসি” রধুনাথ প্রভুরে মিলিল। ॥ ২২৩ ॥
sannyasa kari’ prabhu yabe $3/770000/3 aila
tabe asi’ raghunatha prabhure milila
SYNONYMS
sannyasa kari’—after accepting the sannyasa order; prabhu—the Lord; yabe —
when; dantipura aila—went to Santipura; tabe —at that time; asi’—coming;
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa; prabhure—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; milila—
met.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to Santipura after accepting the
renounced order, Raghunatha dasa met Him.
TEXT 224
প্রভুর চরণে পড়ে প্রেমাবিষ্ট হঞা।
প্রভ্ভু পাদস্পর্ণ কৈল করুণ৷ fam ॥ ২২৪ ॥
prabhura carane pade premavista hana
prabhu pada-sparsa kaila karuna kariya
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carane—at the lotus feet; pade —fell
down; prema-avista—absorbed in ecstatic love; hafia—becoming; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pada-sparsa kaila—touched with His feet; karuna—
mercy; kariyd—showing.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunitha dasa went to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he fell at the
Lord's lotus feet in ecstatic love. Showing him mercy, the Lord touched him
with His feet.
TEXT 225
তার পিতা সদ। করে আচার্য-সেবন |
অতএব আচার্থ ভারে হৈল। AFAR ॥ ২২৫ ॥


--- Page 275 ---
272 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 16
tanra pita sada kare acarya-sevana
ataeva acarya tanre haila parasanna
SYNONYMS
tanra pita—his father; sada—always; kare —performs; acarya-sevana—worship
of Advaita Acarya; ataeva dcarya—therefore Advaita Acarya; tarire—upon him;
haila parasanna—became pleased.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa’s father, Govardhana, always rendered much service to
Advaita Acarya. Consequently Advaita Acarya was very pleased with the
family.
TEXT 226
আচার্থ-প্রসাদ্ে পাইল প্রভুর উচ্ছিষ্ট-পাত |
প্রভুর চরণ দেখে দিন পঁচ-সাত ॥ ২২৬ ॥
acarya-prasade paila prabhura ucchista-pata
prabhura carana dekhe dina panca-sata
SYNONYMS
acarya-prasade —by the mercy of Advaita Acarya; paila—got; prabhura—of
Lord ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ucchista-pata—remnants of food; prabhura—of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carana—lotus feet; dekhe—sees; dina—days; panca-
sata—five to seven.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa was there, Advaita Acarya favored him by giving
him the food remnants left by the Lord. Raghunatha dasa was thus engaged for
five or seven days by rendering service to the Lord's lotus feet.
TEXT 227
প্রভু তারে বিদায় দিয়৷ গেল৷ নীলাচল।
তেঁহো ঘরে আসি” टेन প্রেমেতে পাগল ॥ ২২৭ ॥
prabhu tanre vidaya diya gela nilacala
tenho ghare asi’ haila premete pagala


--- Page 276 ---
Text 229] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 273
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tinre—unto Raghunatha dasa; vidiya
diya—bidding farewell; gela—went back; nildcala—to Jagannatha Puri; ternho—
he; ghare asi’—returning home; haila—became; premete pagala—mad in ecstatic
love.
TRANSLATION
After bidding farewell to Raghunatha dasa, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
returned to Jagannatha Puri. After returning home, Raghunitha dasa became
mad with ecstatic love.
TEXT 228
বার বার পলায় তেঁহে। নীলাদ্ররি য'ইতে |
পিতা তারে বান্ধি' রাখে আনি' পথ হৈতে ॥ ২২৮ ॥
bara bara palaya tenho niladri yaite
pita tanre bandhi’ rakhe ani’ patha haite
SYNONYMS
bara bara—again and again; paldya—leaves home; tenho—he; niladri yaite—
to go to Jagannatha Puri; pita—his father; tarire—him; bandhi’—binding; rakhe —
keeps; ani’—bringing back; patha haite —from the road.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa used to run away from home again and again to go to
Jagannatha Puri, but his father kept binding him and bringing him back.
TEXT 229
পঞ্চ পাইক তারে রাখে রাত্রি-দিনে ।
চারি সেবক, দুই ব্রাহ্মণ রহে সার সনে ॥ ২২৯ ॥
panca paika tare rakhe ratri-dine
cari sevaka, dui brahmana rahe tarra sane
SYNONYMS
painca—five; paika—watchmen; tanre —him (Raghunatha dasa); rakhe—keep;
ratri-dine—day and night; cari sevaka—four personal servants; dui brahmana—
two brahmanas to cook; rahe —remain; tarira sane —with him.


--- Page 277 ---
274 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
His father even had five watchmen guard him day and night. Four personal
servants were employed to look after his comfort, and two brahmanas were
employed to cook for him.
TEXT 230
একাদশ जन পারে রাখে নিরন্তর ।
নীলাচলে যাইতে না পায়, দুঃখিত অন্তর ॥ ২৩০ ॥
ekadasa jana tanre rakhe nirantara
nilacale yaite na paya, duhkhita antara
SYNONYMS
ekadasa—eleven; jana—persons; tanre—him; rakhe—keep; nirantara—day
and night; nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; yaite—to go; na paya—was not able;
duhkhita antara—very unhappy within the mind.
TRANSLATION
In this way, eleven people were incessantly keeping Raghunatha dasa under
control. Thus he could not go to Jagannatha Puri, and because of this he was
very unhappy.
TEXT 231
এবে যদি মহাপ্রভু गा खिन त्र wide |
wfam পিতারে agai নিবেদিল। ॥ ২৩১ ॥
ebe yadi mahaprabhu ‘santipura’ aila
Suniya pitare raghunatha nivedila
SYNONYMS
ebe—now; yadi—when; mahaprabhu —S$r7 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; santipura—
to Santipura; aila—came; suniya—hearing; pitare —unto his father; raghunatha—
Raghunatha dasa; nivedilda—submitted.
TRANSLATION
When Raghuniatha dasa learned that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had arrived
at Santipura, he submitted a request to his father.


--- Page 278 ---
Text 234] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 275
TEXT 232
“আজ্ঞা দেহ যাঞ। দেখি প্রভুর চরণ |
অন্যথা, न রহে মোর শরীরে জীবন” ॥ ২৩২ ॥
"2/5 09097 yana dekhi prabhura carana
anyatha, na rahe mora sarire jivana”
SYNONYMS
ajna deha’—kindly give me permission; yaha—going; dekhi—I| may see;
prabhura carana—the lotus feet of the Lord; anyatha—otherwise; na rahe —will
not remain; mora—my; sarire—within the body; jivana—life.
TRANSLATION
Raghunatha dasa asked his father, ‘Please give me permission to go see the
lotus feet of the Lord. If you do not, my life will not remain within this body.’”
TEXT 233
শুনি' তার পিতা ag (नां क-खंव किञ्च ।
পাঠাইল বলি” “नोच ख। जि ফ্রিয়” ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
Suni’ tanra pita bahu loka-dravya diya
pathaila bali’ ‘Sighra asiha phiriya’
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; tanra—his; pita—father; bahu—many; loka-dravya—servants
and materials; diya—giving; pathaila—sent; bali’—saying; sighra—very soon;
asiha—come; phiriya—returning.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this request, Raghunatha dasa’s father agreed. Giving him many
servants and materials, the father sent him to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
requesting him to return soon.
TEXT 234
जार किन শানস্তিপুরে প্রভু-সঙ্গে রহে।
রাজ্রি-দিবসে এই মনঃকথ। কহে ॥ ২৩৪ ॥


--- Page 279 ---
276 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 16
sata dina $antipure prabhu-sarnge rahe
ratri-divase ei manah-katha kahe
SYNONYMS
sata dina—for seven days; santipure—at Santipura; prabhu-sarige—in the
association of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rahe —stayed; ratri-divase—both day
and night; ei—these; manah-katha—words in his mind; kahe —says.
TRANSLATION
For seven days Raghunatha dasa associated with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
in Santipura. During those days and nights, he had the following thoughts.
TEXT 235
“রক্ষকের হাতে Ye কেমনে BBA !
কেমনে প্রভুর সঙ্গে নীলাচলে যাব ?” ২৩৫ ॥
‘raksakera hate muni kemane chutiba!
kemane prabhura sange nilacale yaba?’
SYNONYMS
raksakera hate—from the clutches of the watchmen; muni —I; kemane —how;
chutiba—shall get release; kemane—how; prabhura sarige—with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; yaba—I shall go.
TRANSLATION
Raghuniatha dasa thought, ‘How shall | be able to get free from the hands of
the watchmen? How shall | be able to go with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to
Nilacala?’’
TEXT 236
সর্বচ্ড গৌরাঙ্গণ্রভু জানি” Sta मन ।
শিক্ষা-রূপে কহে তরে আখশ্বাস-বচন ॥ ২৩৬ ॥
sarvajina gauranga-prabhu jani’ tanra mana
Siksa-rape kahe tanre asvasa-vacana
SYNONYMS
sarva-jiia—omniscient; gauranga-prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jani'—
knowing; tanra—his; mana—mind; Siksa-rape—as an instruction; kahe —says;
tanre—unto Raghunatha dasa; asvasa-vacana—words of assurance.


--- Page 280 ---
Text 237] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 277
TRANSLATION
Since Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was omniscient, He could understand
Raghunatha dasa’s mind. The Lord therefore instructed him with the following
reassuring words.
TEXT 237
“স্থির ₹31 ঘরে যাও, না হও বাতুল |
ক্রমে ক্রমে পায় লোক SAFI ॥ ২৩৭ ॥
“sthira hana ghare yao, na hao vatula
krame krame paya loka bhava-sindhu-kdala
SYNONYMS
sthira (1275 —being patient; ghare yao—go back home; na—do not; hao—be-
come; vatula—crazy; krame krame—gradually; paya—gets; loka—a person;
bhava-sindhu-kala—the far shore of the ocean of material existence.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Be patient and return home. Don’t be a crazy fellow. By and by you will be
able to cross the ocean of material existence.
PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.58):
samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam
mahat-padar punya-yaso-murareh
bhavambudhir vatsa-padam pararn padam
padam (2201207) yad vipadarh na tesam
This material world is just like a big ocean. It begins with Brahmaloka and extends
to Patalaloka, and there are many planets, or islands, in this ocean. Not knowing
about devotional service, the living entity wanders about this ocean, just as a man
tries to swim to reach the shore. Our struggle for existence is similar to this. Every-
one is trying to get out of the ocean of material existence. One cannot im-
mediately reach the coast, but if one endeavors, he can cross the ocean by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mercy. One may be very eager to cross this ocean, but he
cannot attain success by acting like a madman. He must swim over the ocean very
patiently and intelligently under the instructions of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu or
His representative. Then, one day, he will reach the shore and return home, back
to Godhead.


--- Page 281 ---
278 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 238
মর্কট-বৈরাগ্য না কর লোক (को) |
যথাযোগ্য বিষয় SP অনাসক্ত ङ.थग। ॥ ২৩৮ ॥
markata-vairagya na kara loka dekhana
yatha-yogya visaya bhuiija’ anasakta hana
SYNONYMS

markata-vairagya—monkey renunciation; na kara—do not do; loka—to the
people; dekhana—showing off; yatha-yogya—as it is befitting; visaya—material
things; bhunija’—enjoy; anasakta—without attachment; hafia—being.

TRANSLATION

‘You should not make yourself a showbottle devotee and become a false
renunciant. For the time being, enjoy the material world in a befitting way and
do not become attached to it.”

PURPORT

The word markata-vairagya, indicating false renunciation, is very important in
this verse. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, in commenting on this word,
points out that monkeys make an external show of renunciation by not accepting
clothing and by living naked in the forest. In this way they consider themselves
renunciants, but actually they are very busy enjoying sense gratification with
dozens of female monkeys. Such renunciation is called markata-vairagye —the
renunciation of a monkey. One cannot be really renounced-until one actually be-
comes disgusted with material activity and sees it as a stumbling block to spiritual
advancement. Renunciation should not be phalgu, temporary, but should exist
throughout one's life. Temporary renunciation, or monkey renunciation, is like the
renunciation one feels at a cremation ground. When a man takes a dead body to
the crematorium, he sometimes thinks, “This is the final end of the body. Why am
1 working so hard day and night?” Such sentiments naturally arise in the mind of
any man who goes to a crematorial ghata. However, as soon as he returns from
the cremation grounds, he again engages in material activity for sense enjoyment.
This is called smasana-vairagya, or markata-vairagya.

In order to render service to the Lord, one may accept necessary things. If one
lives in this way, he may actually become renounced. In the Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu (1.2.108), it is said:

yavata syat sva-nirvahah
svikuryat tavad arthavit

adhikye nyanatayarn ca
cyavate paramarthatah


--- Page 282 ---
Text 239] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 279
“The bare necessities of life must be accepted, but one should not superfluously
increase his necessities. Nor should they be unnecessarily decreased. One should
simply accept what is necessary to help one advance spiritually.”

In his Durgama-sarigamani, ১ Jiva Gosvami comments that the word sva-nir-
vahah actually means sva-sva-bhakti-nirvahah. The experienced devotee will ac-
cept only those material things that will help him render service to the Lord. In
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.256), markata-vairagya, or phalgu-vairagya, is ex-
plained as follows:

prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyari phalgu kathyate
“Whatever is favorable for the rendering of service to the Lord should be ac-
cepted and should not be rejected as a material thing.” Yukta-vairagya, or befit-
ting renunciation, is thus explained:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunijatah
nirbandhah krspa-sambandhe
yuktari vairagyam ucyate
“Things should be accepted for the Lord's service and not for one’s personal sense
gratification. If one accepts something without attachment and accepts it be-
cause it is related to Krsna, one’s renunciation is called yukta-vairagya.” Since
Krsna is the Absolute Truth, whatever is accepted for His service is also the Ab-
solute Truth.

The word markata-vairagya is used by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to indicate so-
called Vaisnavas who dress themselves in loincloths trying to imitate Srila Rapa
Cosvami. Such people carry a beadbag and chant, but at heart they are always
thinking about getting women and money. Unknown to others, these markata-
vairagis maintain women but externally present themselves as renunciants. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very much opposed to these markata-vairagis, or
pseudo-Vaisnavas.

TEXT 239
অন্তরে নিষ্ঠা কর, ACW (ल) কব্যবহার।
অচিরাও কৃষ্ণ তোমায় করিবে উদ্ধার ॥” ২৩৯ ॥
antare nistha kara, bahye loka-vyavahara
acirat krspa tomaya karibe uddhara


--- Page 283 ---
280 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
antare —within the heart; nistha kara—keep strong faith; bahye —externally;
loka-vyavahara—behavior like ordinary men; acirat—very soon; krsna—Lord
Krsna; tomaya—unto you; karibe—will do; uddhara—liberation.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: ‘Within your heart, you should keep
yourself very faithful, but externally you may behave like an ordinary man.
Thus Krsna will soon be very pleased and deliver you from the clutches of
maya.
TEXT 240
বৃন্দাবন দেখি” যবে আসিব নীলাচল্গে ।
তবে তুমি আমা-পাশ আসিহ কোন ছলে ॥ ২৪০ ॥
vrndavana dekhi’ yabe 35163 nilacale
tabe tumi ama-pasa asiha kona chale
SYNONYMS
vrndavana dekhi’—after visiting Vrndavana; yabe —when; asiba—I shall come
back; nilacale —to Jagannatha Puri; tabe —at that time; tumi—you; ama-pasa—to
Me; asiha—please come; kona chale—by some pretext.
TRANSLATION
‘You may see me at Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri, when I return after visiting
Vrndavana. By that time you can think of some trick to escape.
TEXT 241
সে ছল সেকালে কৃষ্ণ “FACT তোমারে |
FoF যারে, তারে কে রাখিতে পারে ॥” ২৪১ ॥
se 00313 se-kale krspa sphurabe tomare
krspa-krpa yanre, tare ke rakhite pare”
SYNONYMS
se chala—that trick; se-kale—at that time; krsna—Lord Krsna; sphurabe —wiill
show; tomare —unto you; krsna-krpa—the mercy of Krsna; yarire —upon whom;
tare —him; ke—who; rakhite—to keep; pare —is able.


--- Page 284 ---
Text 242] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 281
TRANSLATION
“What kind of means you will have to use at that time will be revealed by
Krsna. If one has Krsna’s mercy, no one can check him.”
PURPORT
Although Srila Raghuniatha dasa was very anxious to join Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the Lord advised him to wait for the mercy of Lord Krsna. He recom-
mended that Raghunatha dasa keep his Krsna consciousness firmly fixed in his
heart while externally behaving like an ordinary man. This is a trick for everyone
advanced in Krsna consciousness. One can live in society like an ordinary human
being, but at the same time one’s own business should be to satisfy Krsna and
spread His glories. A Krsna conscious person should not be absorbed in material
things, for his only business is the devotional service of the Lord. If one is engaged
in this way, Krsna will certainly bestow His mercy. As Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
advised Raghunatha dasa: yatha-yogya visaya bhunja’ anasakta hana. The same is
repeated: antare nistha kara, bahye loka-vyavahara. This means that one must
have no other desire within his heart than to serve Krsna. On the basis of such a
conviction, one can cultivate Krsna consciousness. This is confirmed in Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.200):
laukiki vaidiki vapi
ya kriya kriyate mune
hari-sevanukalaiva
sa karya bhaktim icchata
A devotee may act as an ordinary human being or as a strict follower of Vedic in-
junctions. In either case, everything he does is favorable for the advancement of
devotional service because he is in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 242
এত কহি'” মহাপ্রভু তারে বিদায় দিল ।
ঘরে আসি” মহাপ্রভুর শিক্ষা! আচরিল ॥ ২৪২ ॥
eta kahi’ mahaprabhu tarnre vidaya dila
ghare asi’ mahaprabhura Siksa acarila
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarire —unto
Raghunatha dasa; vidiaya dila—bade farewell; ghare asi’—returning home;
mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $iksa—the instruction; acarila—
practiced.


--- Page 285 ---
282 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to Raghunatha dasa,
who returned home and did exactly what the Lord told him.
TEXT 243
वांछ বৈরাগ্য, বাতুলত৷ जकन ছাড়িয়া |
FATT কার্য করে खनांग হঞ। ॥ ২৪৩ ॥
bahya vairagya, vatulata sakala chadiya
yatha-yogya karya kare anasakta hana
SYNONYMS
bahya vairagya—external renunciation;  vatulata—craziness; sakala—all;
chadiya—giving up; yatha-yogya—as it is befitting; karya—duties; kare —per-
forms; anasakta hafa—being without attachment.
TRANSLATION
After returning home, Raghunatha dasa gave up all craziness and external
pseudo renunciation and engaged in his household duties without attach-
ment.
TEXT 244
দেখি” ভার পিতা-মাতা বড় সুখ পাইল |
তাঁহার আবরণ কিছু শিথিল হইল ॥ ২৪৪ ॥
dekhi’ tanra pita-mata bada sukha paila
tanhara avarana kichu Sithila ha-ila
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; tanra—his; pita-mata—father and mother; bada—very much;
sukha—happiness; paila—got; tanhara avarapa—strong vigilance upon him;
kichu—something; sithila ha-ila—became slackened.
TRANSLATION
When Raghunatha dasa’s father and mother saw that their son was acting
like a householder, they became very happy. Because of this, they slackened
their guard.
PURPORT
When Raghunatha dasa’s father and mother saw that their son was no longer
acting like a crazy fellow and was responsibly attending to his duties, they be-


--- Page 286 ---
Text 2471 The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 283
came very happy. The eleven people —five watchmen, four personal servants and
two brahmanas—who were guarding him became less strict in their vigilance.
When Raghunatha dasa actually took up his household affairs, his parents
reduced the number of guards.
TEXTS 245-246
2% প্রভু একত্র করি” जव ভক্তগণ |
। অব্বৈত-নিত্যানন্দাদি যত ভক্তজন ॥ ২৪৫ ॥
जव। আলিঙ্গন করি” কহেন গোসাণি |
जटव আজ্ঞা! দেহ'-__আমি নীলাচলে যাই ॥ ২৪৬ ॥
103/) prabhu ekatra kari’ saba bhakta-gana
advaita-nityanandadi yata bhakta-jana
saba alingana kari’ kahena gosani
sabe 5/5 deha’——ami nilacale yai
SYNONYMS
iharn—here (at Santipura); prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ekatra kari’—
assembling in one place; saba bhakta-gana—all the devotees; advaita-nityanan-
da-adi—headed by Advaita Acarya and Nityananda Prabhu; yata bhakta-jana—all
the devotees; saba alingana kari’—embracing every one of them; kahena
gosani—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; sabe —all of you; 3ল3 deha’—just give
Me permission; ami—I; nilacale—to Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri; yai—may go.
TRANSLATION
Meanwhile, at Santipura, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu assembled all His devo-
tees —headed by Advaita Acarya and Nityananda Prabhu—embraced them all
and asked their permission to return to Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 247
সবার সহিত 28 আমার হুইল মিলন |
এ বর্ষ NAIR (कङ्‌ Al করিহ গমন ॥ ২৪৭ ॥
sabara sahita 1/15/) amara ha-ila milana
€ varsa ‘niladri’ keha na kariha gamana
SYNONYMS
sabara sahita—with everyone; ihan—here; amara—of Me; ha-ila—there was;
milana—meeting; e varsa—this year; niladri—to Jagannatha Puri; keha—any of
you; na—not; kariha gamana—go.


--- Page 287 ---
284 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Because He had met them all at Santipura, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu re-
quested all the devotees not to go to Jagannatha Puri that year.
TEXT 248
छां] হৈতে অবশ্য আমি “বৃন্দাবন” যাব।
সবে আজ্ঞা দেহ, তবে নি্বিদস্মে আসিব ॥ ২৪৮ ॥
tahan haite avasya ami ‘vrndavana’ yaba
sabe 2/6 deha’, tabe nirvighne asiba
SYNONYMS
tahan haite—from there; avasya—certainly; ami—I; vrndavana yaba—shall go
to Vindavana; sabe—all of you; 2/7 deha’—give Me permission; tabe —then;
nirvighne—without disturbance; asiba—I shall come back.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ८८1 shall certainly go to Vrndavana from
Jagannatha Puri. If all of you give Me permission, | shall return here again
without difficulty.”
TEXT 249
মাতার চরণে ধরি” বছ বিনয় করিল ।
বৃন্দাবন যাইতে त्र আজ্ঞ। লইল ॥ ২৪৯ ॥
matara carane dhari’ bahu vinaya karila
vrndavana yaite tanra 2/7 la-ila
SYNONYMS
matara—of Sacimata; carane —the feet; dhari’—catching; bahu vinaya karila—
submitted most humbly; vrndavana yaite—to go to Vindavana; tanra—her;
ajna—permission; la-ila—took.
TRANSLATION
Clasping the feet of His mother, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very humbly re-
quested her permission. Thus she gave Him leave to go to Vrndavana.


--- Page 288 ---
Text 252] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 285
TEXT 250
তবে नवक्ञोटन সারে fast Ardent |
Reif एनिन्‌। সঙ্গে ভক্তগণ नय] ॥ ২৫০ ॥
tabe navadvipe tanre dila pathana
niladri calila sange bhakta-gana lana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; navadvipe—to Navadvipa; tarire—her; dila pathana—sent
back; niladri—to Jagannatha Puri; calila—departed; sarge —with Him; bhakta-
gana lara—taking all the devotees.
TRANSLATION
Srimati Sacidevi was sent back to Navadvipa, and the Lord and His devotees
started for Jagannatha Puri, Niladri.
TEXT 251
সেই जव লোক পথে করেন সেবন |
স্থখে নীলাচল আইল শচীর নন্দন ॥ ২৫১ ॥
sei saba loka pathe karena sevana
sukhe nilacala aila sacira nandana
SYNONYMS
sei saba loka—all those persons; pathe—on the road; karena sevana—ren-
dered all service; sukhe—in great happiness; nilicala—to Jagannatha Puri; aila—
came back; sacira nandana—the son of mother Saci.
TRANSLATION
The devotees who accompanied Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rendered all
kinds of service on the way to Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri. Thus in great happi-
ness the Lord returned.
TEXT 252
প্রভু আসি” জগন্ন।থ Gant टेकल।
“মহাপ্রভু আইলা” -গ্রামে কোলাহল হৈল ॥ ২৫২ ॥


--- Page 289 ---
286 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
prabhu asi’ jagannatha darasana kaila
‘mahaprabhu aila’——grame kolahala haila
SYNONYMS
prabhu —$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asi’—returning; jagannatha—to Lord Jagan-
natha; darasana—uvisit; kaila—made; mahaprabhu aila—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has come back; grame—in the town; kolahala haila—there was great agitation.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived in Jagannatha Puri, He visited the
temple of the Lord. News then spread all over the city that He had returned.
TEXT 253
আনন্দিত ভক্তগণ আসিয়! মিলিল। ৷
প্রেম-আলিঙ্গন প্রভু সবারে করিল ॥ ২৫৩ ॥
anandita bhakta-gana asiya milila
prema-alingana prabhu sabare karila
SYNONYMS
anandita—very pleased; bhakta-gana—all the devotees; asiya—came; milila—
met; prema-alingana—embracing in love; prabhu —the Lord; sabare—to all devo-
tees; karila—offered.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees then came and met the Lord with great happiness. The Lord
also embraced each of them in great ecstatic love.
TEXT 254
কাশীমিশ্র, রামানন্দ, Sgr, সার্বভৌম |
বাণীনাথ, শিখি-আদি যত Sate ॥ ২৫৪ ॥
kasi-misra, ramananda, pradyumna, sarvabhauma
vaninatha, sikhi-adi yata bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
kasi-misra—Kast Misra; ramananda—Ramananda; pradyumna—Pradyumna;
sarvabhauma—Sarvabhauma; vaninatha—Vaninatha; sikhi-adi—Sikhi Mahiti and
others; yata bhakta-gana—all the devotees.


--- Page 290 ---
Text 257] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 287
TRANSLATION
Kasi Misra, Ramananda Raya, Pradyumna, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya,
Vaninatha Raya, Sikhi Mahiti and all the other devotees met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 255
গদাধর-পণ্ডিত আসি” প্রভুরে মিলিলা ।
সবার BLAS প্রভু কহিতে লাগিল ॥ ২৫৫ ॥
gadadhara-pandita asi’ prabhure milila
sabara agrete prabhu kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
gadadhara-pandita—Gadadhara Pandita; asi’—coming; prabhure milila—met
the Lord; sabara agrete—in front of all the devotees; prabhu—the Lord; kahite
lagila—began to say.
TRANSLATION
Gadadhara Pandita also came and met the Lord. Then, before all the devo-
tees, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to speak as follows.
TEXT 256
“বৃন্দাবন যাব আমি (नौखुटकमनं fam ।
নিজ-মাতার, গঙ্গার চরণ RIT ॥ ২৫৬ ॥
‘vindavana yaba ami gauda-desa diya
nija-matara, gangara carana dekhiya
SYNONYMS
vrndavana yaba—shall go to Vrndavana; ami—I; gauda-desa diya—through
Bengal; nija-matara—of My own mother; gangara—of the River Ganges; carana—
the feet; dekhiya—seeing.
TRANSLATION
‘‘It was My decision to go to Vrndavana through Bengal in order to see My
mother and the River Ganges.
TEXT 257
এত মতে করি” কৈন্যু: গৌড়েরে গমন |
मङ्टखक সঙ্গে হৈল নিজ-ভক্তগণ ॥ ২৫৭ ॥


--- Page 291 ---
288 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
eta mate kari’ kailun gaudere gamana
sahasreka sange haila nija-bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
eta—such; mate —decision; kari’—making; kailun—I did; gaudere —to Bengal;
gamana—going; sahasreka—thousands of men; sarge —with Me; haila—there
were; nija-bhakta-gana—My own devotees.
TRANSLATION
‘Thus | went to Bengal, but thousands of devotees began to follow Me.
TEXT 258
লক্ষ नक्र CNT আইসে (PGT CHATS |
লোকের RACE পথ না পারি চলিতে ॥ ২৫৮ ॥
laksa laksa loka aise kautuka dekhite
lokera sanghatte patha na pari calite
SYNONYMS
laksa laksa loka—many thousands of people; dise—came; kautuka—out of
curiosity; dekhite—to see; lokera sanghatte—by the assembly of so many men;
patha—the road; na pari—| was not able; calite—to pass through.
TRANSLATION
‘Many hundreds and thousands of people came to see Me out of curiosity,
and due to such a large crowd | could not travel very freely on the road.
TEXT 259
যথা রহি, তথা ঘর-প্রাচীর হয় চুর্ণ ৷
Fall নেত্র পড়ে তথা লোক দেখি পূর্ণ ॥ ২৫৯ ॥
yatha rahi, (৪003 ghara-pracira haya ০0103
yatha netra pade tatha loka dekhi 20103
SYNONYMS
yatha rahi—wherever | stayed; tatha—there; ghara-pracira—the building and
the boundary walls; haya—became; carna—broken; yatha—wherever; netra—
the eyes; pade—fell; tatha—there; loka—people; dekhi—I see; parna—filled.


--- Page 292 ---
Text 261] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 289
TRANSLATION
‘Indeed, the crowd was so large that the house and the boundary walls of
the house where 1 stayed were destroyed, and wherever | looked I could see
only large crowds.
TEXT 260
FLR-RCRI FA গেলাঙ রামকেলি-গ্রাম।
আমার $। यञ আইল। “রূপ” “সনাতন” নাম ॥ ২৬০ ॥
kaste-srstye kari’ gelana ramakeli-grama
amara thani ३11 ‘rapa’ ‘sanatana’ nama
SYNONYMS
kaste-srstye—with great difficulty; kari’—doing; gelana—I went; ramakeli-
grama—to the village of Ramakeli; amara thani—before me; aila—came; rapa
sanatana nama—the two brothers named Rapa and Sanatana.
TRANSLATION
“With great difficulty | went to the town of Ramakeli, where | met two
brothers named Rapa and Sanatana.
TEXT 261
দুই ভাই- ভক্তরাজ, কৃষ্ণকূপা-পাত্র।
ব্যবহারে- রাজমন্ত্রী হয় রাজপাত্র ॥ ২৬১ ॥
dui bhai——bhakta-raja, krsna-krpa-patra
vyavahare —raja-mantri haya raja-patra
SYNONYMS
dui bhai—two brothers; bhakta-raja—kings of devotees; krspa-krpa-patra—
suitable candidates for Krsna's mercy; vyavahare—in behavior; raja-mantri—
ministers of the government; haya—are; raja-patra—government officers.
TRANSLATION
“These two brothers are great devotees and suitable recipients of Krsna’s
mercy, but in their ordinary dealings they are government officials, ministers
to the King.


--- Page 293 ---
290 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 262
বিভ্যা-ভক্তি-বুদ্ধি-বলে পরম প্রবীণ |
তবু আপনাকে মানে छन হৈতে হীন ॥ ২৬২ ॥
vidya-bhakti-buddhi-bale parama pravina
tabu apanake mane trpa haite hina
SYNONYMS
vidya —education; bhakti—devotion; buddhi—and intelligence; bale—in
strength; parama—very; pravina—experienced; tabu—still; apanake —them-
selves; mane —they think; trna—a straw; haite—than; hina—lower.
TRANSLATION
‘Srila [0103 and Sanatana are very experienced in education, devotional ser-
vice, intelligence and strength, yet they think themselves inferior to straw in
the street.
TEXTS 263-264
তর দৈত্য; দেখি” শুনি” পাষাণ विकट |
আমি তুষ্ট হঞ। তবে কহিল্যু' (হারে ॥ ২৬৩ ॥
“উত্তম FP] হীন করি' মানহ আপনারে |
অচিরে করিবে কৃষ্ণ তোমার উদ্ধারে ॥” ২৬৪ ॥
tanra dainya dekhi’ Suni’ pasana bidare
ami tusta hana tabe kahilun donhare
“uttama hana hina kari’ manaha apanare
acire karibe krspa tomara uddhare”
SYNONYMS
tanra dainya dekhi’—by seeing their humility; suni’—or even hearing about it;
pasana—stone; bidare—becomes melted; ami—I; tusta hana—being very
pleased; tabe—then; kahilun donhare—said to both of them; uttama hafa—
being actually superior in every respect; hina—inferior; kari’—proposing as;
manaha—you accept; apanare—yourselves; acire—very soon; karibe—will do;
krspa—Lord Krsna; tomara—of you; uddhare—liberation.


--- Page 294 ---
Text 266] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 291
TRANSLATION
‘Indeed, the humility of these two brothers could even melt stone. Because
1 was very pleased with their behavior, | told them, ‘Although you are both
very exalted, you consider yourselves inferior, and because of this, Krsna will
very soon deliver you.’
PURPORT
Such are the qualifications of a pure devotee. Materially one may be very opu-
lent, experienced, influential and educated, but if one still thinks himself lower
than straw in the street, one attracts the attention of 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu or
Lord Krsna. Although Maharaja Prataparudra was a king, he took up a broom to
cleanse the road for Lord Jagannatha’s Ratha chariot. Because of this humble ser-
vice, 57 Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased with the King, and for that reason
the Lord embraced him. According to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s instructions, a
devotee should never be puffed up by material power. He should know that ma-
terial power is the result of one’s past good activities (karma) and is consequently
transient. At any moment all one’s material opulence can be finished; therefore a
devotee is never proud of such opulence. He is always humble and meek, con-
sidering himself lower than a piece of straw. Because of this, the devotees are
eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 265-266
এত किः আমি যবে বিদায় ভারে far
গমনকালে সনাতন “প্রহেলী” কহিল ॥ ২৬৫ ॥
যার সঙ্গে হয় এই লোক লক্ষ কেটি ।
বৃন্দাবন যাইবার এই নহে ARB ॥ ২৬৬ ॥
eta kahi’ ami yabe vidaya tanre dila
gamana-kale sanatana ‘praheli’ kahila
yanra sange haya ei loka laksa koti
vrndavana yaibara ei nahe paripati
SYNONYMS
eta kahi’—saying this; ami—I|; yabe—when; vidaya—farewell; tanre—unto
them; dila—gave; gamana-kale—while going; sanatana—Sanatana; praheli—
enigma; kahila—said; yanra sange —with whom; haya—is; ei—this; loka—crowd
of people; laksa koti—hundreds of thousands; vrndavana—to Vrndavana-dhama;
yaibara—for going; ei—this; nahe —not; paripati—the method.


--- Page 295 ---
292 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
‘After speaking to them in this way, | bade them farewell. As | was leaving,
Sanatana told Me, ‘It is not appropriate for one to be followed by a crowd of
thousands when one goes to Vrndavana.’
TEXT 267
তবু আমি শুনিল্দু'মাত্র, न टेक वधान |
প্রাতে চলি' আইল।ঙ'কান।ইর नाक नाल-ाम॥ van
tabu ami sunilury matra, na (९11८0) avadhana
prate cali’ ailana ‘kanaira natasala’-grama
SYNONYMS
tabu—still; ami—I; sunilun—heard; matra—only; na—not; kailun—paid;
avadhana—any attention; prate—in the morning; cali’ ailana—| walked; kanaira
natasala—to Kanai Natasala; grama—the place.
TRANSLATION
‘Although 1 heard this, | did not pay it any attention. In the morning,
however, | went to the place named Kanai Natasala.
TEXT 268
রাত্রিকালে মনে আমি বিচার করিল ।
সনাতন মোরে কিবা “প্রহেলী” কহিল ॥ ২৬৮ ॥
ratri-kale mane ami vicara karila
sanatana more kiba ‘praheli’ kahila
SYNONYMS
ratri-kale—at night; mane—in the mind; ami—I; vicara karila—considered;
sandtana—Sanatana; more—unto Me; kiba—what; praheli—enigma; kahila—
spoke.
TRANSLATION
‘‘At night, however, | considered what Sanatana had told Me.
TEXT 269
रालः কহিল» (मात्र এত লোক সঙ্গে ।
লোক দেখি” কহিবে মোরে--“এই এক BT’ ॥२७३॥


--- Page 296 ---
Text 271] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 293
bhalata’ kahila, —mora eta loka sange
loka dekhi’ kahibe more — ‘ei eka dhange’
SYNONYMS
bhalata’ kahila—he has spoken very well; mora—of Me; eta—so much; loka—
crowd; sange—in the company; loka—the people; dekhi’—seeing; kahibe
more —will speak about Me; ei—this; eka—one; dharge —imposter.
TRANSLATION
‘I decided that Sanatana had spoken very well. | was certainly being
followed by a large crowd, and when people would see so many men, they
would surely rebuke Me, saying, ‘Here is another imposter.’
TEXT 270
“তুরলভ "gol সেই “নির্জন” বৃন্দাবন |
একাকী যাইব, किव সঙ্গে একজন ॥ ২৭০ ॥
‘durlabha’ ‘durgama’ sei ‘nirjana’ vrndavana
ekaki yaiba, kiba sange eka-jana
SYNONYMS
durlabha—very rare; durgama—invincible; sei—that; nirjana—solitary;
vrndavana—the land of Vindavana; ekaki—alone; yaiba—I shall go; kiba—or;
sange—with Me; eka-jana—only one person.
TRANSLATION
“८1 then began to consider that Vrndavana is a very solitary place. It 15 invin-
cible and very difficult to attain. | therefore decided to go there alone or, at
the most, take only one person with Me.
TEXT 271
মাধবেল্দ্পুরী थ] গেল৷ अट कश्चटन्ग' |
তুঞ্চদান-চ্ছলে কৃষ্ণ সাক্ষাৎ দিল Sica ॥ ২৭১ ॥
madhavendra-puri tatha gela ‘ekesvare’
dugdha-dana-cchale krspa saksat dila tanre


--- Page 297 ---
294 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 16
SYNONYMS
madhavendra-puri—Madhavendra Purl; tatha—there; gela—went; ekesvare —
alone; dugdha-dana-chale—on the plea of giving milk in charity; krsna—Lord
Krsna; saksat—direct audience; dila—gave; tanre—unto him.
TRANSLATION
‘“Madhavendra Puri went to Vrndavana alone, and Krsna, on the pretext of
giving him milk, granted him an audience.
TEXT 272
বাদিয়ার বাজি পাতি” চলিলাঙ তথারে |
বচু-সঙ্গে বৃন্দাবন গমন না করে ॥ ২৭২ ॥
badiyara baji pati’ calilana tathare
bahu-sange vrndavana gamana na kare
SYNONYMS
badiyara—of a gypsy; baji—the magic; pati’—demonstrating; calilana—I
went; tathare—there; bahu-sange—with many men; vrndavana—to Vindavana-
dhama; gamana—going; na kare—no one does.
TRANSLATION
‘‘1 then understood that | was going to Vrndavana like a magician with his
show, and this is certainly not good. No one should go to Vrndavana with so
many men.
TEXT 273
একা যাইব, কিবা সঙ্গে ভৃত্য একজন |
তবে সে NST বৃন্দাবনের গমন ॥ ২৭৩ ॥
eka yaiba, kiba sange bhrtya eka-jana
tabe se sobhaya vrndavanera gamana
SYNONYMS
eka yaiba—I shall go alone; kiba—or; sarige—with Me; bhrtya—servant; eka-
jana—one; tabe—in that way; se—that; sobhaya—is beautiful; vrndavanera
gamana—going to Vrndavana.


--- Page 298 ---
Text 276] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 295
TRANSLATION
“1 have therefore resolved to go alone or, at the utmost, with one servant. In
this way, My journey to Vrndavana will be beautiful.
TEXT 274
বৃন্দাবন ষাব कारे] “একাকী” হঞা |
সৈন্য সঙ্গে চলিয়াছি ঢাক ators! ! ২৭৪ ॥
vrndavana yaba kahan ‘ekaki’ hana!
sainya sange caliyachi dhaka bajana!
SYNONYMS
vrndavana yaba—I should go to Vrndavana; kaha —whereas; ekaki hana —
being alone; sainya—soldiers; sarige—along with; caliyachi—I am going; dhaka
bajana—beating the drum.
TRANSLATION
‘I thought, ‘Instead of going to Vrndavana alone, | am going with soldiers
and the beating of drums.’
TEXT 275
fig, धिक्‌ আপনাকে বলি” হইল1ঙ অস্থির |
নিবৃত্ত 91 পুনঃ আইলাঙ গলঙ্গাতীর ॥ ২৭৫॥
dhik, dhik apanake bali’ ha-ilana asthira
nivrtta hana punah ailana ganga-tira
SYNONYMS
dhik dhik —fie! fie!; apanake —on Myself; bali’—saying; ha-ilana—| became;
asthira—agitated; nivrtta 027 —stopping such an action; punah —again; ailarna—
| came back; garnga-tira—to the bank of the Ganges.
TRANSLATION
“I therefore said, ‘Fie upon Me!’ and being very agitated, 1 returned to the
banks of the Ganges.
TEXT 276
ভক্তগণে রাখেয়। আইনু নিজ মিজ স্থানে |
আমা-সঙ্গে আইল।৷ जटव পচ-ছয় জনে ॥ ২৭৬ ॥


--- Page 299 ---
296 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 16
bhakta-gane rakhiya ainu nija nija sthane
ama-sange aila sabe panca-chaya jane
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gane—the devotees; rakhiya—keeping; ainu—l came; nija nija
sthane—in their respective places; ama-sange—with Me; &ila—came; sabe —
only; panca-chaya jane —five or six men.
TRANSLATION
‘I then left all the devotees there and brought only five or six persons with
Me.
TEXT 277
নিশ্বিস্মে এবে কৈছে যাইব বৃষ্দাবনে |
जटव মেলি” যুক্তি দেহ” হুঞ।! পরসঙ্পে ॥ ২৭৭ ॥
nirvighne ebe kaiche yaiba vrndavane
sabe meli’ yukti deha’ haa parasanne
SYNONYMS
nirvighne —without obstacles; ebe—now; kaiche—how; yaiba—I shall go;
vrndavane —to Vindavana; sabe meli’—altogether; yukti deha’—give Me con-
sultation; hana parasanne —being very pleased with Me.
TRANSLATION
“Now | wish that you all will be pleased with Me and give Me good con-
sultation. Tell Me how | shall be able to go to Vrndavana without impedi-
ments.
TEXT 278
গদাধরে ছাড়ি” cat, दे"टद দুঃখ পাইল ।
সেই হেতু বৃন্দাবন যাইতে নারিল ॥ ২৭৮ ॥
gadadhare chadi’ genu, 17700 duhkha paila
sei hetu vrndavana yaite narila
SYNONYMS
gadadhare chadi’—leaving aside Gadadhara Pandita; genu—I went; inho—
Gadadhara Pandita; duhkha paila—became unhappy; sei hetu—for that reason;
vrndavana—to Vrindavana-dhama; yaite narila—| was unable to go.


--- Page 300 ---
Text 280] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 297
TRANSLATION
41 left Gadadhara Pandita here, and he became very unhappy. For this
reason | could not go to Vrndavana.”
TEXT 279
তবে গদাধর-পণ্ডিত প্রেমাবিষ্ট হুঞ |
প্রভু-পদ ধরি” কহে বিনয় FFI ॥ ২৭৯ ॥
tabe gadadhara-pandita premavista hana
prabhu-pada dhari’ kahe vinaya kariya
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereupon; gadadhara pandita—Gadadhara Pandita; prema-avista
hana—being absorbed in ecstatic love; prabhu-pada dhari’—catching hold of the
lotus feet of the Lord; kahe —says; vinaya kariya—with great humility.
TRANSLATION
Being encouraged by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s words, Gadadhara Pandita
became absorbed in ecstatic love. Immediately clasping the lotus feet of the
Lord, he began to speak with great humility.
TEXT 280
তুমি যাহ্‌।-যাহ। রহ, डो] “বৃন্দাবন” ।
তাহ যমুনা, গঙ্গা, সর্বতীর্থকণ ॥ ২৮০ ॥
tumi yahan-yahan raha, tahan ‘vrndavana’
tahan yamuna, ganga, sarva-tirtha-gana
SYNONYMS
tumi—You; yahan-yahan—wherever; raha—stay; tahan vrndavana—that place
15 Vrndavana; tahan—there; yamuna—the River Yamuna; garnga—the River
Ganga; sarva-tirtha-gana—all other holy places of pilgrimage.
TRANSLATION
Gadadhara Pandita said, “Wherever You stay is Vrndavana, as well as the
River Yamuna, the River Ganges and all other places of pilgrimage.


--- Page 301 ---
298 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 281
তবু বৃন্দাবন যাহ” লোক শিখাইতে |
(मदे করিবে, তোমার যেই লয় চিত্তে ॥ ২৮১ ॥
tabu vrndavana yaha’ loka sikhaite
seita karibe, tomara yei laya citte
SYNONYMS
tabu —still; vindavana yaha’—You go to Vrndavana; loka sikhaite —to teach the
people in general; seita—that; karibe —You will do; tomara—of You; yei—what;
laya—takes; citte—in the mind.
TRANSLATION
‘‘ Although wherever You stay is Vrndavana, You still go to Vrndavana just to
instruct people. Otherwise, You do whatever You think best.”
PURPORT
It was not essential for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to go to Vindavana, for
wherever He stayed was immediately converted to Vindavana. Indeed, there was
also the River Ganges, the River Yamuna and all other places of pilgrimage. This
was also expressed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself when He danced in the
Ratha-yatra. At that time He said that His very mind was Vrndavana (mora-mana—
—vrndavana). Because His mind was Vrndavana, all the pastimes of Radha and
Krsna were taking place within Himself. Nonetheless, just to teach people, He
visited bhauma-vrndavana, Vindavana-dhama in this material world. In this way
the Lord instructed everyone to visit Vindavana-dhama, which is a very holy
place. Materialists consider Vrndavana-dhama an unclean city because there are
many monkeys and dogs there, and along the bank of the Yamuna there is refuse.
Some time ago, a materialistic man asked me, “Why are you living in Vrndavana?
Why have you selected such a dirty place to live after retiring?” Such a person
cannot understand that Vrndavana-dhama is always a representation of the
original Vrndavana-dhama. Consequently Vindavana-dhama is as worshipable as
Lord Krsna. Aradhyo bhagavan vrajesa-tanayas tad-dhama vrndavanam: according
to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s philosophy, Lord Sri Krsna and His abode,
Vrndavana, are equally worshipable. Sometimes materialistic people who have no
spiritual understanding go to Vrndavana as tourists. One who goes to Vrndavana
with such materialistic vision cannot derive any spiritual benefit. Such a person is
not convinced that Krsna and Vrndavana are identical. Since they are identical,
Vrndavana is as worshipable as Lord Krsna. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s vision
(mora-mana——vrndavana) is different from the vision of an ordinary materialistic


--- Page 302 ---
Text 281] The Lord's Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 299
person. At the Ratha-yatra festival, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, absorbed in the
ecstasy of Srimati Radharani, dragged Lord Krsna back to Vrndavana-dhama. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke of this in the verses beginning ahus ca te
(Madhya 13.136).

In Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.84.13) it is stated:

yasyatma-buddhih kunape tridhatuke
svadhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih
yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
janesv abhijiiesu sa eva gokharah
“A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his self,
who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who considers the
land of birth as worshipable, and who goes to the place of pilgrimage simply to
take a bath rather than meet men of transcendental knowledge there, is to be
considered like an ass or a cow.”

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally renovated Vrndavana-dhama and advised
His chief disciples, Ripa and Sanatana, to develop it and open it to attract the
spiritual vision of the general populace. At present there are about five thousand
temples in Vrndavana, and still our society, the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, is constructing a huge, magnificent temple for the worship of Lord
Balarama, Radha-Krsna and Guru-Gauranga. Since there is no prominent Krsna-
Balarama temple in Vrndavana, we are attempting to construct one so that people
will be attracted to Krsna-Balarama, or Nitai-Gauracandra. Vrajendra-nandana yei,
saci suta haila sei. Narottama dasa Thakura says that Balarama and the son of
Maharaja Nanda have advented Themselves as Gaura-Nitai. To propagate this
fundamental principle, we are establishing a Krsna-Balarama temple to broadcast
to the world that worship of Gaura-Nitdi is the same as worship of Krsna-
Balarama.

Although it is very difficult to enter into the Radha-Krsna pastimes, most of the
devotees of Vrndavana are attracted to the Radha-Krsna 11/3. However, since
Nitdi-Gauracandra are direct incarnations of Balarama and Krsna, we can be
directly in touch with Lord Balarama and Lord Krsna through ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu. Those who are highly elevated in Krsna
consciousness can enter into the pastimes of Radha-Krsna through the mercy of
Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It is said: sri-krspa-caitanya radha-krsna nahe anya. Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is a combination of Radha and Krsna.

Sometimes materialists, forgetting the pastimes of Radha-Krsna and Krsna-
Balarama, go to Vrndavana, accept the land's spiritual facilities and engage in ma-
terial activity. This is against the teachings of ৩11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The
prakrta-sahajiyas proclaim themselves vraja-vasi or dhama-vasi, but they are
mainly engaged in sense gratification. Thus they become more and more impli-


--- Page 303 ---
300 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
cated in the materialistic way of life. Those who are pure devotees in Krsna con-
sciousness condemn their activities. The eternal vraja-vasis like Svaripa Damodara
did not even come to Vrndavana-dhama. $ri Pundarika Vidyanidhi, लात Haridasa
Thakura, Srivasa Pandita, Sivananda Sena, $ri Ramananda Raya, 677 Sikhi Mahiti, Sri
Madhavidevi and ৩1 Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami never visited Vindavana-
dhama. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura points out that we have no
authorized documents stating that these exalted personalities visited Vrndavana.
Nonetheless, we find many nondevotees, Mayavadi sannyasis, prakrta-sahajiyas,
fruitive workers, mental speculators and many others with material motives going
to Vrndavana to live. Many of these people go there to solve their economic
problems by becoming beggars. Although anyone living in Vrndavana somehow
or other is benefited, the real Vindavana is appreciated only by a pure devotee.
As stated in Brahma-samhita: premaijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena. When one
has purified eyes, he can see that Sri Vrndavana and the original Goloka
Vrndavana planet in the spiritual sky are identical.

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, Srinivasa Acarya, Sri Jagannatha dasa Babaji
Maharaja, Sri Bhagavan dasa Babaji Maharaja, Srila Gaurakisora dasa Babaji
Maharaja and later Sri Bhaktivinoda Thakura of Calcutta always engaged in nama-
bhajana and certainly did not live anywhere but Vrndavana. Presently, the mem-
bers of the Hare Krsna movement throughout the world live in materially opulent
cities, such as London, New York, Los Angeles, Paris, Moscow, Zurich and
Stockholm. However, we are satisfied with following in the footsteps of Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura and other acaryas. Because we live in the temples of Radha-
Krsna and continuously hold hari-nama-sankirtana—the chanting of Hare Krsna—
we consequently live in Vrndavana and nowhere else. We are also following in
the footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by attempting to construct a temple in
Vrndavana for our disciples throughout the world to visit.

TEXT 282
এই আগে আইলা, প্রভু, বর্ষার চারি माज ।
এই চারি মাস কর নীলাচলে বাস ॥ ২৮২ ॥
ei age aila, prabhu, varsara cari masa
ei cari masa kara nilacale vasa
SYNONYMS

ei—just; age—ahead; aila—have come; prabhu—my Lord; varsara cari masa—
the four months of the rainy season; ei cari masa—these four months; kara—just
do; nilacale—at Jagannatha Pur; vasa—living.


--- Page 304 ---
Text 284] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 301
TRANSLATION
Taking this opportunity, Gadadhara Pandita said, ‘Just now the four
months of the rainy season have begun. You should therefore spend the next
four months in Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 283
পাছে সেই আচরিব যেই তোমার यन |
অআপন-ইচ্ছায় চল, AZ, — কে করে বারণ ॥” ২৮৩ ॥
pache sei acariba, yei tomara mana
apana-icchaya cala, raha, —ke kare varana”
SYNONYMS
pache—thereafter; sei—that; 4acaribai—You will do; yei—what; tomara
mana—You like; apana-icchadaya—by Your sweet will; cala—You always go;
raha—You remain; ke—who; kare varana—can stop You.
TRANSLATION
‘‘After remaining here for four months, You may be free to do as You like.
Actually no one can stop You from going or remaining.”
TEXT 284
শুনি” जव रुख কহে প্রভুর চরণে |
সবাকার ইচ্ছা পণ্ডিত কৈল নিবেদনে ॥ ২৮৪ ॥
Suni’ saba bhakta kahe prabhura carane
sabakara iccha pandita kaila nivedane
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; saba—all; bhakta—devotees; kahe—said; prabhura carane—
unto the lotus feet of the Lord; sabakara iccha—everyone's desire; pandita—
Gadadhara Pandta; kaila—has made; nivedane —submission.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this statement, the devotees present at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu stated that Gadadhara Pandita had properly presented
their desire.


--- Page 305 ---
302 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TEXT 285
সবার ইচ্ছায় প্রভু চারি মাস রহিলা
শুনিয়া প্রতাপরুদ্ব আনন্দিত देङ्न। ॥ ২৮৫ ॥
sabara icchaya prabhu cari masa rahila
Suniya prataparudra anandita haila
SYNONYMS
sabara icchadya—because of everyone's desire; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; cari masa—for four months; rahila—remained; suniya—hearing;
prataparudra—King Prataparudra; anandita haili—became very, very happy.
TRANSLATION
Being requested by all the devotees, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu agreed to
remain at Jagannatha Puri for four months. Hearing this, King Prataparudra be-
came very happy.
TEXT 286
সেই দিন গদাধর टेकल নিমন্ত্রণ |
তাহ fom কৈল প্রভু नञ ভক্তগণ ॥ ২৮৬ ॥
sei dina gadadhara kaila nimantrana
tahan bhiksa kaila prabhu 120 bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
sei dina—that day; gadadhara—Gadadhara Pandita; kaila nimantrana—gave an
invitation; tahan—at his place; bhiksa kaila—took lunch; prabhu—5ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; laina—with; bhakta-gana—His devotees.
TRANSLATION
That day Gadadhara Pandita extended an invitation to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and the Lord took His lunch at his place with the other devotees.
TEXT 287
छिच्छांटङ পণ্ডিতের (vz, প্রভুর আস্বাদন |
TILT শক্তেয তুই না যায় বর্ণন ॥ ২৮৭ ॥
bhiksate panditera sneha, prabhura asvadana
manusyera saktye dui na yaya varnana


--- Page 306 ---
Text 289] The Lord’s Attempt to Go to Vrndavana 303
SYNONYMS
bhiksate—in feeding; panditera—of Gadadhara Pandita; sneha—the affection;
prabhura—of 67 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; asvadana—tasting; manusyera—of an
ordinary human being; saktye—in the power; dui—these two; na yaya—not
possible; varpana—the description.
TRANSLATION
No ordinary human being can possibly describe Gadadhara Pandita’s
affectionate presentation of food and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s tasting this
food.
TEXT 288
এই মত গৌরলীলা- অনন্ত, অপার |
সংক্ষেপে কহিয়ে, কহা না যায় বিস্তার ॥ ২৮-৮' ॥
ei mata 89019-11/3 --- 3৭/73/7709, apara
sanksepe kahiye, kaha na yaya vistara
SYNONYMS
ei mata—in this way; gaura-lili—pastimes of Lord ও Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
ananta—unlimited; apara—unfathomed; sanksepe—in brief; kahiye—I describe;
kaha—describing; na yaya vistara—no one can do elaborately and completely.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performs His pastimes, which are un-
limited and unfathomable. Somehow or other, these have briefly been de-
scribed. It is not possible to describe them elaborately.
TEXT 289
সহজ্ঞব-বদনে কছে আপনে “অনজ্ত? |
তবু এক লীলার (dred নাহি পায় অন্ত ॥ ২৮৯ ॥
sahasra-vadane kahe apane ‘ananta’
tabu eka lilara tenho nahi paya anta
SYNONYMS
sahasra-vadane—in thousands of mouths; kahe—speaks; apane—personally;
ananta—Anantadeva; tabu—still; eka lilara—of one pastime only; tenho—He
(Anantadeva); nahi—not; paya—gets; anta—the end.


--- Page 307 ---
304 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [{Madhya-lila, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Although Lord Anantadeva is always describing the pastimes of the Lord
with His thousands of mouths, He cannot reach the end of even one of the
Lord’s pastimes.
TEXT 290
জ্রীরূপ-রঘুলাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্ত কহে कख ॥ ২৯০ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha pade yara asa
$ri-caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—>Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade —at the lotus feet; yara—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of $ri Rapa and Raghunatha, always desiring their
mercy, |, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
113, Sixteenth Chapter, describing Lord Caitanya’s attempt to go to Vrndavana.


--- Page 308 ---
References

The statements of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta are all confirmed by standard Vedic
authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this book on the
pages listed. Numerals in bold type refer the reader to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
translations. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya (Bhaktivinoda Thakura), 159
Anubhasya (Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura), 21-22
Bhagavad-gita, 21, 71, 88, 141, 144, 146
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Srila Rapa Gosvami), 194, 278-279, 281
Bhakti-ratnakara (Narahari Cakravarti Thakura), 263
Bhakti-sandarbha (Jiva Gosvami), 53, 54-57,133, 195
Brahma-sarnhita, 89, 121, 300
Caitanya-bhagavata (Vrndavana dasa Thakura), 184, 259-262
Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (Kavi-karnapara), 259-260
Caitanya-carita-maha-kavya (Kavi-karnapara), 259
Caitanya-mangala (Locana dasa Thakura), 259, 262-263
Durgama-sangamani (Jiva Gosvami), 279
Dvaraka-mahatmya, 133
Garuda Purana, 145
Hari-bhakti-vilasa (Sanatana Gosvami), 54, 55, 56, 132-133
Mahabharata, 139, 231
Navadvipa-parikrama, 263
Padma Purana, 88-89

305


--- Page 309 ---
306 §ष Caitanya-caritaimrta
Padyavali (Rapa Gosvami), 59
Sakha-nirnayamrta (Yadunatha dasa), 155-156
Skanda Purana, 132-133
$ri-krspa-ganoddesa-dipika (Rapa Gosvami), 123
$rimad-Bhagavatam, 51, 53, 120, 136, 137-138, 140, 145, 191, 195, 222-229, 248,
277,299
Upadesamrta (Rapa Gosvami), 51, 60, 194
Visnu-yamala-tantra, 54


--- Page 310 ---
~
Glossary
A
Abhidheya—the stage of love of Godhead where one’s relationship with God is expressed by
one’s activities.
Aprakata-lila—the unmanifested pastimes of the Lord.
Arati—ceremony of Deity worship in which various pleasing articles are offered to the Lord.
Arcana—the devotional process of worshiping.
Atma-nivedana—the devotional process of surrendering everything.
B
Bala-gopala—Deity of Krsna as a cowherd boy.
Bhagavata—A Vaisnava.
Bhauma-ijya-dhih—accepting something to be spiritual when it is actually material.
Bhoga—material enjoyment; or, articles of foodstuffs which have not been offered to the
Deity.
Brahma-bandhu—an unqualified son of a brahmana.
Brahmana—the intelligent class of men.
C
Candala—a dog-eater, the lowest of men.
Caranamrta—the Deities’ bath water, mixed with yogurt and sugar.
Caturmasya—the four month rainy season when sannyasis do not travel.
D
Dana —charity.
Dasyam —the devotional process of serving.
Devi—the internal energy.
Diksa—the process by which one can awaken his transcendental knowledge and vanquish
all reactions caused by sinful activity.
Dola-yatra —the swing festival of Radha and Krsna.
G
(00035 —the three modes of material nature.
Gauda-desa—Bengal.
Gaura-Nitai—Deity forms of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda.
H
Hari—the name of Krsna which means “one who takes away all miseries.”
Hladini—the pleasure potency of the Lord.
307


--- Page 311 ---
308 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
J
Janmastami—the festival of Krsna's birthday.
JAanis—mental speculators.
K
Kadara—the ointment of Lord Jagannatha used by Lord Caitanya.
Kanistha-adhikari—neophyte devotee.
Karma —fruitive work and its resultant reactions.
Karmis —fruitive workers.
Kasamdi—a kind of pickle.
Karttika—the name of a Vedic month occuring around October-November of the Roman
calendar in which the Damodara form of Lord Krsna is worshiped.
Kayastha caste—people of a Hindu community who are expert in managing business affairs
and government affairs; very reliable and faithful servants.
Kirtana—the devotional process of chanting.
Krsna-bahirmukha—bereft of one’s relationship with Krsna.
Krsna-bhakti—devotion to Krsna.
Krsna-dasa—servant of Krsna.
Ksatriyas—the administrative and warrior class of men.
Ksetra-sannydsa—vow to leave household life and live in a place of pilgrimage devoted to
Lord Visnu.
Ksiracora —Gopinatha Deity who stole condensed milk for Madhavendra Puri.
M
Madhyama-adhikari—the second-class devotee, usually a preacher.
Madhyama-bhagavata—a devotee who has attained the intermediate stage between the
neophyte and perfect devotee. Generally he becomes a preacher and is worshipable
by neophytes and ordinary persons.
Maha-bhagavata—a first-class, unalloyed devotee.
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Mahatma—a great soul.
Manjaris —flowers of the tulasi plant.
Markata-vairagya—false renunciation; literally, the renunciation of a monkey.
Mantra—(manah—mind, tr—to deliver) that which delivers the mind.
Maya —illusion; the external energy of Krsna.
Miecchas —those who do not follow the regulative principles of the Vedas.
N
Namabhasa —the stage above the offensive stage of chanting the name of God in which one
gets a dim reflection of realization of the holy name.


--- Page 312 ---
Glossary 309
Nanda-mahotsava—the festival of Nanda Maharaja; Krsna's birthday.
Nirantara—without cessation, continuously, constantly.
Nitya-siddha—an eternally liberated soul.
Oo
Odana-sasthi—ceremony at the beginning of winter when Lord Jagannatha gets a winter
covering.
शि
Pada-sevana—the devotional process of serving the Lord's lotus feet.
Pancaratra-vidhi —Deity worship.
Paramaharinsa—topmost swanlike devotee.
Phalgu—temporary.
Prabhu —master.
Prajapatis—progenitors of the human race.
Prakata-lila—the manifested pastimes of the Lord.
Prakrta—on the material platform.
Prakrta-sahajiyas —materialistic class of so-called Vaisnavas who imagine themselves as con-
fidential devotees.
Prasada—(lit. mercy) remnants of foodstuffs, etc., offered to the Lord.
Purascarya—five preliminary devotional activities performed to qualify for intiation.
R
Rasa-yatra—festival of the rasa dancing of Krsna.
৪
Sakhya —the devotional process of maintaining friendship.
Saksi-gopala—the Deity of Krsna who acted as a witness to the promise of an elder
brahmana to a younger one.
Salagrama-sila—a stone from the village of Salagrama which is worshiped as Narayana.
Sastras—revealed scriptures.
Smarana—the devotional process of remembering.
Sravana —the devotional process of hearing.
Sri Krsna-vijaya—a book of poems by Gunaraja Khan, considered to be the first poetry book
written in Bengal.
Sruti-gana—the personified Vedas.
Sudarsana cakra—Krsna's special weapon, a disc of light.
Sadras —the servant class of men responsible for assisting the other three classes.
T
Thakuranis —the wives of devotees.


--- Page 313 ---
310 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
uU
Uttama-adhikari—first-class devotee who is expert in Vedic literature and has full faith in the
Supreme Lord; he can deliver the whole world.
Vv
Vaisnava—one who is a devotee of Visnu, or Krsna.
Vaisyas—the mercantile and agricultural class of men.
Vandana—the devotional process of praying.
Vijaya-dasami—the celebration of the conquest of Lanka by Lord Ramacandra.
Viraja River —the river that divides the material world from the spiritual world.
Visnu-tattva—having full status as Godhead.
Visvasa—(lit,, faithful) a government secretary.
Y
Yavanas—meateaters.
Yukta-vairagya—befitting renunciation.


--- Page 314 ---
Bengali Pronunciation Guide
BENGALI DIACRITICAL EQUIVALENTS AND PRONUNCIATION
Vowels
a खां Bi Hi Bu Ba A;
৮. T গ্রীণ ॐ ॐ ० ॐ au
71 m (anusvara) ॐ 1} (candra-bindu) छ h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutterals: ६.1 ka খ kha a ga q gha 8 78
Palatals: छ ca চু cha ख ja A jha <P 773
Cerebrals: 3 ta > tha ए da ® dha ।, na
Dentals: S ta থ tha W da ¥ dha न्‌ na
Labials: of pa pha वु ba ड ৮13 | ma
Semivowels: YH ya Ara Fla न्तु va
Sibilants: =f sa सु sa HA sa ङ्‌ ha
Vowel Symbols
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
=
ta 1 चः ঢা eg <r (ॐ; Ge Tai ८ To ८१०५
For example: Ft ka f= ki কী ki क्छ ku कू ka E- 3 kr
কম Fhe = kai (क ko = kau
311


--- Page 315 ---
312 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
The letter a is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virama (৬৬) indicates that there is no final vowel. क्कू ।
The letters above should be pronounced as follows:
a —like the © in hot; sometimes like the © in go; 9 —like the d in dawn.
final ৫ is usually silent. dh —like the dh in good-house.
a —like thea in far. n —like the 7 in gnaw.
i,T —like the ee in meet. t—as in ralk but with the tongue against the
u, प —like the u in rule. the teeth.
1 —like the 77 in rim. th—as in 1101-2 0८56 but with the tongue against
f —like the ree in reed. the teeth.
e —like the ai in pain; rarely like e in bet. d—as in dawn but with the tongue against the
ai —like the oi in boil. teeth.
o —like the ০ in go. dh—as in good-house but with the tongue
au —like the ow in owl. against the teeth.
m —(anusvara) like the ng in song. n—as in nor but with the tongue against the
h —(visarga) a final h sound like in Ah. teeth.
n — (candra-bindu) a nasal n sound p —like the p in pine.
like in the French word bon. ph —like the pk in philosopher.
k —like the ९ in kite. b —like the b in bird.
kh —like the kh in Eckhart. bh —like the bk in rub-hard.
8 —like the g in got. m —like the m in mother.
gh —like the gh in big-house. y —like the j in jaw. स्‌
र —like the n in bank. y —like the y in year. §
০ —like the ch in chalk. 7 —like the r in run
ch —like the chk in much-haste. 1 —like the 7 in Jaw )
j like the; in joy. ५ —like the 8 in bird or like the w in dwarf.
jh —like the geh in college-hall. इ, s —like the sh in shop.
n —like the n in bunch. ও like the s in sun.
চ —like the ८ in alk. h—like the 4 in ome.
th —like the 2/7 in hoz-house.

This is a general guide to Bengali pronunciation. The Bengali transliterations in this
book accurately show the original Bengali spelling of the text. One should note, however,
that in Bengali, as in English, spelling is not always a true indication of how a word is pro-
nounced. Tape recordings of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
chanting the original Bengali verses are available from the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness, 3764 Watseka Ave., Los Angeles, California 90034.


--- Page 316 ---
[] []
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete alphabetical listing of the first and third line of each four-line
verse and both lines of each two-line verse in Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. In the first column the trans-
literation is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the chapter-verse references
and page number for each verse are to be found.
A 3/1 ratrye prabhu mora karaha marana 15.146 75
“303 deha’, yana dekhi prabhura carana 16.232 275
scamana karana bhatta dila mukha-vasa 15.254 129  dakrstih krta-cetasari sumanasam uccatanam = 15.110 59
“3-candla adi krsna-bhakti dio dana’ 15.41 19 alaksite rahi’ tomara nrtya dekhiba’ 15.44 23
acaryadi prabhura ganere paraila 15.28 14  aldta-cakrera prayalaguda phiraya 15.25 13
dcarya-gosani prabhuke kahe thare-thore 16.60 185
acarya-gosani prabhura kaila nimantrana 16.55 183  alaukika ei saba anna-vyaiijana 15.225 115
alaukika 1113 kare sri-krspa-caitanya 16.201 256
acarya kahe, — upavdsa kaila dui jana 15.272 141 alingana kari’ kahe madhura vacane 16.87 204
acaryakarila tahan kirtana, nartana 16.28 171 alingana kari’ prabhu tanre vidaya dila 16.62 186
acarya-prasade (02112 prabhura ucchista-pita 16.226 272 = amara ‘duskara’ karma, toma haite haye 16.65 188
acaryaratna-adi yata mukhya bhakta-gana 16.58 184
acaryaratna-sange cale tanhara grhini 16.24 169  amaragaurave kichu phiri’ gela mana 15.143 74
amara sange rahite 62/12, —vancha nija-sukha 16.140 226
acaryaratna, vidyanidhi, $rivasa, ramai 16.16 166  amarasapatha, yadi ara kichu bala 16.141 226
carya tarja pade, keha bujhite na pare 16.60 185  amdra thafi 811 ‘ropa’ ‘santana’ nama 16.260 289
acaryera nimantrana — Scarya-kathana 1513 7  amara vacaneha tomdra na talila mana 15.153 78
acaryere 303 dila kariya sammana 15.41 19
acintya-saktye kara tumi tahara ghatana 16.67 190 amare kahena, —ami tomara kinkara 15.144 75
ama sabara krsna-bhakti raghunandana haite 15.116 62
acirat krsna tomaya karibe uddhara 16.29 279  ama-sange 5113 sabe parnca-chaya jane 16.276 296
acirat paya sei caitanya-carana 15.301 157  ami—bhagyavan, ihira avasesa paba 15.230 117
acirekaribe krsna tomara uddhare” 16.264 291 ami tara ‘putra’, —ei dmdra niscaya 15.115 62
acire miliye tanre caitanya-carana 16.149 230
acire tomare krpa karibe bhagavan 15.277 144 ami tusta hana tabe kahilun donhare 16.263 290
amogha asi’ anna dekhi’ karaye nindana 15.247 126
“adhama yavana-kule kena janma haila 16.181 246  amogha marena—suni’ kahe bhattacarya 15.267 138
advaita asiya kare prabhura pajana 15.7 5  amoghere kahe tara buke hasta diya 15.273 142
advaita, avadhata-gosani baga sukha paila 16.39 176  amrta-gutika, pitha-pana anaila 15.221 113
advaita kahe, — satya kahi, na kariha kopa 15.22 11
advaita-nitydnandadi yata bhakta-jana 16.245 283 anande mahaprabhu vars kaila samadhana 16.94 206
anandita bhakta-gana asiya milila 16.253 286
aga-jagad-okasamakhila-sakty-avabodhaka 15.180 94  ananta aisvarya krsnera vaikunthadi-dhama = 15.175 92
age calibre sei kahe vivarana 16.157 234 anargala prema-bhakti kariha prakase 15.42 21
380 8301 pathaila sacira nandana 16.41 177  aneka samagri diya karila mitali 16.193 253
aiche bhatta-grhe kare bhojana-vilasa 15.298 155
aiche citra-lili kare sacira nandana 15.297 154 aneka siddha-purusa haya tanhara sahite 16.163 237
angikara jani’ acarya karena nartana 16.61 186
aiche eka angda-nase krsnera nahi hani 15.177 92 angikurvan sphutarh cakre 15.1 2
aiche pavitra prema-seva jagat jiniyd 15.84 40  annadi dekhiya prabhu vismita hana 15.224 114
aiche tanhare krpa kaila gauraraya 16.108 212 anna khabe, pithe vasite kahan aparadha? 15.235 119
ai'kedekhite yaiba, na ydiba toma lagi’ 16.135 224  anna-vyadjana-parna dekhi’ sakala bhajane 15.62 30
&ji-kali kari’ uthayavividha upaya 16.10 164  anna-vyafjanopari dila tulasi-manjari 15.220 113
313


--- Page 317 ---
314 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta
annera saurabhya, varna—ati manorama 15.229 116 B
antare krsna-prema inhara janibeka keba 15.120 64
antare manaye sukha, bahye nahi mane 15.65 31 badiyara baji pati’ calilana tathare 16.272 294
antare nisthd kara, bahye loka-vyavahara 16.239 279 bahira udyane asi’ prabhu vasa kaila 16.101 210
anusariga-phale kare sarisarera ksaya 15.109 58  bahire asi’ raja ajia-patra lekhaila 16.110 213
bahu-malya diya ani’ kariya yatana 15.87 41
anyatha, na rahe mora sarire jivana” 16.232 275  pahu-malyavastra prabhu-mastake bandhila 15.28 14
dpana-icchdya cala, raha, —ke kare varana 16.283 301
30373 nindiya kichu balena vacane 15.260 131 bahu nrtya kari’ punah calilaudyane 16.50 181
dpana-'visvasa’ udiya sthane pathaila 16.169 239  bahu-sange vrnddvana gamana na kare 16.272 294
dpane asiya prabhu milila sabaya 16.43 178  bahutaprasada pathaya diya bahu-jane 16.124 219
bahuta sammana asi” kaila sevaka-gane 1629 172
apane mahaprabhu tanra mana phiraila 16.175 242 bahuta sannyasi yadi ise eka thani 15.197 103
dpane namiya tabe karaila cetana 15.124 66
dpane prataparudra, ara misra-kasi 1520 10  bahuta utkantha morayaite vrndavana 16.88 204
20211 bhattacarya kare pakera saba karma 15.203 105 bahuta utkantha tanra, karyache vinaya 16.173 241
2002001 prabhuke 120 tahan uttariba 16.112 214 bahya vairagya, vatulatasakala chadiya 16.243 282
bahye eka dvara tara, prabhu pravesite 15.206 106
aparadha ksama more, prabhu, dayamaya 15.280 147  bahye raja-vaidya inho kare rdja-seva 15.120 64
aparadha’ nahi, sada lao krspa-ndma 15.285 149
dra asta sannydsira bhiksa dui dui divase 15.196 102 balagandi-bhogera bahu prasada 5112 16.53 182
ara bhakta-gana kare prabhure nimantrana 15.14 8 balagopala kiba khaila saba bhata? 15.59 29
ara dravya rahu—suna narikelera katha 15.70 34  balaka-dosa na laya pita tahdte plaka 15.291 152
balya-kala haite tenho visaye 00353 16.222 270
ara dui vatsara cahe vrndavana yaite 16.85 203 bara bara akase pheli’ luphiya dharila 15.23 12
dra ghara mahaprabhura bhiksara lagiya 15.205 106
ara yata pitha kaila, kahite na saki 15.216 111 bara bara palaya tenho niladri yaite 16.228 273
artha, bhami, grama diya karena sahdya 16.219 269 bara ksira ani’ age sevaka dharila 16.30 172
asamartha nahe krsna, dhare sarva bala 15.168 87  battisa-athiya kalara angatiya pate 15.207 107
bhagirathi hana saksat ‘jala-brahma’-sama 15.135 20
asibeka panca-sata bhrtya sarge lana?” 16.177 244  “bhagyatanra—asi’karukaprabhu darasana 16.176 243
asmabhir yad anustheyarit 15.269 139
asru-kampa-svarabhange kahite lagila 15.164 85  bhagyavan tumi, saphala tomdra udyoga 15.228 116
asvasiya kahe, —tumi kaha krspa’ ‘hari’ 16.187 249 bhaksya diyakarenasabara sarvatra palane 16.27 171
astadasa mata, ara yadavera ghare 15.240 122 bhakta-dharma-hani prabhura na haya sahana 16.148 230
bhakta-gane (८2/06, —suna mukundera prema 15.119 63
ataeva acarya tanre haila parasanna 16.225 272 bhakta-gane rakhiya ainu nija nija sthane 16.276 296
ataeva ihan tara na kailun vistara 16.213 266
ataeva pita—raghunandana dmdra niscite 15.116 62 bhakta-iccha vina prabhu na kare gamana 16.11 164
ataeva prabhu bhala jane dui-jane 16.221 270  bhaktakrpa-vase bhismerapratijia rakhila = 16.144 228
ataeva punah taha ihan na likhilur 16.215 266  bhakta-sambandhe yaha ksamila aparidha  15.300 156
bhaktera mahima kahite haya paica-mukha 15.118 63
“ataeva yanra mukhe eka krsna-nama 15.111 60  bhakteramahimaprabhukahite pdyasukha 15.118 63
atharanalake 33 gosani suniya 16.38 176
ati-ucca tungi haite bhamite padila 12.123 65 bhaktera vicchede prabhura visanna haila 15.182 96
avasara nahi haya, vilamba ha-ila 15.82 38  ‘bhaktye ddsi-abhimana, ‘snehete janani’ 16.57 184
avasya caliba, dunhe karaha sammati 16.89 204 bhalata’kahila,—mora eta loka 53786 16.269 293
avese bilaila ghare chila yata dhana 15.29 14  bhattacarya bale, —prabhu nd karaha vismaya 15.232 118
ayuh sriyarh yaso dharmam 15.270 140  bhattacarya kahe, —“utha, aiche prabhuralila 16.143 227


--- Page 318 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 315

bhattacarya kaila tabe pada praksalana 15.223 114 D
bhattacarya lathi lana marite dhaila 15.250 127
bhattacarya tarra ghare gelé tara sane 15.258 130 dadhi-dugdha-bhara sabe nija-skandhe kari’ 15.18 9
bhattacarye kahe kichu bharigi kariya 15.224 114 dadhi-dugdha haridra-jale bhare sabdra anga 15.21 11
bhattacaryera grhe saba dravya ache bhari’ = 15.202 105 daksina yana asite dui vatsara lagila 16.84 202

damodara-pandita, ara govinda, kasisvara 15.184 97
bhatta kahe, —anna, pitha,—samana prasida 15.235 119 damodara-svariipa, —ei bandhava amara 15.195 102
bhatta kahe, —cala, prabhu, isvara-darasane 15.293 152
bhatta kahe, —jani, khao yateka yuydya 15.238 121 dandavat haia bale sadainya vacana 15.255 129
bhatta snana darsana kari’ karild bhojane 15.295 133 dandavat kare asru-pulakita hana 16.179 245
bhavagni-dagdha-janata- 16.1 159 dandavat kari’ dmara ksamaiha aparadha 15.47 24

‘darasana’-'snane’ kare jivera mukati 15.134 70
bhiksa kari’ bakula-tale karila visrama 16.102 210 darsana-smarane yarra jagat tarila’ 16.175 242
bhiksate panditera sneha, prabhura dsvadana 16.287 302
bhoga lagaite sevakaadila lana 15.79 37 ‘daru-brahma’-ripe —saksat sri-purusottama 15.135 70
bhogera samaya punah chuli’ 53/75/3911” 15.74 35 ‘daru’-‘jala’-rape krsnaprakata samprati 15.134 70
bhojana dekhite cahe, asite na pare 15.245 125 ‘dasa-dina bhiksa kara’ kahe vinati kariya 15.191 100

dasa-krosa haite andya kariya yatana 15.72 34
bhysta-masa-mudga-sipa amrta nindaya 15.214 110 dasa nauka bhari’ bahu sainya sange nila 16.198 255
bhrtya-varicha-parti vinu nahi anya krtya 15.166 86
bhamete padila raya nahika cetana 16.154 233 dasa-prakara saka, nimbatikta-sukhta-jhola 15.210 108
brahmanda jivera tumi varichile nistara 15.167 87 ‘deha’ ‘prana’ bhinna nahe, —ei {2 pramana 16.66 190

dekhi’ mahaprabhu bada santosa paila 15.30 15

वि 06101 sarva-loka-citte camatkara paya 15.25 13
^ dekhi’ tara pitd-mata bada sukha paila 16.244 282

dekhiya saghrna haila vidyanidhira mana 16.79 200
cadaite cadaite gala phulaila 15.282 148 dekhiya sarhsaya haila kichu camatkara mane 15.62 = 30
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspaddsa 15.302 157 dhairya hana udiyake kahe namaskari’ 16.171 240
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa 16.290 304 dharma nahe, kari ami nija dharma-nasa 15.48 24
caitanya-caritdmrta— ydrra prana-dhana 15.3 3 dhik, dhik apanake bali’ ha-ilana asthira 16.275 295
caitanya-gosanira ninda sunila yaha haite 15.261 132

dhrta-ratha-carano ‘bhyayac caladgur 16.145 228
cakravarti kare dunhdya‘bhratr'-vyavahdra 16.220 269 diksa-purascarya-vidhi apeksa na kare 15.108 53
calila acarya-sarige acyuta-janani 16.21 108 dina dui-céri (61700 karila sevana 16.157 234
canpakala-ghanadugdha-amra (303 dhari 15.217 111 dina kata raha—sandhi kari’ {2/2 sane 16.160 236
‘candala—pavitra yanra sri-ndma-sravane 16.184 247 dola-yatra dekhi’ yao —ei bhala rita 16.9 163
cari-dike dhariyache nana ५1/27/2008 bhari’ 15.209 108

dugdha-dana-cchale krsna saksat dilatarire 16.271 293
cari-dike pate ghrta vahiya calila 15.208 107 dugdha-tumbi, dugdha-kusmanda, vesara, 15.211 109
cari-mdasa rahila sabe mahaprabhu-sange 15.16 9 dui bhai—bhakta-rja, krspa-krpa-patra 16.261 289
carisevaka, dui brahmana rahe tarra sane 16.229 273 dui-bhai ৪0373 tanre hasiya hasiya 16.80 201
caturdvdre karahauttama navya vasa 16.116 215 dui bhai yukti kaila nibhrte vasiya 15.37 18
caturmasya-ante punah nityanande 1373 16.59 185

dui-janaya krsna-kathdya ekatra-i sthiti 16.77 199
caturya-vaidagdhya kare yarra lila-rasa 15.141 73 dui-jane (0004 kari’ kahena gosani 15.133 69
cikitsara vat kahe tanhdra agrete 15.121 64 dui-jane Sokakula nilacale aila 16.147 229
‘citrotpald-nadi’ asi’ ghate kaila snana 16.119 217 dui kara, sighra pabe sri-krspa-carana” 16.70 192
cittaakarsiya kardya krsne premodaya 15.108 58 dui maha-patra, —'haricandana’, ‘mardaraja’ 16.113 214


--- Page 319 ---
316 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta
dui mala govinda dui-jane paraila 16.39 176  ei-mata nityananda phiraya laguda 15.26 13
dui-mala pathaila govinda-hate diya 16.38 176  ei-mata pithd-pand, ksira-odana 15.89 42
dui rija-patra yei prabhu-sange ydya 16.150 231 ei-mata prabhu tomara vicchedasahiya 16.146 229
dui pase sugandhi sitala jala-jhari 15.220 113 ei-mata pratyabda aise gaudera bhakta-gana 16.82 202
dui prahara bhitare kaiche ha-ila randhana? 15.225 115  ei-matapremera 56৮3 kare anupama 15.91 43
dui yogya nahe, dui sarira brahmana 15.262 134  ei-matarasa-yatra, ara dipavali 15.36 17
dunhake kahena raja vinaya-vacana 16.4 161 ei-mata 5303 vaisnava gaude calila 16.76 199
dunhdra duhkha dekhi’ prabhu dunha 15.253 128  ei-mata sammanila sarva bhakta-gane 15.92 43
dunhara icchate bhojana kaila tusta hana 15.253 128 ei matasarva-bhakterakahi’ saba guna 15.181 96
dunhe kahe, —ebe vars, calite narioa 16.93 206 eimatasarva-ratri karena krandana 15.147 76
00706 kahe, —ratha-yatra kara darasana 168 163  ei-mata sevakera (21111 cahi prabhu-paya 15.154 79
dara haite prabhu dekhi’ bhomete padiya 16.179 245  ei-matatomaranisthajanibara tare 15.155 80
‘durlabha’ ‘durgama’ sei ‘nirjana’ vrnddvana 16.270 293  ei-matavidayadila 5209 bhakta-gana 16.68 192
dvarakate sola-sahasra mahisi-mandire 15.240 122 ei mata vyaijanera sika, mala, phala 1588 41
dvare puskarini, tira ghatera upare 15.128 67  ei-mata yabe karena uttama randhana 15.64 31
dvarera upara bhite tenho hata dila 15.82 38
ei-saba-sange prabhu vaise (2621९ 15.185 97
E eita dsane vasi’ karaha bhojana 15.234 118
ei tina karya 5303 karaha tina jane’ 15.132 69
ei vakye vikdinu tanra varnsera hata 15.100 48
ebe mora ghare bhiksa karaha ‘masa’ bhari’ 15.188 98 ei vastra matake 0103 ei saba prasida 15.47 24
ebe prabhura nimantrane avasara haila 15.187 98
ebe 5303 vaisnava gauda-dese cali’ gela 15.187 98 ei vijaya-dasamite haila ei riti 15.66 32
ebe ‘vaisnava’ haila, tara gela ‘aparadha’ 15.292 152 eka 2/75 deha, —seva kari ye tomdra 16.188 250
ebe yadi mahaprabhu ‘santipura’ sila 16.231 274  ekdadasa jana tarre rakhe nirantara 16.230 274
eka-dina mahaprabhu nitydnande lana 15.37 18
ei 386 3//3, prabhu, varsara cari masa 16.282 300 eka dina mleccha-rijira ucca-tungite 15.121 64
ei ami magi, tumi karaha prasada 16.63 187
ei anne trpta haya dasa bara jana 15.248 126 eka dina phala dasa sarskara kariya 15.79 37
ei aparadha, prabhu, ksama kara more 15.256 130  eka-dinaprabhu tathikariya nivasa 16.205 258
ei 0903 3/73, ei 0903 upakara’ 16.191 252  eka-dina salyanna, vyaijana panca-sita 15.54 27
eka eka bhogera anna sata sata bhara 15.239 122
ei cari masa kara nilacale vasa 16.282 300 eka eka dina eka eka bhakta-grhe mahotsava 15.15 8
ei chara mukhe tomadra karinu nindane 15.281 147
ei jani’ mata more na karaya rosa 15.50 25 eka eka-dina, eka eka jane parna ha-ilamase 15.196 102
ei-mata anyonye karena namaskara 15.12 7 eka eka phalera malya diya cari-cari pana 15.72 34
ei-mata bara bara suniya vacana 15.143 74  eka-ghare silagramera bhoga-seva haya 15.204 105
eka-grasa madhukari karaha angikara 15.243 124
ei-mata bhakta-gana rahila cari masa 16.47 179  ekaki ydiba, (403 sange eka-jana 16.270 293
ei-mata cali’ cali’ kataka ila 16.35 174
ei-mata cali’ prabhu ‘remuna’ ila 16.153 233 “eka krsna-name kare sarva-papaksaya 15.107 52
ei mata 0103, 1८40479, sandesa sakala 15.88 41  ekale dilatanrahrdayajaniya 15.222 114
ei mata gaura-lili—ananta, apara 16.288 303  ekanavinanauks, tiramadhye ghara 16.196 254
eka navya-nauka ani’ rakhaha nadi-tire 16.114 215
ei-mata kahi’ tanre prabodha karila 16.147 229 ‘eka sannyasi dila jagannatha ha-ite 16.163 237
ei-mata kala, amra, naranga, kanthala 15.86 41
ei-mata 1113 (८०/€ gauranga-sundara 15.31 15 = ekaudumbara vrkse lage koti-phale 15.172 90
ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana-sange 15.4 3 ekdyaiba, 103 sange bhrtya eka-jana 16.273 294
ei-mata mahaprabhura cari vatsara gela 16.84 202  ekeld sannyasi kare etekabhaksana! 15.248 126


--- Page 320 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 317
emana krpalu nahi suni tribhuvane 16.121 218  ghare asi’ bhattacarya tare 3৭3 dila 15.201 104
eta bali’ 3pana gale cadaya dpane 15.281 147  ghare asi’ mahaprabhura siksa acarila 16.242 281
eta bali’ ghare gela, cinti’ ratri-kdle 15.145 75  gharera bhitare gela karite bhojana 15.223 114
eta bali’ mahaprabhu calila bhavane 15.258 130  ghare vasi’ kare prabhu nama sankirtana 15.7 5
eta bali’ mahaprabhu nauk ate cadlila 16.142 227  ghata bhari’ prabhura tenho abhiseka kaila 16.52 183
eta bali’ pade dui sastreravacana 15.268 130  ghatiyala prabodhi’ dena sabare vdsa-sthana 16.26 170
eta bali’ pandita-gosani prthak calila 16.136 224  ghrta-sikta paramanna, mrt-kundika bhari’ 15.217 111
eta bali’ phala phele pracira 127/11}/3 15.84 40  go-brdhmana-vaisnave 0117055 karyachi apara 16.189 251
eta bali’ prabhu 8115 sarvabhauma-sthana 15.285 149  gopa-vesa haila prabhu laid bhakta saba 15.17 9
eta bali’ prabhu gela isvara-darasane 15.295 153  gopinathacarya, dra pandita-damodara 16.128 220
eta bali’ raghavere kaila dlingane 15.92 43 gopinathacarya gela prabhu-darasane 15.271 141
eta bali’ visvdsere kahila vacana 16.176 243 gosani rakhite karaha nana upaya 166 162
eta cinti’paka-patra yana dekhila 15.61 30 gosadiraavesa dekhi’ loke camatkara 15.35 17
eta kahi’ ami yabe vidaya tare dila 16.265 291  govardhana-yajiie anna khaila rasi rasi 15.242 123
eta kahi’ mahaprabhu tanre vidaya dila 16.242 281  ‘grame-grame’ 7612019 3৮353 kariba 16.111 214
eta kahi’ sei cara ‘hari’ ‘krsna’ gaya 16.168 239  ‘grhastha’ hayena inho, cahiye saficaya 1095 44
eta mate kari’ (31101) gaudere gamana 16.257 288  grhastha visayiami, ki mora sadhane 15.103 49
eta suni’ mi 0903 mane sukha pailun 15.152 78  gunaraja-khanna kaila sri-krsna-vijaya 15.99 46
eta suni’ hasi’ prabhu vasila bhojane 15.244 125  gundica dekhiya yabe amare miliya 15.40 19
eta Suni’ maha-patra avista hana 16.183 246  gundicdya asibe sabaya palana kariya 10.97 45
eta Suni’ mahaprabhura citta dravild 15.164 85 H
eta suni’ yavanera mana phiri’ gela 16.169 239
eteka kahite prabhu vihvala ha-ila 15.67 32
€ varsa (7113001 keha na karihagamana 16.247 283 hanti sreyariisi sarvani 15.270 140
hanuman-avese prabhu vrksa-sak ha 1973 15.33 16
G haridasa mili’ aise dpana nilaya 15.6 4
haridasa-thakura, ara pandita-vakresvara 16.128 220
gadadhara-pandita asi’ prabhure milila 16.255 287 17356, kande, nice, gaya baulera priya 16.168 239
gadadhara-pandita rahila prabhura pase 15.183 96
gadadhara-pandita yabe sangete calila 16.130 221 hasti-upara tambu-grhe stri-gane cadaila 16.117 216
gadadhara-pandlite tenho punah mantradila 16.78 200 hate dhari’ gopinathacarya nisedhila 15.282 148
gadadhare chadi’ genu, inho duhkha paila 16.278 296  hena-kale ‘amogha’, —bhattacaryera jamata 15.245 125
hena-kale ekamayira-pucchera 30371 12.122 65
gada-khaite bhase yenarai-purna bhanda 15.176 92 hena-kale jagannathera maha-prasada 2113 16.123 218
galaphulila, acarya antare ullasa 16.81 201 hena-kale mahaprabhu madhyahna kariya 15.222 114
gale mala dena, mathaya tulasi-madjari 15.9 5
gamana-kale sanatana ‘praheli’ kahila 16.265 291  hena-tomara ei jiva paila darasane 16.184 247
gandha, vastra, alankara, sarva dravya-sara 15.90 42 hera-paficami-yatra dekhe 1275 bhakta-gana 16.54 182
ganga-tira yaite mahaprabhura mana haya 16.190 251 = hindu-cara kahe sei yavana-pasa giya 16.162 237
‘hindu’ haile paitama tomara carana 16.182 246
gauda-desa diya yaba tan-saba dek hiya 16.91 205  hindu-vesadhari’ sei yavana ila 16.178 244
gauda-dese hayamora ‘dui samasraya’ 16.90 205  ‘hiranya’, ‘govardhana’,—dui sahodara 16.217 267
gauda-dese yaha sabe vidaya karila 15.39 19
gaude rahi’ mora 10003 saphala kariba 16.64 187 1
gaude utkale yata bhaksyera prakara 15.218 112
gaudodyanari gaura-meghah 16.1 159 1057 prabhu ekatra kari’ saba bhakta-gana 16.245 283
ghare asi’ bhattacarya sathira mata-sane 15.260 13] ihdra gharera dya-vyaya saba—tomara sthine 10.96 45


--- Page 321 ---
318 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta
10306 tomara kiba aparadha haila? 15.257 130  kabhu tomara sarige yabe, kabhu ekesvara 15.195 102
inhdra dainya Suni’ mora phataye jivana 15.157 80 kadambera eka vrkse phute bara-mase 15.129 67
11703 rahi’ seva kara, —amara 59/05“ 16.133 223 kadara, candana, dora, saba sarge laila 16.95 207
inhara krsna-sevara katha suna, sarva-jana 15.69 33 kadhite na pari matha, mane pai vyatha 15.149 77
inhara ye ei gati, ithe ki vismaya? 16.185 247  ‘kahanre ravna’ prabhu kahe krodhavese 15.34 16
inhdre uthana tabe alingana kailun 15.152 78  kahibara katha nahe —dekhile se jani 16.167 239
inha-saba 1205 prabhu kare nrtya-ranga 15.21 11 kahite na pari ei tahara varnana 16.155 234
inho prasada paile, varta amake kahiba 15.294 153  ‘kalmasa’ ghucile jiva ‘krsna-nama’ laya 15.276 143
12/76 bolana punah sthana lepaila 15.63 31  kampa, asru, pulaka, stambha, sveda, svara 15.279 146
iSvare ta’ aparadha phale tata-ksana 15.268 139  kanani-khutiydachena ‘nanda’-vesa dhari’ 15.19 10
J kanani-khutiya, jagannatha, —dui-jana 15.29 14
kandite kandite kichu kare nivedana 15.148 76
kandite kandite sei tire rahi’ caya 16.197 254
jagaddnanda, mukunda, govinda, kasisvara = 16.127 220  kanji-bada dugdha-cida, dugdha-laklaki 15.216 111
‘jagan-mata hare papi, marimu savarise’ 15.34 16 kanthe dhari’ kahe tanre madhura vacana 15.45 23
jagannatha aja magi’ prabhate calila 16.96 207
jagannatha-darasana nitya kare pratah-kale 15.185 = 97  karite samartha tumi hao, dayamaya 15.161 82
jagannatha-mahati haidchena ‘vrajesvari’ 15.19 10  karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajari 15.170 89
kartika ile kahe —ebe maha-sita 169 163
jagannatha parena tatha ‘maduya’ vasana 16.79 200 kartika ile, tabe karihagamana 168 163
jagannatha-prasada saba prthak dharila 15.221 113 kasamdi, dcara adi aneka prakdra 15.90 42
jagannathera nana yatra dekhe maha-range = 15.16 9
jagannathera prasada bhatta dena harsa-mane 15.244 125  kasi-misra, ramananda, pradyumna, 16.254 286
jagannathera prasada prabhu yata panachila 16.95 207  kaste-srstye kari’gelana ramakeli-grama 16.260 289
kataka asi’ prabhu tarre sarge anaila 16.136 224
jagannathera prasada-vastra eka 1373 asi 15.27 13 ‘katake’asiya kaila‘gopala’ darasana 16.100 209
Jagat tarite prabhu tomara avatara 15.160 82 kaya-mano-vakye prabhu tanre krpa kaila 16.107 212
jala-sanya phala dekhi’ pandita— harasita 15.76 36
jala-dasyu-bhaye sei yavana calila 16.198 255 ‘ke anna-vyaijana (८0211, Sanya kene pata? 15.59 29
‘janani’ ‘jahnavi’, —ei dui dayamaya 16.90 205 ke bujhibe tanhadunharagopa-bhavagigha 1526 13
kemane chadiba raghunathera carana 15.146 75
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda = 15.2 2 kemane prabhura sange nilicale yaba?' 16.235 276
jayddvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vinda 16.2 160 1676 upavasa kara, kene kara rosa 15.287 150
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nitydnanda 16.2 160
jaya jaya jahy ajam ajita dosa-grbhita-gunarih 15.180 94 ke vaisnava, kahatanra samanya lak sane 15.105 50
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda 15.2 2 keyapatra-kalakhola-donga sari sari 15.209 108
khanda-vasinarahari, sri-raghunandana 16.18 167
jaya sri-caitanya-caritamrta-srota-gana 15.3 3 khandera mukunda-dasa, sri-raghunandana = 15.112 60
jihva-sparse -candala sabare uddhare 15.108 53 (८105 ami anna-patre bhrame na badila!’ 15.61 30
jivera duhkha dekhi’ mora hrdaya bidare 15.162 83
jivera papa 1205 mui karon naraka bhoga 15.163 83 (८105 kona jantu asi’ sakala khaila? 15.60 29
Jjyotsnavati ratrye cali’ ila caturdvara 16.122 218  kiba mora kathdya mane bhrama hana gela! 15.60 29
kiba prarthana, kiba 2/4 - (८९/19 na bujhila 16.62 186
K kiba raghunandana—pita, tumi—tdra tanaya? 15.114 61
1083 yukti kaila dunhe, keha nahi jane 15.38 18
kabhu sarge asibena svarapa-damodara 15.198 103  kiba yukti kare nitya nibhrte vasiya 16.59 185
kabhu sasya (00373 punah patra bhare samse 15.78 = 37 = kikdya sannydse mora, prema nija-dhana 15.51 26
kabhusanyaphala rakhena, kabhujalabhari’ 15.75 = 36  kimvanija-prana yadi kari vimocana 15.262 134


--- Page 322 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 319
koti-kamadhenu-patira chagi yaiche mare 15.179 93 loka-bhida bhaye yaiche ‘kuliya’ sila 16.207 260
koti ye brahmanga bhése virajara jale 15.172 90 loka dekhi’ kahibe more —‘ei eka dhange’ 16.269 293
krama kari’ kahe prabhu ‘vaisnava'-laksana 16.75 198 loka vidaya karite prabhu dhairya dharila 15.67 32
krame krame pdya loka bhava-sindhu-kala = 16.237 277 10613 sanghatte patha na pari calite 16.258 288
krsna-janma-yatra-dine nanda-mahotsava 15.17 9
*krsna’ kahi’ nace, kande, gadagadi yaya 16.166 238 M
krsna-katha ramananda-sane ratri-dine 16.151 232
krsna-krpa yarre, tare ke rakhite pare” 16.241 280 madhava-dasa-grhe (30073 sacira nandana 16.208 263
krsna krsna kahe, netra asru varisaya 16.120 218 madhava-purira katha, gopala-sthapana 16.32 173
‘krsna’ ‘krspa’ kahi’ preme vihvala ha-ila 16.170 240 madhavendra-puri tatha gela ‘ekesvare’ 16.271 293
madhura-caritra krsnera madhura-vilasa 15.141 73
krsna-nama nirantara yanhara vadane 16.72 193 madhurdmla, bagddmladi amla panca chaya 15.214 110
krsna-ndma, sei pdjya, —srestha sabakara” 15.106 50
krspa-prema haya yanra 00/3 darasane 16.121 218 madyapayavana-rajara 386 adhikara 16.158 235
krsna sei narikela-jala panakari’ 15.75 36 ‘madyapayavaneracitta aiche ke karaya! 16.174 242
krsna sei satya kare, yei mage bhrtya 15.166 86 madhye madhye ami tomdra nikata yaiba 15.44 23
madhye madhye dsimu tanra carana dekhite 15.52 26
krsna-sevd vind inhara anya nahi mana 15.131 68 madhye madhye prabhure karena nimantrana 16.58 184
krsna ving anya-updsana mane nahi laya 15.142 74
krsna-yogya nahe, phala apavitra haild 15.83 39  maha-bhagyavan tenho, nama—krsnadasa 16.51 182
krsne samarpana kare muk ha chidra kari’ 15.74 35 mabhaisvarya-yukta dunhe —vadanya, 16.218 268
krsnera dsana-pitha rak haha uthana 15.231 117 mahd-patra nila tanre kariyd sammana 16.180 245
maha-patra cali’ 313 mahaprabhura sane 16.195 253
krsnera bhoga laganacha, anumana kari 15.217 116 maha-patra tanra sane kaila kolakuli 16.193 253
krsnera sakala sesa bhrtya dsvadaya 15.236 119
krsnera vasite ei yogya-sthana haya 15.274 142 maha-patre mahaprabhu karila vidaya 16.197 184
ksetra-sannydsa mora yduka rasatala” 16.131 222 ‘mahdprabhu dila’—grame kolahala haila 16.252 286
‘ksetra-sannydsa na chadiha’— prabhu 16.130 221 mahdprabhura datta mala sabare paraila 16.42 177
mahaprabhura mukhe age € katha sunila 16.33 173
ksira banti’ sabare dila prabhu-nityananda 16.31 172 mahatd hi prayatnena 15.269 139
ksira-prasada pana sabara badila ananda 16.31 172
ksira-puli, narikela-puli dra yata pista 15.215 111 maha-vidagdha raja, sei saba jane 15.127 67
kulina-grama-vasi cale patta-dori lana 16.17 166 mahisi-sakala dekhi’ karaye prandma 16.119 217
mahotsava-sthane 3//3 bali ‘hari’ *hari’ 15.18 9
kulina-grami patta-dori jagannathe dila 16.49 180 maricera 0212, chana-bada, badi ghola 15.210 108
kulina-grami parvavat kaila nivedana 16.169 192  marita’ amogha, tare kene jiyaild 15.290 151
kulina-gramire kahe sammana kariya 15.98 46
kulina, nindaka tenho sathi-kanyara bharta 15.245 125 markata-vairagya na kara loka dekhana 16.238 278
mane soyasti nahi, ratri kaila jagarana 15.147 76
‘mantresvara’~-dusta-nade para kardila 16.199 255
L manusya bharila saba, kiba jala, sthala 16.203 257
manusyera saktye dui nd yaya varnana 16.287 302
laguda phiréite para, tabe jani gopa 15.22 11
laksa-koti loka tatha (2811 darasana 16.208 263  mata-pitd-jidne dunhe namaskara kaila 15.30 15
laksa laksa loka aise kautuka dekhite 16.258 288 matdra carane dhari’ bahu vinaya karila 16.249 284
laksa laksa loka 3156 (303 dekhibare 16.165 238 ‘madtsarya’-candala kene ihan vasdile 15.275 143
misra-purandarera parve karyachena sevane 16.221 270
lanka-gade cadi’ phele gada bhangiya 15.33 16 mleccha asi’ kaila prabhura carana vandane 16.195 253
lathi-hate bhatticarya dchena duyare 15.246 125 moca-ghanta, moca-bhajs, vividha sikra 15.211 109
lembu-ada-khanda, dadhi, dugdha, khanda = 15.55 27 17703 dhyane asru-jale bharila nayana 15.57 28


--- Page 323 ---
320 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
mora nivedana eka karaha angikara 15.160 82 = 71709 karaite toma aninu nija-ghare 15.256 130
mora sukha caha yadi, nilicale cala 16.141 226  ninda suni’mahaprabhu hasite lagila 15.251 127
more khdoyaite kare utkanthaya rodana 15.64 31  ’nirantarakara krsna-nama-sankirtana’ 15.104 49
more prasida deha’ bhinna patrete kariya 15.231 117  nirantara kare sabe krsna-sarkirtana 16.164 237
mudga-bada, masa-bada, kala-bada mista 15.215 111 nirvighne ebe kaiche yaiba vindavane 16.277 2%
mukha-vadya kari’ prabhu hasdya dcaryere 15.11 6 niscaya kariya kaha, yauka sarhsaya’ 15.114 61
mukunda disere puche sacira nandana 15.113 6] nitya dui phula haya krsna-avatamse 15.129 67
mukunda kahe, —ati-baga \/1/2104 pai nai 15.125 66  nitydnanda kahe, —ami ‘deha’ tumi ‘prana’ 16.66 190
mukunda kahe, —raghunandana mora ‘pita’ 15.115 = 62 = nitydnanda-prabhuke prema-bhakti prakasite 16.14 165
mukunda kahe, raja, mora vyadhidche migi = 15.126 67  nitydnande djAa dila, —'yaha gauda-dese 15.42 21
mukundere haila tanra ‘maha-siddha’-jiane = 15.127 = 67  nitydnande kahe prabhu, —sunaha, sripida 16.63 187
mukundere kahe punah madhura vacana 15.130 67  nitydnandera paricaya saba sevaka sane 1629 172
murdri-guptere prabhu kari’ dlingana 15.137 72 nitydnandera prema-cesta ke pre bujhite 16.15 165
17707000103 893 pandita tathai padila 16.142 227  nitya snana kariba tahan, tahan yena mari 16.115 215
nitya ydi’ dekhi muri tanhara carane 15.53 27
ol nivedana kare prabhura carane dhariya 15.159 81
nivrtta hand punah 3373 ganga-tira 16.275 295
nacite nacite cali’ dila dui-jana 16.40 177 170 diksam nacasat-kriyam naca 15.110 59
nadiyd-vasi, brahmanera upajivya-praya 16.219 269  nrsimhananda kaila yaiche pathera sijana 16.214 266
“nandanandana krspa—mora prana-nitha” 15.100 48  nrtya-gita kare danda-paranama,stavana 15.5 3
narahari rahu dmara bhak ta-gana-sane 15.132 69
narendra siya tahan sabare milila 16.42 177 0
‘natasala’ haite prabhu punah phiri’ ila 16.211 265
naukate cadiya prabhu haila nadi para 16.122 218  ogdana-sasthira dine yatra ye dekhila 16.78 200
nava-nimbapatra-saha bhrsta-vartaki 15.213 110
nava-vidha bhakti parna nama haite haya 15.107 52
ndvikere paraila nija-krpa-sati 16.202 257 P
navyagrhe nana-dravye karaye sevana 16.152 232 pdche seidcaribd, yei tomdramana 16.283 301
1718 0073 nirmala prema, yena dagdhahema 15119 63  pada-madhye phirdya laguda, —dekhi’ loka 15.24 12
nija-gana-sarige prabhu ‘bhavanipura’ dila 16.97 208  paka-sildra daksine —dui bhogalaya 15.204 105
nija-guna suni’ datta mane lajja pana 15.159 81 pdaka-salraeka dvdra anna parivesite 15.206 106
nija-matara, gangdra carana dekhiya 16.256 287  palaila amogha, tara laga na paila 15.250 127
nija-rdjye yata ‘visayi’, tahare pathaila 16.110 213 panca-dina tarra bhiksa niyama karila 15.192 100
nibhrte kariydche bhatta natana kariya 15.205 106  pancagandakari’ narikelavikaya tatha 1570 34
nilacale chon muri tanhdra jiate 15.52 26  paficamavatsare gaudera bhakta-gana aila 16.86 203
nilicale bhojana tumi kara bayanna bara 15.239 122 (027८० (041८० tanre rik he ratri-dine 16.229 273
nilicale calite sabdra haila mana 16.12 164
panca-sata navya-grhe samagrye bhariba 16.111 214
nilicale rahi’ kare nrtya-gita-rarige 15.4 3 pandita kahe, —dvadre loka kare gatdydte 15.82 38
nilacale yaite na paya, duhkhita antara 16.230 274  pandita kahe, —“koti-seva tvat-pada- 16.132 222
niladri calila sange bhakta-gana lana 16.250 285
niladri chadi’ prabhura mana anyatra yéite 16.5 161 panditakahe, —“saba dosa dmdra upara 16.134 223
nilambara cakravarti —aradhya dunhdra 16.220 269  pandita kahe, —“yahan tumi, sei nildcala 16.131 222
nimaira priya mora—e-saba vyanjana 15.56 28  pandite lana yaite sarvabhaume aja dila 16.143 227
nimani nahika etha, ke kare bhojana 15.57 28 panditera gauranga-prema bujhana ndydya 16.137 224


--- Page 324 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 321
arama dnande yana prabhura darasane 16.27 171  prabhu kahe,—tomara bhiksa ‘eka’ divasa 15.190 99
parama-avese prabhu dila nija-ghara 15.31 15  prabhu kahe,— “vaisnava-seva, 16.70 192
paramamadhura, gupta, vrajendra-kumara = 15.138 72 prabhu kahe, -- “yanra 171८4466 suni eka-bara 15.106 50
arama pavitra, dra kare sarvottama 15.89 42 prabhuke anite dila visvasa pathana 16.194 253
parama pavitra kari’ bhoga lagaila 15.85 40 prabhuke karena stuti carane dhariya 16.183 246
parama-pavitra sevd ati sarvottama 15.69 33 prabhuke milite sabara utkantha antare 16.37 175
parama pavitra sthanaapavitra kaile 15.275 143 10380 krame krame panca-dina ghataila 15.192 100
parama udara inho, ye dina ye dise 15.94 44 prabhu-krpa-asrute tanra deha haila snana 16.106 212
parityaga kailun, tara nama na la-iba 15.263 135 prabhu lagi’ dharma-karma 00806 bhakta 16.148 230
pathaila bali’ Sighra asiha phiriya’ 16.233 275 prabhu-pada dhari’ bhatta kahite lagila 15.290 151
pathe yiite loka-bhide kaste-ststye aila 16.204 258 prabhu-pada dhari’ kahe vinaya kariya 16.279 297
(22011) ca patitam tyajet 15.265 137 prabhu pada-sparsa kaila karund kariya 16.224 271
‘patita’ ha-ile bharta tyajite ucita 15.264 135 prabhu-pade padi’ bahu atma-ninda kaila 15.259 131
pavitra sarhskarakari’ kare nivedana 15.87 41 prabhu-pasa asi’ sarvabhauma eka dina 15.186 98
phala bhangi’ sasye kare sat-patra parita 15.76 36 prabhuracalibara pathe rahe sari haa 16.118 216
phala-patra-hate sevaka dvare ta’ rahila 15.82 38 prabhura carana dekhe dina panca-sata 16.226 272
phale anumana pache kaila bhakta-gana 15.38 18 prabhura carane dhari’ karaye vinaya 15.280 147
phula-badi, patola-bhaja, kusmanda-mana- 15.213 110 prabhura carane kichu kaila nivedana 15.102 49
phulabadi-phala-mala vividha prakara 15.212 109 prabhura carane pade premavista haa 16.224 271
pichalada paryanta saba tarra adhikdra 16.159 235 prabhura darasane sabe hailapremamaya 16.120 218
‘pichalda’ paryanta sei yavana aila 16.199 255 prabhura ha-ila iccha yaite vindavana 163 161
pita-sugandhi-ghrte anna sikta kaila 15.208 107 prabhura ingita pana anandita mana 15.199 103
pita tanre bandhi’ rak he ani’ patha haite 16.228 273 prabhura maha-bhakta tenho, snehete janani 15.200 104
‘prabhu ila’ bali’ loke haila kolahala 16.203 257 prabhuranana priya dravya nila ghara haite 16.25 170
“prabhu, 9105 kara, —amarakartavya sadhana 16.69 192 prabhure nimantrana kare dcarya bara bara 15.12 7
prabhu asi’ jaganndtha darasana kaila 16.252 286 prabhura priya-vyanjana saba randhena 16.57 184
prabhu dsvasana kare sparsi’ tara gatra 15.283 148 prabhura sahita kare kirtana-vilasa 16.47 179
prabhu chadaileha, pada chadéna na yaya 15.154 79 prabhura sei adabhuta caritra dekhiya 16.162 237
prabhu dekhi’ dandavat bhamete padila 16.103 210 prabhura vicchede bhakta karena rodana 15.182 96
prabhu dekhi’ sarvabhauma dharila carane 15.286 150 prabhu-sane ati hatha kabhu bhala naya 16.92 206
prabhu dekhite acarya calila ullase 16.13 165 prabhu-sange puri-gosaii, svarapa-damodara 16.127 220
prabhu hase 06111 tara premera tararga 15.279 146 prabhu-sange rahi’ kare yatra-darasana 16.82 202
prabhu kahe, —amogha sisu, (105 tira dosa 15.287 150 prabhu-sange tahan bhojanakare bhakta saba 15.15 8
prabhu kahe, —amogha isu, tomara balaka 15.291 152  prabhu tarre alingiya vasila dsane 15.286 150
prabhukahe,—bhalakaile, $astra-ajia haya 15.236 119  prabhu (37/6 puchila bhattacarya-vivarane 15.271 141
prabhu kahe,—dharma nahe, karite napari 15.188 98 prabhu tarire vidiya diya geld nilicala 16.227 272
prabhu kahe, —eha nahe yati-dharma-cihna 15.198 99  prabhu viddya dila, réya yaya tarra sane 15.151 232
prabhu kahe, —gopinatha, ihani rahiba 15.294 153  pradhana kahilun, sabara ke kare ganana 16.129 220
prabhu kahe, — “inha kara gopinatha sevana” 16.132 222 (2125502 bhojana kari’ tathaya rahila 16.99 209
prabhu kahena, -- 'krsna-seva’, ‘'vaisnava 15.104 49 prasada 1275 kole karena krandana 15.56 28
prabhu kahe, —ninda nahe, ‘sahaja’ kahila 15.257 130 pratah-kale asi’ mora dharila carana 15.148 76
prabhu kahe, —pujya ei krsnera dsana 15.234 118 pratah-kale cali’ prabhu ‘bhuvanesvara’ ila = 16.99 209
prabhu kahe, —“seva chadibe, dmaya lage 16.133 223  pratah-kale sei bahu nauka sajana 16.194 253


--- Page 325 ---
322 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
pratah-kale tra visacika-vyadhi haila 15.266 138  raghava pandite kahena vacana sarasa 15.68 33
“prataparudra-santrata” nama haila yaya 16.108 212  raghunandana sevakare krsnera mandire 15.128 67
prataparudra-thani raya karila payana 16.102 210  raghunandanera karya—krsnera sevana 15.131 68
prataparudrera djidya padicha-tulasi 15.27 13 raghunatha dasa asi’ prabhure milila 16.216 267
prate cali’ ailana *kanaira natasala’-grama 16.267 292  raghunatha-tyaga-cintdya ha-ila vikale 15.145 75
prate kumdrahatte aila, —yahan Srinivasa 16.205 258  raghundthera pdya muni veciyachonmatha 15.149 77
prathamavasare jaganndtha-darasana 15.5 3 raja bale —vyatha tumi paile kona (0271? 15.125 66
prati-dina panca-sata phala cholana 15.73 35 raja kahe,—mukunda, tumi padild ki lagi’? 15.126 67
prati-grame raja-ajiaya raja-bhrtya-gana 16.152 232 raja-patra-gana kaila prabhura vandana 16.109 213
‘pratijiia’, ‘seva’ chadibe, —e tomdra ‘'uddesa’ 16.139 226 1333 djfdya padicha pathaya dine-dine 16.124 219
‘pratijia’-'seva’-tyaga-dosa, tara ami bhagi” = 16.135 224  rdjdra 17502, —raja-vaidyera ha-ila marana 15.124 66
‘pratijid’, ‘ri-krsna-sevd’ chadila trna-prdya = 16.137 224 1336 vidaya dila sacira nandana 16.109 213
pratita kariye —yadi nirastra hana 16.177 244 raja-siropari dhare eka sevaka ani’ 15.122 65
prati-varsa nilacale tumi na asiba 16.64 187  ‘raksakera hate muni kemane chutiba! 16.235 276
prati-varse dmdra saba bhakta-gana 1205 15.97 45  rama-dasa, gadadhara adi kata jane 15.43 22
pratyabda asibe yatrdya patta-dori lana 15.98 46  ramai, nandai, dra bahu bhakta-gana 16.129 220
prema-alingana prabhu sabare karila 16.253 286  ramdnandaailapache dolaya cadiya 16.98 208
preme ndce, krsna-nama laya maha-santa 15.296 154  ramananda-hathe prabhu na pare calite 16.85 203
‘premera vivarta’ ihd $€ yei jana 16.149 230  ramananda, mardardja, sri-haricandana 16.126 220
premonmade matta 0275 nacite lagila 15.278 146  ramananda-rdya saba-gane nimantrila 16.101 210
puja-patre puspa-tulasi sesa ye achila 15.10 6  ramananda, sarvabhauma, dui-jand-sthane 16.7 162
punah mala diya svarapadi nija-gana 16.41 177  ramananda, yahatumimahaprabhu-pasa’ 16.116 215
punah sei nindakera mukha na dekhiba 15.263 135  rasald-mathita dadhi, sandesa apara 15.218 112
punah stuti kari’ raja karaye pranama 16.106 212 rathadekhi’ narahila, gaudere calila 16.86 203
punah uthe, punah pade pranaya-vihvala 16.104 211 ratri-diba vetra-haste sevdya rahiba 16.112 214
punarapi gopalake anna samarpila 15.63 31 ratri-divase ei manah-kathakahe 16.234 276
punarapi prabhu yadi ‘santipura’ aila 16.216 267  ratri-kale mane ami vicara karila 16.268 292
punarukti haya, grantha badaye apara 16.213 266  ratrye tatharahi’prate snana-krtya kaila 16.123 218
punarukti haya, (303 na kailun varpana 15.14 8  rdyakole kari prabhu karaye krandana 16.154 233
puri-gosani, jagadananda, svardpa-ddmodara 15.184 97 rdyera viddya-bhave na yaya sahana 16.155 234
puri-gosanira bhik sa panca-dina mora ghare 15.194 101 remundya asiya kaila gopinatha darasana 16.28 171
parvavat ratha-agre nartana karila 16.49 180 ५
parvavat ratha-yatrd kaila darasana 16.54 182
parvavat ratha-yatra-kala yabe 2019 16.48 180
parva vatsare yanra yei vasa-sthana 16.46 179 saba alingana kari’ kahena gosari 16.246 283
parve ami inhdre lobhaila bara bara 15.138 72 saba aparadhi-gane prakare tarila 16.209 264
parve ami kahiyachon tomara gocare 15.194 101 saba brahmanda saha yadi ‘maya‘ra haya 15.178 93
sabakara iccha pandita kaila nivedane 16.284 301
R 52/05 lana 2113 punah dpana-bhavana 16.44 178
radha-krsna saksat ihan kariyichena bhojana 15.116 229 saba lana gundica-mandirapraksalila 16.48 180
radha-krsne laganacha etadrsa bhoga 15.228 116 saba 1373 kaila jagannatha-darasana 16.44 178
radhi eka vipra, tenho —nityananda dasa 16.51 182 sabara agrete prabhu (2/11€ lagila 16.255 287
raghava-pandita asi’ prabhu lana gela 16.204 258 sabara carana vandi’ cale hrsta haa 16.192 252
raghava pandita nija-jhali sajana 16.17 166 sabdra icchaya prabhu cari masa rahila 16.285 302


--- Page 326 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 323
sabdra sahita ihan amdra ha-ila milana 16.247 283  sirvabhaumakahe, —bhiksa karaha bisa dina 15189 99
sabdra sarva-karya karena, dena vasa-sthana = 16.20 168  sirvabhauma kahe punah, —dina ‘pafica-dasa’ 15.190 99
sabre kahila prabhu—pratyabda asiya 15.40 19 sirvabhauma, kara 'daru-brahma’-araidhana 15.136 71
sabare palanakari’ suk he 1974 yana 16.19 167  sirvabhauma-prema yanha ha-ila vidita 15.299 155
sabre vidya dila kari’ alingana 15.181 96  sarvabhauma, rdmdnanda, ani’ dui jana 16.4 161
saba sange mahaprabhu prasada khaila 16.53 182  sarvabhauma-sambandhe tumi mora 15.283 148
saba thakuranl mahaprabhuke bhiksa dite 1625 170  sarvabhauma-sarige tomara ‘kalusa’ haila 15.276 143
sabe 3803 deha’—ami nilcale yi 16.246 283  sdrvabhauma, vidyd-vacaspati, —dui bhai 15.133 69
sabe 383 deha’, tabe nirvighne asiba 16.248 284  sarva-jivera papa prabhu deha’ mora sire 15.162 83
sabe hase, nace, gaya, karaye krandana 16.164 237 = sarvajiia gauranga-prabhu jani’ tanra mana 16.236 276
sabe meli’ geld advaita caryera pase 16.13 165  sarva-loka ‘jaya’ ‘jaya’ bale bara bara 15.35 17
sabe meli’ yukti deha’ 7388 parasanne 16.277 296  sarva mukta karite krsnera nahi kichu drama 15.171 90
Saci-mata mili’ tarra duhkha khandaila 16.210 265  sarvdnge lepaye prabhurasugandhicandana 15.8 5
sadacari, satkulina, dharmikagra-ganya 16.218 268  sarvange parila prabhura malya-candana 15.255 129
sad-aisvarya-pati krsnera maya kiba kare? 15.179 93 Sasya khana krsna kare sanya bhajana 15.77 36
sadhu sadhu, gupta, tomdra sudrdha bhajana 15.153 78  sasya samarpana kari’ bahire dheyana 15.77 36
sahaje nirmala ei ‘brahmana’-hrdaya 15.274 142 sata culdya sata jana paka yadi kare 15.226 115
sahasra-vadane kahe dpane ‘ananta’ 16.289 303 sata dina rahi’ tathd loka nistarila 16.209 264
sahasreka sange haila nija-bhakta-gana 16.257 288 sata dina santipure prabhu-sarge rahe 16.234 276
sahaya ha-iya daiva kaila mora karya 15.267 138  ‘sdthira mata’ nama, bhattacaryeragrhini 15.200 104
sainya sange caliyachidhaka bajana! 16.274 295  sathira matara prema, ara prabhura (0125402 15.300 156
sakala jivera, prabhu, ghucahabhava-roga 15.163 83  sathira mata — vicaksana, jane paka-marma 15.203 105
sakala-sadguna-vrnda-ratna-ratnakara 15.140 73 ‘sathi randi ha-uka’ —iha bale bare bare 15.252 128
ska, moca-ghanta, bhrsta-patola-nimba-pata 15.54 27  sathire kaha —tare chaduka, se ha-ila {22012 15.264 135
sakha-vrnda sabdra ghare dvisandhyd-bhojana 15.241 123 satyardja bale, —vaisnava cinibakemane? 15.105 50
saksat hanuman tumi sri-rama-kinkara 15.156 80  5€ chala se-kale krsna sphurabe tomare 16.241 280
saksi-gopdla dekhi’ sabe se dina rahila 1635 174  seha mora priya, anya jana rahu dara 15.284 149
saksi-gopalera katha kahe nitydnanda 16.36 175 561 amogha haila prabhura bhakta ‘ekanta’ 15.296 154
Salagrame samarpilena bahu upahdra 15.55 27 sei bhite hata diya phala parasila 15.83 39
sammana karite 0201, aparadha pai 15.197 103 sei dina gadadhara kaila nimantrana 16.286 302
sandtana more kiba ‘praheli’ kahila 16.268 292 sei dina mahaprabhura kaila nimantrana 15.199 103
sandhydte calibe prabhu, —nrpati sunila 16.117 216 sei dine vyaya kare, nahi rakhe sese 10.94 44
sandhyate calila prabhu nija-gana [ग 16.118 216 sei govardhanera putra—raghunitha dasa 16.222 270
sange seva kari’ cale ei tina jana 16.126 220 sei hate phala chunila, pandita dekhila 15.82 38
sanksepe kahiye, kaha na ydya \/15{2/9 16.288 303 sei hetu vrndavana ydite narila 16.278 296
sannyasa kari’ prabhu yabe santipura ila 16.223 271 sei kahe,— ‘more yadi kaila angikra 16.188 250
“$antipuracarya’-grhe aiche ila, 16.210 265 sei (३1९ se yavanera eka anucara 16.161 236
santipure punah kaila dasa-dina vasa 16.212 265 sei kathd sabara madhye kahe nitydnanda 1634 174
saptagrame béra-laksa mudrara isvara 16.217 267 sei krsna bhaja tumi, hao krsnasraya 15.142 74
sarva-bhakta cale, tira ke kare ganana 16.18 167 = 5€ mora priya, anya-jana rahu dira 15.101 48
sarvabhauma, dra padicha-patra tulasi 15.20 10 sei murdri-guptaei—moraprana sama 15.157 80
sarvabhauma-ghare ei bhojana-carita 15.299 155 sei nauka cagli’ prabhu ils ‘panihati’ 16202 257
sarvabhauma-grhe bhufijan 15.1 2 sei papa ha-ite mora ha-uka nistara 16.189 251
sarvabhauma-grhe dasa-dasi, ye kukkura 15.284 149  seiratre amogha kahan palana gela 15.266 138


--- Page 327 ---
324 ওল Caitanya-caritaimrta
sei ratri saba mahanta tahani rahila 1630 172 Suni’ krpamaya prabhu 2115 dhana 15.273 142
sei ratrye jagannatha-balai asiya 16.80 201 Suni’ ‘krsna’ ‘krsna’ bali’ amogha uthila 15.278 146
sei saba 1205 prabhu acarye pajila 15.10 6 Suni’ maha-patra kahe hana vismaya 16.174 242
sei saba loka haya baulera praya 16.166 238  suni’ saba bhakta kahe prabhura carane 16.284 301
sei saba loka pathe karena sevana 16.251 285  suni’ sathira mata sire-buke ghata mare 15.252 128
seita karibe, tomara yei laya citte 16.281 298  suni’ tanra pita bahu loka-dravya diya 16.233 275
sei ta’ vaisnava, kariha tanhara sammana’’ 15.111 60  sunitei bhattacarya ulati’ cahila 15.249 127
sei vaisnava-srestha, bhaja tanhara carane 16.72 193 Suniya pitare raghunatha nivedila 16.231 274
se-kale tanra prema-cesta na pari varnite 16.200 256  suniya prabhura vani mane vicaraya 16.92 206
se siddha ha-ila—chadi’ ail dara desa 16.139 226  suniya prataparudradnandita haila 16.285 302
se vatsara prabhu dekhite saba thakurani 16.21 168  Suniya prataparudra ha-ila vimana 163 161
Sighra asi, bhojana kara, tabe mora sukha 15.288 150  Suniyd vaisnava-mane badila dnanda 16.34 174
Sighra kari’ dila sabe sri-nilacale 16.37 175  Suniya vaispava-mane badila ananda 16.36 175
Sighra yai’ muni saba karinu bhaksana 15.58 28  sunya-patra dekhi’ asru kariya marjana 15.58 28
Siksa-rape kahe {40/€ asvasa-vacana 16.236 276  susitala karite rakhe jale dubaina 15.73 35
sirhha-dvdra-nikate aila suni’ gauraraya 16.43 178  sustha kari, ramananda rajare vasaila 16.107 212
Sirera upare, prsthe, sammukhe, dui-pase 15.24 12 satra-madhye sei lila ami ta’ varnilun 16.215 266
Sivananda jane udiya-pathera sandhana 16.20 168 svado ‘pi sadyah savanaya kalpate 16.186 248
Sivananda-sange cale tanhara grhini 16.22 168  svagana-sahite prabhuprasada angikari’ 16.125 219
Sivananda-sena kare ghati samadhana 16.19 167  svagane cadaild prabhu tahara upara 16.196 254
Sivananda-sena kare saba samadhana 16.26 170  svahaste sabare prabhu prasada khaoyaila 16.45 179
Sivananda sene kahe kariya sammana 15.93 43 svanigamam apahaya mat-pratijfiam 16.145 228
Sivanandera balaka, nama—caitanya-dasa 16.23 169  svapnesvara-vipra kaila prabhura nimantrana 16.100 209
snanakari’ tanha mudi asichon ekhane 15.293 152  svardpa-sahita tara haya sakhya-priti 16.77 199
50/10/{1-/02/1€ tenho taha satya nahi mane 15.53 27  svayam bhagavan krsna—sarvamsi, sarvasraya 15.139 72
sraddha bade panditera, prema-sindhu bhase 15.78 = 37
sraddha kari’ bhattacarya saba karaila 15.219 112 T
Sraddha kari’ ei lila sune yei jana 15.301 157
Sri-mukhe 303 kara prabhu—nivedi carane = 15.103 49 (386 ara narikela samskara karaila 15.85 40
Sri-narahari, —ei mukhya tina jana 15.112 60 (386 asi’ raghunatha prabhure milila 16.223 271
tabe gadadhara-pandita premavista haa 16.279 297
sri-raghunatha-carana chadana na yaya 15.150 77 tabegali, sapa dite bhattacarya ila 15.251 127
Sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 15.302 157 (386 hasi’ kahe prabhu jani’ tanramana 16.71 193
Sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 16.290 304
Srivasa pandita-sange calila malini 16.22 168 tabe laguda lana prabhu phiraite lagila 15.23 12
Srivasa-pandite prabhu kari’ alingana 15.45 23 tabe mahaprabhu saba bhakte bolila 15.39 19
tabe mahaprabhu tanre krpa-drsti kari’ 16.187 249
Srivasa prabhure tabe kaila nimantrana 16.56 183  tabe mukunda datta kahe, ‘Suna, mahasaya = 16.190 251
“sthira hana ghare yao, na hao vatula 16.237 277  tabe navadvipe tarre dila pathana 16.250 285
stuti kare, pulakanga, pade asru-jala 16.104 211
Subhra-pithopari sak sma vasana patila 15.219 112 tabe ‘odhra-desa-sima’ prabhu cali’ Gila 16.156 234
sugandhi-salile dena padya, acamana 15.8 5 tabe prabhu sirvabhauma-ramananda-sthane 16.87 204
tabe ‘ramakeli’-grame prabhu yaiche gela 16.211 265
50006 nilacala aila sacira nandana 16.251 285 tabe ramananda, ara satyaraja khanna 15.102 49
Suni’ anandita raja ati-sighra aila 16.103 210  {26€ sarvabhauma kare ara nivedana 15.193 100
Suni’ harse kahe prabhu— “kahile niscaya 15.117 62 tabe sarvabhauma prabhura carape dhariya 15.191 100


--- Page 328 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 325
tabe sei mahdprabhura carana vandiya 16.192 252  tarra mukha dekhi’ hase sacira nandana 16.61 186
tabe se sobhaya vrndavanera gamana 16.273 294 tara pita sada kare acarya-sevana 16.225 272
tabe sukhe naukate karaibagamane 16.160 236  tanraprema-vasaami, tarra seva—dharma 15.49 25
tabe tumi dma-pasa asiha kona chale 16.240 280 (4/2 preme ani’ amaya karaya bhojane 15.65 31
tabe vasudeve prabhu kari’ 21182172 15.158 81 (2/2 seva chadi’ ami kariyachi sannyasa 15.48 24
tabe yukti kare prabhu—‘yaba vrndavane’ 16.7 162 tarre 374 dilaraja—'karihasarvakaya 16.113 214
tabu alpa-hani krsnera mane nahi laya 15.174 91 tarre dekhi’ punarapi ydite nare ghare 16.165 238
tabu ami sunilur matra, na kailur avadhana 16.267 292  tarre santa kari’ prabhu ghare pathdila 15.259 131
tabu apanake mane trna haite hina 16.262 290 tare viddya dila prabhu kari’ alingana 16.68 192
tabu eka lilara tenho nahi paya anta 16.289 303 tarre viddya dila prabhu sei grama haite 16.200 256
tabu Sighra eta dravya randhite na pare 15.226 115 = (3/2 eka phala padi’ yadi nasta haya 15.173 91
tabu vrndavana ১303 loka Sikhaite 16.281 298 tara eka rai-nase hani nahi mani 15.177 92
taha chadi’ kariyachi vatulera karma 15.49 25  taragada-khai—karanabdhiyadra nama 15.175 92
tahan bhiksa kaila prabhu lana bhakta-gana = 16.286 302 = (4/3 lekhdya ei anna nahe eka grasi 15.242 123
tahan eka-vakya tanra ache premamaya 15.99 46 tara madhye kaila yaiche jhada-varisana 16.55 183
tahan haite age gela sivananda-ghara 16.206 259 tara madhye milila yaiche ripa-sanatana 16.214 266
tahan haite avasya ami ‘vrndavana’ yaba 16.248 284 tara madhye nan citra-caritra-prakasa 15.298 155
tahani arambha kaila krsna-sankirtana 16.40 177 tara madhye ye ye varse achaye visesa 16.83 202
tahan 5204 pathana karaila visrama 16.46 179 = (4/2 pada-dhdli udi’ lage upara bhite 15.82 38
tahan 51001 kare —hena anye na dekhiye 16.65 188 tare vadha kaile haya papa-prayascitte 15.261 132
tahan stambha ropana kara ‘maha-tirtha’ kari’ 16.115 215 tate bhase maya (205 ananta brahmanda 15.176 92
tahan yaite kara tumi sahaya-prakara 16.191 252 tate more ei krpa kara, dayamaya 15.151 77
tahan yamund, gangs, sarva-tirtha-gana 16.280 297  tatha haite ramananda-raye vidya dila 16.153 233
tahara upare ebe karaha prasada 15.292 152  tathdpi ८2/11 mahaprabhure dekhite 16.15 165
taiche eka brahmanda yadi mukta haya 15.174 91 tathdpi eteka anna khiona na yaya 15.238 121
tanhake puchiya tara karaiha pratiti 15.66 32 tathapi nd mane krsnakichu apacaya 15.178 93
tanhara avarana kichu Sithila ha-ila 16.244 282  tathdpi sunena yatha mista narikela 15.71 34
tanhara caritre prabhu antare santosa 16.138 225 = (2102001 ५६52 nahi jane nija-apacaya 15.173 91
tanhara hate dhari’ kahe kari’ pranaya-rosa 16.138 225  tathd raja-adhikari prabhure milila 16.156 234
tanhara prabhave tarre ‘isvara’ kari’ mani’ 16.167 239 tava djna-bhanga haya, ki karon updya 15.150 77
tanhara premera katha kahite na jani 16.24 169  tavat rahiba mi ethdya vasiya 15.289 151
tarihare gopala yaiche magila candana 16.32 173 tenho caliyiche prabhure dekhite ullasa 16.23 169
tanhare janiha tumi vaisnava-pradhina’ 16.74 197 tenho ghare asi’ hail premete pagala 16.227 272
tanha vina ei rajya more nahi 8033 166 162 tenho kahe,— “ke vaisnava, ki tarra laksapa?” 16.71 193
tara abhiseke prabhu maha-trpta haila 16.52 183 tenho yadi prasada dite haila dna-mana 15.247 126
tarra avadhana dekhi’ amogha (2212112 15.249 127  tina-mana tandulera ubharila 80306 15.207 107
tarira bhakti dek hi’ prabhura tusta haila mana 16.105 211 = toma-duriha vina mora nahi anya gati 1689 204
tarira bhakti-nisthd kahena, Sune bhakta-gana 15.137 72  tomake va kene 8007/3/86 papa-phala? 15.168 87
tanra bhaye nadi keha haite nare para 16.159 235 tomd-sane eisandhi, nahi yuddha-bhaya’ 16.173 241
tanra bhaye pathe keha nare calibira 16.158 235 tomd-sarige na yaiba, yaiba ekesvara 16.134 223
tanra dainya dekhi’ Suni’ pasana bidare 16.263 290  ‘toma-sthane pathaila mleccha adhikari 16.171 240
tanra guna kahe hai sahasra-vadana 15.158 81  tomara age mrtyu ha-uka, yauka sarnsaya 15.151 77
tara lagi’ gopinatha ksira curi kaila 16.33 173 tomdra §jriakari ami nahi svatantara 15.144 75


--- Page 329 ---
326 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
tomara bahuta bhagya kata prasarisiba 15.230 117  uthiya calild prabhu bali’ *hari’ ‘hari’ 16.125 219
tomdra darsana-prabhava ei-mata haya’ 16.185 247  “uttama hai hina kari’ manaha dpandre 16.264 291
tomdra dui dharma yaya, —amara haya 16.140 226  utthana-dvadasi-yatrd dekhila sakali 15.36 17
tomara ghare kirtane ami nitya naciba 15.46 23
tomara hathe dui vatsara na kailungamana 16.88 204 Vv
tomadra icchd-matre habe brahmanda-mocana 15.171 90  ‘vdcaspati-grhe’ prabhu yemate rahila 16.207 260
tomdra karaha yatna tanhare rakhite 16.5 161  vdcaspati, kara jala-brahmerasevana 15.136 71
‘tomdra karya—dharme dhana-upérjana 15.130 67  ‘vaispava’, ‘vaisnavatara’, ara ‘vaisnavatama’ 16.75 198
tomara ki kathd, tomdra gramera kukkura 15.101 48  vaisnavera papa krsna dara kare saba 15.169 87
tomdra pratijiia raksa kaila yatna kariya” 16.146 229  vaisnavera tdratamya prabhu sikhaila 16.73 196
tomara sahdya lagi’ dilu tomdra sane 15.43 22 vanara-sainyakaila prabhu 1274 bhakta-gape 15.32 15
tomdra sange sannyasi 3006 dasa-jana 15.193 100  vanindtha bahu prasada dila pathana 16.98 208
‘tomdra Suddha preme ami ha-i’ tomara vasa’ 15.68 33  vaninatha, kasi-misra prasada anila 16.45 179
tomdra upare krsnera samparna prasada 15.165 86  vaninatha, Sikhi-adi yata bhakta-gana 16.254 286
“tomadra vicitra nahe, tumi—saksat prahlida 15.165 86  vdpi-tire than yai’ karila visrame 16.50 181
tomdre dgraha ami kailun bare bare 15.155 80  varsa-antare punah tarraaicheprasnakaila 16.73 196
trtiya vatsare saba gaudera bhakta-gana 16.12 164  vasudeva-dattera tumi kariha samadhana 15.93 43
(01351-17737/3/1, lavanga, elaci rasa-vasa 15.254 129  vasudeva-grhe pache ila isvara 16.206 259
tumi dekhd pabe, ara keha na dekhiba 15.46 23 vasudeva, murdri, govindadi tina bhai 16.16 166
tumi dunhe 2174 deha’ parasanna hana 1691 205  vdtite kata sata vrkse laksa laksa phala 15.71 34
tumiha nija-chaye asibe mora ghara 15.198 103  vatula balakera mata nahi laya dosa 15.50 25
tumi jana, krsna nija-pratijAa chadild 16.144 228  vidagdha, catura, dhira, rasika-sekhara 15.140 73
tumi kene chadibe tarra carana-kamala ` 15.156 80 vidhimore hindu-kule kena na janmaila 16.181 246
tumi mana kara, tabe anayase haya 15.161 82  vidya-bhakti-buddhi-bale parama pravina 16.262 290
‘tumi— pita, putra tomara— sri-raghunandana? 15.113 = 61 == vidyanidhi se vatsara niladri rahila 16.76 199
tumi ta’ isvara, mui —ksudra jiva chara 15.243 124  vijaya-dasami dile avasya caliba 16.93 206
tumi yadi 2/5 deha’ ethake asiya 16.172 241 vijayd-dasami-dine karila payana 16.94 206
tumi yahan-yahan raha, tahan ‘vendavana’ 16.280 297  vijaya-dasami—larka-vijayera dine 15.32 15
tumi yanra hita ৮3003 se haila ‘vaispava’ 15.169 87 vind papa-bhoge habe sabara uddhara 15.167 87
tvayopayukta-srag-gandha-vasohalankara 15.237 120  vistdri’ varniyachena dasa-vrndavana 15.13 7
vistri’ varniyachena dasa-vrndavana 16.56 183
U vistdri’ varniyachena vrndavana-dasa 16.81 201
vistdri’ varniyachena vrndavana-dasa 16.212 265
ucchista-bhojino 03535 15.237 120 vistariyaage (303 kahiba nihsesa 16.83 202
udiya-bhakta-gana 53786 pache cali ila 16.96 207 visacikd-vyadhite amogha chadiche jivana 15.272 141
udiya-bhakta-gane prabhu yatne nivarila 16.97 208
‘udliya-katake’ dila kari’ vesantara 16.161 236  visuddha-nirmala-prema, sarva-rasamaya 15.139 72
udyoga nd chila mora grhinira randhane 15.233 118  ‘visvdsa’ asiyd prabhura carana vandila 16.170 240
‘visvasa’ yana tanhare sakala kahila 16.178 244
‘upala-bhoga’ lagile kare bahire vijaya 15.6 4 vraje jyetha, khuda, mama, pisadi gopa-gana 15.241 123
upare dekhiye yate tulasi-manjari 15.227 116
uthaha, amogha, tumi lao krsna-nama 15.277 144  vrddha-kusmanda-badira vyaijana apara 15.212 109
utha, sndna kara, dekha jagannatha-mukha 15.288 150  vrndavanadekhi’ yabe asiba nilicale 16.240 280
uthi’ mahaprabhu tarre kaila alingana 16.105 211 vrndavana yaba ami gauda-desa diya 16.256 287


--- Page 330 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 327

vrndavana yaba kahan ‘ekaki’ hana! 16.274 295 yanra sak tye bhoga siddha, sei taha jane 15.223 118

vrndavana yaibara ei nahe paripati 16.266 291 yanra sange haya ei loka laksa koti 16.266 291

vrndavana yaite tanra ajna la-ila 16.249 284 yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho 15.170 89

vyartha mora ei deha, yaukaparana" 16.182 246  yathanetrapade tatha loka dekhi parna 16.259 288

vyavahare raja-mantri haya raja-patra 16.261 289  yatha rahi, tatha ghara-pracira haya carna 16.259 288

yatha-yogya karya kare anasakta hana 16.243 282

Y yatha-yogya visaya bhunja’ anasak ta hana 16.238 278

yavana adhikari yaya prabhuke miliya 16.172 241

yavat nd khdibe tumi prasada asiya 15.289 151

yadyapi prabhura jaa gaudete rahite 16.14 165  yeba saka-phaladika, anaila ahari’ 15.202 105
yadyapi svatantra prabhu nahe nivarana 16.11 164

yaha dekhi’ sarva-lokera judana nayana 15.91 43 yeidekhe, sune, tarra vismaya haya mana 15.297 154

yahan snana kari’ prabhu ya‘na nadi-pare 16.114 215 = yei iha sune tara janma, deha dhanya 16.201 256

yaha yaha dara-grame suniyache bhala 15.86 41 yeikhabe, tanhara saktye bhoga siddha haya 15.232 118

ye-kale sannyasa kailun, channa (12112 mana = 15.51 26

ydite sammati na deya vicchedera bhaya 16.10 164 ye karaha, sei kari, nahika niyama 16.67 190
‘ydjapura’ asi’ prabhu tare dilena vidaya 16.150 231

yamesvare prabhu yanre kardila avase 15.183 96  yoda-hata kari’ kichu kaila nivedana 15.186 98

yanhdradarsane mukhe dise krsna-nama 16.74 197 yoda-hate prabhu-age laya krsna-nama 16.180 245

yanha haite krsna-bhakti sei guru haya” 15.117 62  yoda-hate stuti kare pade namaskari’ 15.9 9

yan-namadheya-sravananukirtanad 16.186 248 “yo ‘si so ‘si namo ‘stu te” ei mantra pade 15.11 6


--- Page 331 ---
General Index
Numerals in bold type indicate references to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
verses. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
Amirta-pravaha-bhasya
A Sixteenth Chapter summarized in,
159
Abhinanda Ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
as uncle of Krsna, 123 verses quoted, 121
Absolute Truth Anantadeva
three phases of, 144-145 can't reach end of one of Lord's
See also: Krsna, Supreme Lord pastimes, 304
Acaryaratna Andsaktasya visayan yatharham
See: Candrasekhara verses quoted, 279
Activities Anubhasya
determine position in disciplic succes- quoted on Nityananda as visnu-tattva,
sion, 189 21-22
for initiation not required for quoted on prakrta-sahajiyas’ beliefs,
deliverance, 54 21-22
of Vaisnavas not easily understood, 64 Anyabhilasita-sanyam
pure devotee above fruitive, 194 quoted, 194
Acyutananda Aradhananam sarvesam
as son of Sitadevi, 168 quoted, 189
Advaita Acarya Aradhyo bhagavan vrajesa-tanayas
Caitanya visited house of, 264 quoted, 298
communicates secretly with Caitanya, Arcayam eva haraye
186 quoted, 51
dances at Remuna, 171 Arcye visnair $ila-dhir gurusu
house of at Santipura, 174 quoted, 145
instructed to spread krsna-bhakti, 20 Arjuna
invites Caitanya to lunch, 183-184 takes credit for victorious battle,
served by Govardhana, 272 189-190
travels to Jagannatha Puri, 165, 168 Association
worshiped by Caitanya, 6-7 of ordinary persons, 194
worshiped Caitanya, 5-6 with faithful neophyte, 51
Age of Kali Ataeva krsnera ‘nama’
See: Kali-yuga quoted, 58
Amara ajhdya guru hana Atah sri-krspa-namadi
quoted, 20 quoted, 58
Amara ‘duskara’ karma Atatayinamayantam api vedanta
quoted, 189 verses quoted, 136
Amogha Atharanala
as son-in-law of Sarvabhauma, 125 Advaita Acarya and Nityananda receive
became devotee of Caitanya, 146-149, garlands at, 176-177
154, 156 Atheists
criticizes Caitanya, 126 regard Deity as material, 194-195
329


--- Page 332 ---
330 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Ato gurum pranamyaivam Bhakti-sandarbha
quoted, 55 quoted on diksd, 54
quoted on importance of kirtana, 53
B Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
as author of Anubhasya, 21
cited on chanting the holy name, 51
Balagandi cited on maha-bhagavata, 197
Caitanya takes prasada from, 182 cited on Raghava Pandita, 39
Balarama cited on renunciation of a monkey, 278
slaps Pundarika Vidyanidhi, 201 cited on Sri Krsna-vijaya, 46-47
Balarama Acarya cited on Vaisnavism, 194
as family priest of Govardhana Ma- cited on Vasudeva Datta, 83-85
jumadara, 268 Bhaktivinoda Thakura
Bengal advocates ksetra-sannydasa, 221-222
Caitanya’s shelters in, 205 cited on serving Vaisnavas, 60
devotees of arrive at Narendra Lake, Bhauma-ijya-dhih
178 explained, 39
devotees of travel to Jaganndtha Purl,  Bhavanipura
165-177 Caitanya visits, 208
Nitydnanda requested to remain in, 187 Bhimasena
Ratha-yatra attended annually by devo- quoted on punishment of offenses to
tees of, 202 devotees, 139-140
Vaisnavas return to, 199 Bhisma
Bhadrabhadra-vastu-jiiana Krsna fulfilled promise of, 228-229
quoted, 39 Bhuvanesvara
Bhagavad-gita Caitanya visits, 209
quoted on approaching Krsna, 21 Blasphemy
quoted on divisions of human society, Bhagavatam quoted on, 134
146 Bhakti-sandarbha quoted on, 133
quoted on everything as Krsna's energy, Dvaraka-mahatmya quoted on, 133
71 seriousness of, 132-134
quoted on greatness of devotees, 141 Skanda Purana quoted on, 132-133
quoted on pure devotional service, 144 Body, material
quoted on reaching Krsna, 191 as impediment to self-realization, 194
quoted on surrender to Krsna, 88 Brahma
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu receives instructions from the Lord, 191
quoted on acting in Krsna conscious- Brahma-bandhur na hantavya
ness, 281 verses quoted, 136
quoted on pure devotion, 194 Brahman
quoted on real and false renunciation, one who understands is a brdhmana,
278,279 144
Bhakti-ratnakara Brahmana
quoted, 263 as one who understands Brahman, 144
Bhakti-sandarbha contamination of is in mode of good-
quoted, 195 ness, 144-145
quoted on blaspheming Visnu, 133 heart of by nature clean, 143
quoted on brahmana initiation, 54-57 injunctions for killing, 136


--- Page 333 ---
General Index 331
Brahmana Caitanya dasa’
must worship salagrama-sila, 106 as son of Sivananda Sena, 169
one who chants holy name is more Caitanya-mangala
than, 250 account of Caitanya’s tour given in, 259
respected by Hiranya and Govardhana, quoted, 262-263
269 Candalas
developing qualities of, 55 eligible to perform sacrifice, 186
must be initiated, 54 eligible to receive krsna-bhakti, 20-21
Brahmananda Bharati holy name available to, 59
as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101 krspa-bhakti open to, 20
Brahmanda Purl Candrasekhara
as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101 invites Caitanya to lunch, 185
Brahma-sarhita travels to Jagannatha Puri, 166, 168
quoted on Lord as destroyer of karma, wife of travels to Jagannatha Puri, 170
89 Caranamrta
quoted on purified vision of devotees, not to be considered ordinary, 195
300 Caturdvara
quoted on the spiritual world, 121 Caitanya visited, 218
Caturmasya
Caitanya consults with Nityananda at
त end of, 185
Catur-varnyarn maya srstam
Caitanya Mahaprabhu quoted, 146
as combination of Radha and Krsna, 299 Causal Ocean 1
as Krsna, 124 as surrounding waters of Vaikuntha, 92
as son of $Saci, 61, 177 Chanting
has five faces, 63 by neophyte and advanced devotees,
known as Prataparudra-santrata, 213 194
Nilambara Cakravarti as grandfather of, dissolves material entanglement, 58
270 enables one to see Krsna’s lotus feet, 57
Caitanya-bhagavata intermediate devotee attracted to, 196
cited, 260 of Hare Krsna as medicine, 187
cited on Caitanya’s pastimes at Advaita of Hare Krsna continues for four
Acarya’s house, 184 months, 180
account of Caitanya'’s tour given in, 259 of holy name by Mohammedan gover-
quoted, 261-262 nor, 245
Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka of holy names by Mohammedan spy,
account of Caitanya’s tour given in, 239
259-260 precedes and follows all devotional ac-
Caitanya-carita-maha-kavya tivities, 53
account of Caitanya’s tour given in, 259 purascarya as life force of, 56
Caitanya-caritamrta results from seeing maha-bhagavata,
quoted on chanting Hare Krsna, 57 197
quoted on classes of Vaisnavas, 195 the holy name once as worshipable,
quoted on judgment by action, 197 51
quoted on revelation through devo- with and cessation recommended by
tional service, 58 Caitanya, 50


--- Page 334 ---
332 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Christians Devotees
confess sins then commit them again, Krsna fulfills desires of, 86
84 materialistic not respectful, 51
Citrotpala River must preach, 187-188
Caitanya bathes in, 217 of Bengal attend Ratha-yatra annually,
Conditioned souls 202
as bereft of their relationship with Raghava Pandita imitated by neophyte,
Krsna, 94 39
awakened by maha-bhagavata, 197-198 wives of go to Jagannatha Puri, 168
chanting good for, 57 Devotional service
Vasudeva Datta desired to suffer for, interrupted by material desires, 194
83-85 nine types of, 52-53
proper candidate for, 195
D revelation of the Lord through, 58
Dipavali
Caitanya celebrated, 17-18
Damodara Pandita Disciplic succession
hears pastimes of Madhavendra Puri, Gaura-Nitai’s service in the, 189
174 See also: Parampara
remained with Lord at Puri, 97 Divya jAhanarn yato dadyat
Deity quoted, 54
০০313 installed by Madhavendra Puri, Dola-yatra
173 Caitanya detained at Jagannatha Puri
of 6 Varahadeva at Yajapura, 231 until, 163
regarded as material by atheists, Durgama-sangamani
194-195 cited on real renunciation, 279
Deity worship Duty
considered imaginative by so-called Caitanya questioned on, 192
brahmanas, 145 for Caitanya’s sake devotees aban-
leads to pure devotion, 51 doned, 230
Demigods ‘Dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jiiana, saba
Supreme Lord not one of, 195 verses quoted, 29
Demons Dvaraka
not killed by Gaura-Nitai, 189 wives and mothers of Krsna at, 122-123
Desires Dvaraka-mahatmya
devotional service interrupted by ma- quoted on blaspheming devotees, 133
terial, 194 Dvijanam anupetanarn
Devaki quoted, 54
as mother of Krsna, 123
Devotees E
abandoned duties for Caitanya’s sake,
230
are as great as the Lord, 140-141 Ecstatic symptoms
as superior to karmis and jianis, 52 manifest by Amogha, 147, 156
Caitanya praises glories of, 63 of millions of saintly persons, 238
etiquette for, 119 of Mohammedan governor, 245, 256
given credit for accomplishments, of Mohammedan secretary, 240
189-190 of Mohammedan spy, 239


--- Page 335 ---
General Index 333
Ecstatic symptoms Canges
of Prataparudra Maharaja's queens, 217 Caitanya is carried across, 252-257
Energies Vidya-vacaspati ordered to worship, 71
Caitanya's unconceivable, 191 wherever Caitanya stays is, 297-298
Envy Garuda Purana
demon loses everything by, 140-141 quoted on exalted position of devotee,
ete kalingah kaunteya 145
verses quoted, 231 Garuda-stambha
Etiquette Caitanya stands near to see Jagannatha,
for devotees, 119 4
Gauda-desa
Nityananda as only qualified preacher
F from, 188
Gaurangera sangi-gane
Faith quoted, 85
devotees categorized according to, 52, Gaura-Nitai
195 as incarnation for preaching, 189
in chanting, 51 as Krsna-Balarama, 299
Fear Gauranga-sundara
modes of nature keep conditioned See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
souls in, 95 Gopala
Fire Deity installed by Madhavendra Puri,
ceremony can be performed by offen- 173
seless chanter, 249 Copinatha
Food at Remuna, 171
Caitanya collects remnants of Lord Deity known as Ksiracora, 174
Jagannatha's, 207 stole milk for Madhavendra Puri, 174
from Balagandi taken by Caitanya, 182 Govardhana Majumadara
offered by wives of Caitanya, 170 good qualities of, 268-269
prepared for Caitanya by Sarvabhauma, Raghunatha dasa as son of, 268, 270
107-113 served Advaita Acarya, 272
See also: Prasada Govinda
See: Krsna
ष Govinda
G brings garlands to Atharanala, 176
remained with Lord at Puri, 97
Gadadhara Pandita travels to Jagannatha Puri, 166
broke vow of ksetra-sannyasa, 221-226 Gunaraja Khan
forbidden to accompany Caitanya, as author of $r7 Krsna-vijaya, 46
221-226 life history of, 47
given place to live at Yamesvara, 97 Gundica temple
initiated by Pundarika Vidyanidhi, 200 cleansed at time of Ratha-yatra, 180
intimacy of Caitanya and, 225 Sivananda Sena instructed to go to, 45
met Caitanya at Puri, 287 Guror labdhasya mantrasya
never went to Vrndavana, 300 verses quoted, 55
Ganges Guru
as shelter of Caitanya, 205 Caitanya ordered everyone to become
as Supreme Lord in form of water, 71 a, 20


--- Page 336 ---
334 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Guru Holy name
See also: Spiritual master Caitanya asked Mohammedan gover-
nor to chant, 250
candala delivered by vibrating, 54
H chanted by Amogha, 146, 154
chanted by neophyte and advanced
Hanti nindati vai dvesti devotees, 194
verses quoted, 132 chanted once as worshipable, 51
Hanuman intermediate devotee attracted to
as servant of Ramacandra, 190 chanting, 196
Caitanya displays emotions of, 16-17 material entanglement dissolved by
Murari Gupta as incarnation of, 80 chanting, 58
Hare Krsna not to be considered ordinary, 195
chanting of continues for four months, qualities of, 59
180 Stayardja Khan instructed to chant the,
chanting of as medicine, 187 50
See also: Holy name, Maha-mantra See also: Maha-mantra
Harer nama harer nama Householder
verses quoted, 249 sannyasi expected to collect food from,
Hari-bhakti-vilasa 124
cited on blasphemy, 132-133 should serve Vaisnavas, 60
quoted on brahmana initiation, 54 Vasudeva Datta as, 44-45
quoted on purascaryd, 55, 56 Humility
quoted on surrender to spiritual master, of Murari Gupta, 81
55 of Rapa and Sanatana Gosvamis,
Haricandana 290-291
Prataparudra Maharaja gives orders to, Husband
215 duty of, 136
Haridasa Thakura
Balarama Acarya as favorite of, 268 1
more advanced than Christ, 84
never went to Vrndavana, 300
Hearing Impersonalists
as purification, 51 sometime imagine a form of the Lord,
Hera-paficami 145
attended by Caitanya and devotees, India
183 Caitanya toured South, 203
Heart Western Vaisnavas not allowed in some
instructions given through, 191 temples in, 250
of a brahmana by nature clean, 143 International Society for Krishna Conscious-
Hiranya Majumadara ness
good qualities of, 268-269 Krsna-Balarama temple constructed by,
Holy name 299
a candila can be purified by hearing, members of must distribute krsna-bhak-
247 ti, 20
Holy name 1 sarva-bhatanam
as non-different from the Lord, 57 quoted, 191


--- Page 337 ---
General Index 335
Tévara Puri Kali-yuga
first narrated story of Madhavendra Puri Caitanya’s mission in, 188-189
to Caitanya, 174 Krsna manifests in forms of wood and
Isvare tad-adhinesu water in, 70-71
verse quoted, 195 so-called brahmanas in, 145
suffering of caused by sinful activity,
20
॥ Kanai Natasala
Caitanya went to, 292
Jagadananda visited by Caitanya, 265
hears pastimes of Madhavendra Puri, Kanani Khutiya
174 dressed himself like Nanda Maharaja,
remained with Lord at Puri, 97 10, 14
Jagai Kapiladeva
delivered by Nityananda, 189 verdict of, 249
Jagannatha Deity Kara-patrai$ ca phalyante
as Supreme Lord in form of wood, 71 verses quoted, 133
prasada of offered to Caitanya, 113 Karma
receives silken ropes, 180 Brahma-sarnhita quoted on Lord as
Sarvabhauma ordered to worship, 71 destroyer of, 89
seeing of as great benefit, 187-188 immediately affects offender of the
seen by Caitanya each morning, 97 Lord, 139
slaps Pundarika Vidyanidhi, 201 nullified by chanting holy name, 251
visited by Caitanya and associates, 178 Karmis
Jagannatha Mahati are not purified, 84
dressed himself as Mother Yasoda, 10, as faithless, 52
14 Karpau pidhaya nirayad yad akalpa
Jagannatha Puri verses quoted, 134
as place of pilgrimage, 221 Karttika
Caitanya detained at, 162-164, 203 Caitanya detained at Jagannatha Puri
Caitanya returned to, 273 until, 163
devotees travel to, 165-177 Kasi Misra
preaching more important than staying brings prasada to Caitanya, 179
in, 187-188 met Caitanya at Puri, 287
the Lord eats fifty-two times a day at, Kasisvara
122 remained with Lord at Puri, 97
Jesus Christ Kataka
eradicated sins of his disciples, 84 Caitanya visits, 209
JAanis devotees arrive at, 175
are not purified, 84 Kayastha caste
as faithless, 52 description of, 243
Hiranya and Govardhana belonged to,
K 268
Kesava Puri
Kadara as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101
Lord Jagannatha's ointment taken by Khanda
Caitanya, 207 three inhabitants of, 61


--- Page 338 ---
336 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Krsna Kulina-grama
as Caitanya’s life and soul, 48 inhabitants of travel to Jagannatha Puri,
as identical with holy name, 51 166
as the original prabhu, 79 symptoms of Vaisnavas explained to in-
as the supreme sweetness, 72 habitants of, 199
Caitanya as, 124 Kuliya
compared to a mine of gems, 73 visited by Caitanya, 260-263
fulfilled Bhisma’s promise, 228-229 Kumarahatta
fulfills desires of His devotees, 86 visited by Caitanya, 259
full in six opulences, 94 Kuruksetra
gives credit to devotees, 189-190 Arjuna takes credit at, 189-190
granted audience to Madhavendra Puri,
294
manifests in forms of wood and water L
in Kali-yuga, 70-71
Murari Gupta induced by Caitanya to
worship, 72-74 Lahake yavat sparsi ‘hema
not to be considered ordinary, 195 quoted, 197
relatives of in Vrndavana, 123 Laukiki vaidiki vapi
Krsna-Balarama verses quoted, 281
CGaura-Nitai as, 299 Liberation
Krsna consciousness by chanting holy names, 251
Indians astonished to see Westerners of candala, 54
taking up, 243 offered by maha-bhagavata, 197-198
spread by madhyama-adhikari, 197 means complete freedom from the
See also: Devotional service modes, 145
Krsnadasa Living entities
identified, 181 Brahma as first of, 191
pours water over the Lord, 182 wander in material ocean, 277
Krspa-mantra haite habe Lotus feet of Lord Caitanya
quoted, 57 Mohammedan governor offered prayers
Krsnananda Puri to, 252
as sannydsi living with Caitanya, 101 Raghunatha dasa touched by, 271
Krsneti yasya giri tam Lotus feet of Krsna
quoted, 51, 60 attained by service and chanting,
Ksetra-sannyasa 193
Gadadhara Pandita gave up vow of, seen by chanting Hare Krsna, 57
221-226 Love of God
Sarvabhauma 8hattacarya lived in, 222 Amogha became mad with, 146
Ksiracora and attraction as goal of devotional ser-
as name of Gopinatha Deity, 174 vice, 196
Kulina-grama awakened by chanting, 58
inhabitants of at Ratha-yatra, 180-181 greatness of Candraéekhara’s 170
inhabitants of invited to Ratha-yatra, 46 Mukunda dasa had deep, 64, 66
inhabitant of petitions Caitanya, 192 Mukunda dasa’s compared with gold,
inhabitants of question Caitanya on 63
Vaisnavas, 196 Raghunatha dasa mad with, 273


--- Page 339 ---
General Index 337
M Maya tatam idam sarvarm jagad
verses quoted, 71
Madhai poor fund of knowledge of, 195
delivered by Nityananda, 189 Prakasananda Sarasvati leader of san-
Madhava dasa nyasis, 189
Caitanya stayed at house of, 263-264 Mental speculation
Madhavendra Puri conceptions of good and bad in ma-
devotees discuss pastimes of, 173-174 terial world are, 40
went alone to Vrndavana, 294 pure devotee above, 194
Madhavidevi Mercy
never went to Vrndavana, 300 no one can check one withKrsna's, 281
Madhyama-adhikari of Caitanya on Amogha, 156
as preaching platform, 197 of Caitanya on Mohammedan gover-
Maha-bhagavata nor, 250
See: Pure devotees one crosses material ocean by
Mahabharata Caitanya's, 277
quoted on punishment of offenses to Mind
devotees, 139 of Caitanya is Vrndavana, 298
quoted on Yajapura, 231 of Pundarika Vidyanidhi polluted, 201
Maha-mantra only Krsna's service appeals to the, 74
accepted as the Lord, Himself, 57 Misra Purandara
chanted by one with clean heart, 143 Hiranya and Govardhana rendered ser-
chanting of is very important, 120 vice to, 270
Mahanila Mukunda dasa
as uncle of Krsna, 123 as inhabitant of Khanda, 61
Mahatmanas tu mam partha as royal physician, 64
verses quoted, 141 as son of Raghunandana, 62
Malini duty of to earn material and spiritual
as wife of Srivasa Pandita, 169 wealth, 68
cooks Caitanya’s favorite vegetables, hears pastimes of Madhavendra Puri,
184 174
Marh hi partha vyapasritya love of God of, 63
verses quoted, 21 Murari Gupta
Mantredvara travels to Jagannatha Puri, 166
Mohammedan governor accompanied as incarnation of Hanuman, 80
Caitanya past, 255-256 attached to service of Ramacandra,
Mardaraja 75-80
Prataparudra Maharaja gives orders to, induced by Caitanya to worship Krsna,
215 72-74
Material existence
by remembering Caitanya one is N
delivered from, 243
Mathura-dhama Na bhajanty avajananti sthanad
as place of pilgrimage, 221 quoted, 145
Maya Nadia
compared to a pot of mustard seeds, 92 brahmanas in given charity by Hiranya
maha-bhagavata can detect, 197 and Govardhana, 269


--- Page 340 ---
338 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta
Namaikarm yasya vaci Nityananda Prabhu
quoted, 195 consults with Caitanya, 185
Namo maha-vadanyaya delivered Jagai and Madhai, 189
verses quoted, 85 embraced by Caitanya, 192
Nanda Maharaja Krsnadasa servant of, 181
as father of Krsna, 48, 123 narrates pastimes of Madhavendra Pur’,
Nandana 174
as uncle of Krsna, 123 narrates pastimes of Saksi-gopala, 175
Na patis ca sa syan na mocayed not a prajapati, 22
quoted, 136 played at whirling the rod, 13
Na pritaye ‘nuragdya hy ৭78০ receives condensed milk, 172-173
verses quoted, 137 requested to remain in Bengal, 187
Narahari travels to see Caitanya, 166
as inhabitant of Khanda, 61 Nrsimha Tirtha
ordered to remain with Caitanya's as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101
devotees, 69
travels to Jagannatha Puri, 167
Narendra Lake ০
Bengali devotees arrive at, 178
Narottama dasa Thakura Odana-sasthi
cited on Krsna-Balarama as Gaura-Nitai, Pundarika Vidyanidhi attends, 199-201
299 Offenses
quoted on ideal devotee of Caitanya, must be avoided in chanting, 53
85 of atheists enumerated, 195
Na te viduh svartha-gatiri hi Orissa
quoted, 145 Caitanya waited at border of, 236
Navadvipa devotees of forbidden to accompany
as place of pilgrimage, 221 Caitanya, 207-208
devotees of travel to Jagannatha Puri, Sivananda Sena knows roads of, 168
166
Navadvipa-parikrama
quoted, 263 P
Nilacala
See:)agannatha Pur? Padma Purana
Niladri quoted on stages of reactions to sin,
See: Jagannatha Puri 88-89
Nilambara Cakravarti Padyavali
as grandfather of Caitanya, 270 quoted on holy name, 59
Nindam bhagavatah srnvas Panihati
verses quoted, 134 Caitanya arrives at, 257-258
Nindan kurvanti ye mudha Paramananda Pur?
verses quoted, 132 as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101
Nityananda Prabhu invited to lunch by Sarvabhauma, 101
assistants of listed, 22 remained with Caitanya at Puri, 97
as the body, 190 Pararh Brahman
as visnu-tattva, 22 everything as energy of, 71
considered human being by prakrta- Parasya brahmanah saktis tathedam
sahajiyas, 21-22 quoted, 71


--- Page 341 ---
General Index 339
Pastimes of Caitanya Paja traikaliki nityam
compared to pastimes of Krsna, verses quoted, 55
227-229 Pundarika Vidyanidhi
one becomes astonished by hearing, attends Odana-sasthi festival, 199-201
154 never went to Vrndavana, 300
one becomes glorious by hearing, 257 slapped by Lord Jagannatha and
Pastimes of Krsna Balarama, 201
as melodious, 74 Purascarana-sampanno
entered through mercy of Caitanya, verses quoted, 56
299 Purascarya
manifested and unmanifested, 120-121 as life force of chanting, 56
take place within Caitanya, 298 five activities of, 55-56
Patayo nabhyastyeran pitr-bhratr Puraskriya hi mantranam
verses quoted, 137 verses quoted, 56
Pichalda Pure devotees
Caitanya taken to, 255-256 humility of, 291
Pradyumna neophytes can’t understand devotional
met Caitanya at Puri, 287 ingredients of, 51
Prahlada Maharaja only can give krsna-bhakti, 21
Vasudeva Datta as incarnation of, 86 only desire of, 194
Prakasananda Sarasvati receive instructions through heart, 191
delivered by Caitanya, 189 symptoms of, 197-198
Prakrta-sahajiyas Purification
engage in sense gratification, 299- by chanting holy name, 250
300 Purusottama
think that Nityananda Prabhu is a See: Jagannatha Puri
human being, 21-22
Pranatibhis ca bhajantam sam
quoted, 194 R
Prapancikataya buddhya
verses quoted, 279 Radha-desa
Prasada Krsnadasa resident in, 181
distributed by Caitanya, 179 Caitanya absorbed in ecstasy in,
distributed by Nityananda, 173 298-299
See also: Food Raghava Pandita
Prataparudra Maharaja Caitanya describes pure devotional ser-
arranged for palace ladies to see vice of, 33-43
Caitanya, 216-218 Caitanya stayed at house of, 258-259
consults with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Raghunandana
and Ramananda Raya, 161 as father of Mukunda dasa, 62
humility of, 291 as inhabitant of Khanda, 61
meeting of Caitanya and, 210-213 constantly served the temple of Krsna,
orders of for Caitanya's service, 68, 69
213-216 Raghunatha
Premadasa See: Ramacandra
commentary of quoted, 263 Raghunatha dasa
Premanijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena as son of Govardhana Majumadara,
verses quoted, 121, 300 268, 270


--- Page 342 ---
340 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Raghunatha dasa Rohini
engaged in household duties without as mother of Krsna, 123
attachment, 282 Rapa Gosvami
met Caitanya at $antipura, 267, 271 advised to develop Vindavana, 299
Ramacandra delivered by Caitanya, 189
gives credit to Hanuman, 190 humility of, 290-291
Murari Gupta attached to service of, instructed to preach, 187
75-80 met Caitanya at Ramakeli, 289
Ramai Rdpa-nardyana River
travels to Jagannatha Puri, 166 Pichalada on bank of, 236
Ramakeli
Rapa and Sanitana met Catianya at, ৪
289
visited by Caitanya, 265 Sacidevi
Ramananda Raya as mother of Caitanya, 61, 177
Caitanya's separation from, 234 gave Caitanya permission to go to
consults with Prataparudra Maharaja, Vindavana, 284-285
161 Sacimata
met Caitanya at Puri, 287 Caitanya ate everything offered by,
never went to Vrndavana, 300 27-32
permits Caitanya to go to Vrndavana, met Caitanya at house of Advaita, 264
204-206 Sacrifice
tricked Caitanya, 203-204 if he utters the holy name, candala can
Ramananda Vasu perform, 248
questions Caitanya, 49 $akha-nirnayamrta
Ramarcana-candrika quoted on Amogha Pandita, 155-156
quoted on initiation, 57 Saksi-gopala
Ratha-yatra , at Kataka, 175
attended annually by Bengali devotees, Salagrama-sila
202 brahmana must worship, 106
attended by Caitanya and devotees, Samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavarir
183 verse quoted, 277
Caitanya detained at Jagannatha Puri Sanatana Gosvami
until, 163 advised to develop Vindavana, 299
Gundica temple cleansed at time of, delivered by Caitanya, 189
180 humility of, 290-291
inhabitants of Kulina-grama invited to, instructed on three classes of devotees,
46 51-52
Rati-prema-taratamye bhakta instructed to preach, 187
quoted, 196 met Caitanya at Ramakeli, 289
Ravana Sannanda
kidnapped Sita, 17 as uncle of Krsna, 123
Regulative principles Sannyasis
neophyte advances by following, 52 expected to collect food from house-
Remuna holder, 124
devotees visit Lord Gopinatha at, 171 should not cook for themselves, 101
Renunciation ten who were with Caitanya named,
real and false, 278-279 101


--- Page 343 ---
General Index 341
Santipura Senses
Caitanya stayed at, 174 the Lord not understood through ma-
Caitanya visited house of Advaita at, terial, 58
265 tongue controlled by service, 58
Raghunatha dasa met Caitanya at, 267, Sikhi Mahiti
271 met Caitanya at Puri, 287
Santustalolupa daksa dharma-jha never went to Vrndavana, 300
verses quoted, 137 Sin
Saptagrama holy name annihilates reactions to, 59
Hiranya and Govardhana as residents liberation from by chanting holy name,
of, 268 251
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Padma Purana quoted on stages of reac-
Amogha as son-in-law of, 125 tion of, 88-89
as ksetra-sannydsi, 222 relief from reactions of, 52-53
consults with Prataparudra Maharaja, Vaisnavas delivered from reactions to,
161 88-89
delivered by Caitanya, 189 Sitadevi
met Caitanya at Puri, 287 accompanies Advaita Acdrya to Jagan-
ordered to worship Lord Jagannatha, 71 natha Puri, 168
permist Caitanya to go to Vrndavana, as mother of Acyutananda, 168
204-206 Siva
Sathi as daughter of, 125 quoted on Vaisnava worship, 189
Sathira Mata as wife of, 104 Sivananda Sena
Sarva-dharman parityajya accompanied by wife and son, 169
verses quoted, 88 Caitanya visited house of, 259
Sarva khalv idarh brahma instructed to attend the Gundica
quoted, 71 festival, 45
Sastra-yukti nahi jane 01003 never went to Vrndavana, 300
quoted, 195 takes charge of travelling party,
Sathi 167-168, 170-171
as daughter of Sarvabhauma, 125 Skanda Purana
Sathira Mata quoted on blaspheming Vaisnavas,
as wife of Sarvabhauma, 104 132-133
cooked for Caitanya, 104-105 Spiritual master
Sati considered ordinary human by 50-
quoted on blaspheming devotees, 134 called brahmanas, 145
Satyananda Bharati definition of, 63
as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101 necessity of initiation from, 54-58
Satyaraja Khan seen as ordinary man, 195
questions Caitanya on spiritual advan- , sets down regulative principles, 52
cement, 49-50 Sraddhavan jana haya bhakti-adhikari
Savyasacin , quoted, 195
See: Arjuna Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
Sei bhakta dhanya, ye na chade verses quoted, 53
verses quoted, 79 Sri caitanya-carita-maha-kavya
Sense gratification quoted, 260
interrupts devotional service, 194 Sri-krspa-caitanya radha-krsna
prakrta-sahajiyas engage in, 299-300 quoted, 299


--- Page 344 ---
342 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Sri-krspa-ganoddesa-dipika Sukhananda Puri
quoted on uncles of Krsna, 123 as sannyasiliving with Caitanya, 101
Sri Krsna-vijaya Sunila
, contents of described, 46-47 as uncle of Krsna, 123
Srimad-Bhagavatam Supreme Lord
Gunaraja Khan translated two cantos of, as non-different from maha-mantra, 57
47 not to be considered as demigod, 195
quoted on accepting things offered to See also: Krsna
the Lord, 120 Surrender
quoted on blaspheming devotees, 134 ,  Gitaquoted on, 88
quoted on Brahma's instruction from Svado ‘pi sadyah savanaya kalpate
the Lord, 191 quoted, 249
quoted on cutting off relationship with Svapnesévara
fallen husband, 137-138 invited Caitanya to eat, 209
quoted on envying devotees, 140 5৬৪09 Damodara
quoted on hearing and chanting, 248 as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101
quoted on intermediate Vaisnava, 195 delivers garlands to devotees, 177-178
quoted on killing a brahmana, 136 invited to lunch by Sarvabhauma, 102
quoted on Krsna’s fulfilling His devo- never went to Vindavana, 300
0665 promise, 228-229 remained with Lord at Puri, 97
quoted on materialistic devotees, 51 Syamasundara
quoted on material world as ocean, 277 Krsna known as, 121
quoted on men who are like asses or
cows, 299 T
quoted on nine types of devotional ser-
vice, 53
quoted on non-Vaisnava brahmanas, Tadiya-dusaka-janan
145 verses quoted, 133
quoted on qualification of a husband, Tarra vakya, kriya, mudra vijieha
136 quoted, 64
recited by professionals, 21 Tasmat tvam uttistha
ऽ Raghunandana verse quoted, 189-190
travels to Jagannatha Puri, 167 Tene brahma hrda
Srivasa Pandita quoted, 191
never went to Vindavana, 300 Te pacyante maha-ghore
travels with Malini to Jagannatha Puri, verses quoted, 133
166-169 Tesam satata-yuktanam
Srivasa Thakura verse quoted, 191
Caitanya takes lunch at home of, 184 Tulasi
Caitanya visited house of, 259 flowers of used to worship Caitanya, 6
50031539173 cakra
Caitanya wished to kill ]৭83। and uU
Madhai with, 189
Sudeva Universes
as uncle of Krsna, 123 destruction of not considered loss by
Sadras Krsna, 93-94
can take to Krsna consciousness, 21 float on waters of River Viraja, 90


--- Page 345 ---
General Index 343
Upadesamrta Vasudeva Datta
quoted on faith in chanting, 51 desired to suffer for conditoned souls,
quoted on madhyama-adhikari, 194 83-85
quoted on respecting Vaisnavas, 60 glorified by Caitanya, 81-82
Upananda more advanced than Christ, 84
as uncle of Krsna, 123 travels to Jagannatha Puri, 166
Uttama-adhikari Yadunandana Acarya as favorite of, 268
symptoms of, 197-198 Vedas
Utthana-dvadasi quoted on everything as energy of Lord,
Caitanya celebrated, 17-18 71
Vidyanidhi
Vv travels to Jagannatha Puri, 166
Vidya-vacaspati
Vacaspati Caitanya stayed at house of, 260-263
See: Vidya-vacaspati ordered to worship Ganges, 71
Vaikuntha Vijaya-dasami
Causal Ocean as surrounding waters of, Caitanya celebrated, 16-17
92 Caitanya departs for Vrndavana on day
Vaisnava of, 207
definition of, 60 Vinaiva diksam viprendra
Vaisnavas verse quoted, 57
activities of not easily understood, 64 Vina yena na siddhah syan
as liberal, 84 verses quoted, 56
brahmanas engaged in devotional ser- Viraja River
vice are, 144 universes float on waters of, 90
Caitanya opposed to pseudo-, 279 Visnu
delivered from sinful reactions, 88-89 seriousness of blaspheming, 133
duties of intermediate, 195-196 worship as secondary, 189
not to be considered material, 195 Visnu Puri
return to Bengal, 199 as sannyasi living with Caitanya, 101
Satyaraja inquiries on symptoms of, 50 Visnu-tattva
seriousness of blaspheming, 132-134 Brahma not, 191
Sri Krsna-vijaya valuable for, 47 Krsna as origin of, 195
symptoms of, 193-199 Visnu-yamala
three types of, 197-199 quoted on initiation, 54
worship of, 189 Visvasa
Vaisnavatama title explained, 243
as one type of Vaisnava, 199 Vrajendra-kumara
Vaninatha Raya as name of Krsna, 72
brings prasada to Caitanya, 179 Vrndavana
met Caitanya at Puri, 287 and Krsna are equally worshipable, 298
Vapanam dravinadanari sthanam as invincible, 293
verses quoted, 136 Caitanya denied permission to visit,
Vasudeva Datta 161-164
as householder, 44-45 Caitanya departs for, 207
as incarnation of Prahlada, 86 Caitanya kept from, 203
Caitanya visited house of, 259 Krsna's relatives in, 123


--- Page 346 ---
344 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Vrndavana Y
preaching more important than staying
in, 187-188 Yadunandana Acarya
wherever Caitanyastays is, 297-298 as spiritual master of family of
Vrndavana dasa Thakura Govardhana Majumadara, 268
described Caitanya’s pastimes, 184 Yadyapi anya bhaktih
described slapping of Pundarika quoted, 53
Vidyanidhi, 201 Yadyapi sri bhagavata-mate
pastimes of Caitanya described by, 266 verse quoted, 56
Yadyapi svarapato nasti
verse quoted, 57
WwW Ydjapura
Caitanya visits, 231
situation and history of, 231-232
Wife Yamesvara
should relinquish relationship with hus- Cadadhara Pandita given place to live
band who falls down, 135-138 at, 97
Women Yamuna River
can approach supreme destination, wherever Caitanya stays is, 297-298
21 Yasoda
can understand Sri Krsna-vijaya, 47 as foster mother of Krsna, 123
World, material Yasodeva
as one-fourth of creation, 94 as uncle of Krsna, 123
conceptions of good and bad in as Yasodhara
mental speculations, 40 as uncle of Krsna, 123
distinctions between good and bad Yasyatma-buddhih kunape tridhatuke
made in, 39 verses quoted, 299
divided from spiritual world by River Yatha kancanatarn yati
Viraja, 90 quoted, 55
identification with vanquished, 57 Yavata syat sva-nirvahah
like a big ocean, 277 verses quoted, 278
threemodes in, 145 Ye nindanti hrsikesam
World, spiritual verses quoted, 133
Brahma-samhita quoted on, 121 Yesarn tv anta-gatar papam
constitutes unlimited opulence of verses quoted, 144
Krsna, 92 Yogamaya *
divided from material world by River as sister of Krsna, 140
Viraja, 90 Yo hi bhagavatar lokam upahasam
no “pure or impure” in, 39 verses quoted, 132
Worship Yo si so ‘si namo ‘stu te
of Vaisnavas as topmost, 189 Caitanya worshiped Advaita Acarya by
saying, 1, 6-7


--- Page 347 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in this world
in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent
devotional scholar and the founder of sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic In-
stitutes), liked this educated young man and convinced him to dedicate his life to
teaching Vedic knowledge. 51112 Prabhupada became his student, and eleven
years later (1933) at Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura requested
Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge through the English language. In
the years that followed, Srila Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-
gita, assisted the Gaudiya Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance,
started an English fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and
checked the galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and
struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never stopped;
it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion, the
Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title “Bhaktivedanta.” In
1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada retired from married life, and four
years later he adopted the vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his
studies and writing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana,
where he lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and writing.
He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At Radha-Damodara,
Srila Prabhupada began work on his life's masterpiece: a multivolume translation
and commentary on the eighteen thousand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam
(Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada came to the
United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual master. Since that time,
His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes of authoritative translations,
commentaries and summary studies of the philosophical and religious classics of
India.

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila Prabhupada
was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great difficulty that he
established the International Society for Krishna Consciousness in July of 1966.
Under his careful guidance, the Society has grown within a decade to a world-
wide confederation of almost one hundred 39/73/7735, schools, temples, institutes
and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vindavana, an experimental Vedic com-
munity in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of New Vrndavana,
now a thriving farm community of more than one thousand acres, his students
have since founded several similar communities in the United States and abroad.

345


--- Page 348 ---
346 षा Caitanya-caritamrta

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and second-
ary education in the West by founding the Curukula school in Dallas, Texas. The
school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the beginning of 1975 the enroll-
ment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large international
center at $ridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also the site for a
planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the magnificent Krsna-
Balarama Temple and International Guest House in Vrndavana, India. These are
centers where Westerners can live to gain firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his books. Highly
respected by the academic community for their authoritativeness, depth and
clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in numerous college courses. His writ-
ings have been translated into eleven languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
established in 1972 exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus
become the world's largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and
philosophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most recent
work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —completed by Srila
Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali religious classic Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada has circled
the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to six continents. In
spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada continues to write prolifically.
His writings constitute a veritable library of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature
and culture.


--- Page 349 ---
न्व ऋ वग ण ष यना न कवाक्यता ডে द नव्य ey TF च्ल न aT ga
(continued from front flap)

Madhya-lila (the middle period), the
longest of the three, is a detailed narration of
Sri Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels
throughout India as a renounced mendicant,
teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and
mystic. Finally, Antya-lila (the final period)
concerns the last eighteen years of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s manifest presence, spent in
semiseclusion in Jagannatha Puri, Orissa.
During these final years, $ri Caitanya drifted
deeper and deeper into trances of spiritual
ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and
literary history, Eastern or Western.

, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, was a great saint and
a confidential disciple and student of
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the renowned
ascetic saint who was one of the most inti-
mate disciples of Sri Caitanya. He com-
menced work on the text while in his late
nineties and in failing health, as he vividly
describes in the text itself: “I have now be-
come too old and disturbed in invalidity.
While writing, my hands tremble. 1 cannot
remember anything, nor can | see or hear
properly. Still | write, and this is a great
wonder.” That he nevertheless completed,
under such debilitating conditions, the
greatest literary gem of medieval India is
surely one of the wonders of literary history.

The English translation and commentary is
the work of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished scholar and teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought.
He himself is a disciplic descendant of Sri
Caitanya, and his intimate familiarity with
the precepts of Caitanya Mahaprabhu emi-
nently qualifies him to present this impor-
tant classic to the English-speaking world.
The ease and clarity with which he ex-
pounds upon Sri Caitanya’s precepts lures
even a reader totally unfamiliar with Indian
religious tradition into a genuine under-
standing and appreciation of this profound
and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, pre-
sented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
represents a contribution of major impor-
tance to the intellectual, cultural and
spiritual life of contemporary man.


--- Page 350 ---
2 FOR Fr MADHYA-LILA
५ 3 ~- Volume 6
# च J ৯১৬ (৮ ৷
| # NN gr 4 9
| 1 > No Bi J Vi RI
१ SY i ¢ नम्‌ 1 +
| Q টং, ॥ „ + 4 CAITANYA
\ \ १ 45 न ९ ৫ A |
=, 9, ^ বন."
৮১৮৬. १. RT Fp 4 |
५ #3 ‡ - /
৮ ई wr vv 4 : { রণ A । y ४. The |
+ NF | CEC, a 1. |
॥ र vi Fa a5 ध. भक ০ न,
1১ রা & pss ४4
১ 3 ই we 12
(~ ५.8 2 4 ক 4 |!
11. > | ॥
॥ ५1. 1 oA রি ~ ` ৫ /
' ९4.44 / EN ५ ১৬১. |
४. ALE च्च : nN ॥ ४ i
< ’ ৮1)”
১ a /
29 "ज | HIS DIVINE GRACE
{4 ॥ A.C.Bhaktivedanta
न्य ৷ % i? Swami
MM সে সা. $ a
+ र ५ चः i “> $ > Prabhupada
£3 ¢ 4 ॐ |
3 LA» oy |
ক | J ॥ |
| ০ goa
$1i Caitanya-caritdmrta is the authorized work on the life and teachings of $i
Krsna Caitanya—the philosopher, saint, spiritual preceptor, mystic and divine
incarnation who pioneered a great social and religious movement in Sixteenth
| Century India. His teachings, which embody the highest philosophical and
| theolgoical truths, have affected centuries of religious and philosophical
| thinkers until the present day.
| This translation and commentary on the original Bengali text is the work of
| His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (pictured above), the |
| world's most distinguished scholar and teacher of Indian thought and culture
and author of the best-selling Bhagavad-gita As Its. This translation of $
| Caitanya-caritamrta represents a contribution of major importance to the THE
intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man. BHAKTIVEDANTA
| BOOK TRUST
|
| 00...

