
--- Page 1 ---
[|
Introduction

$ri Caitanya-caritamta is the principal work on the life and teachings of $ri
Krsna Caitanya. ঠা Caitanya is the pioneer of a great social and religious move-
ment which began in India a little less than five hundred years ago and which has
directly and indirectly influenced the subsequent course of religious and phi-
losophical thinking not only in India but in the recent West as well.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu is regarded as a figure of great historical significance.
However, our conventional method of historical analysis —that of seeing a man as
a product of his times —fails here. अ Caitanya is a personality who transcends the
limited scope of historical settings.

At a time when, in the West, man was directing his explorative spirit toward
studying the structure of the physical universe and circumnavigating the world in
search of new oceans and continents, Sri Krsna Caitanya, in the East, was in-
augurating and masterminding a revolution directed inward, toward a scientific
understanding of the highest knowledge of man's spiritual nature.

The chief historical sources for the life of जा Krsna Caitanya are the kadacas (di-
aries) kept by Murari Gupta and Svariipa Damodara Gosvami. Murari Gupta, a
physician and close associate of इन Caitanya’s, recorded extensive notes on the
first twenty-four years of $ri Caitanya’s life, culminating in his initiation into the
renounced order, sannyasa. The events of the rest of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's for-
ty-eight years are recorded in the diary of Svariipa Damodora Gosvami, another of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s intimate associates.

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is divided into three sections called 11125, which literally
means “pastimes” — Adi-lila (the early period), Madhya-lila (the middle period)
and Antya-lila (the final period). The notes of Murari Gupta form the basis of the
Adi-il3, and SvarGpa Damodara’s diary provides the details for the Madhya- and
Antya-lilas.

The first twelve of the seventeen chapters of Adi-lila constitute the preface for
the entire work. By referring to Vedic scriptural evidence, this preface establishes
Sri Caitanya as the avatara (incarnation) of Krsna (God) for the age of Kali—the
current epoch, beginning five thousand years ago and characterized by material-
ism, hypocrisy and dissension. In these descriptions, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
is identical with Lord Krsna, descends to liberally grant pure love of God to the
fallen souls of this degraded age by propagating sarkirtana—literally,
“congregational glorification of God” —especially by organizing massive public
chanting of the maha-mantra (Great Chant for Deliverance). The esoteric purpose
of Lord Caitanya's appearance in the world is revealed, his co-avataras and prin-
cipal devotees are described and his teachings are summarized. The remaining
portion of Adi-lil3, chapters thirteen through seventeen, briefly recounts his
divine birth and his life until he accepted the renounced order. This includes his
childhood miracles, schooling, marriage and early philosophical confrontations, as
well as his organization of a widespread sarikirtana movement and his civil disobe-
dience against the repression of the Mohammedan government.

vi


--- Page 2 ---
$ri Caitanya-caritamrta

The subject of Madhya-lila, the longest of the three divisions, is a detailed nar-
ration of Lord Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels throughout India as a
renounced mendicant, teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and mystic. Dur-
ing this period of six years, ঠা Caitanya transmits his teachings to his principal dis-
ciples. He debates and converts many of the most renowned philosophers and
theologians of his time, including Sankarites, Buddhists and Muslims, and incor-
porates their many thousands of followers and disciples into his own burgeoning
numbers. A dramatic account of Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s miraculous activities at
the giant Jagannatha Cart Festival in Orissa is also included in this section.

Antya-lila concerns the last eighteen years of ऽ Caitanya’s manifest presence,
spent in semiseclusion near the famous Jagannatha temple at Jagannatha Puri in
Orissa. During these final years, $i Caitanya drifted deeper and deeper into
trances of spiritual ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and literary history,
Eastern or Western. का Caitanya’s perpetual and ever-increasing religious
beatitude, graphically described in the eyewitness accounts of Svaripa Damodara
Cosvami, his constant companion during this period, clearly defy the investigative
and descriptive abilities of modern psychologists and phenomenologists of
religious experience.

The author of this great classic, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, born in the year
1507, was a disciple of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, a confidential follower of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Raghunatha dasa, a renowned ascetic saint, heard and
memorized all the activities of Caitanya Mahaprabhu told to him by Svaripa
Damodara. After the passing away of $i Caitanya and Svardpa Damodara,
Raghunatha dasa, unable to bear the pain of separation from these objects of his
complete devotion, traveled to Vrndavana, intending to commit suicide by jump-
ing from Govardhana Hill. In Vrndavana, however, he encountered Ripa Gosvami
and Sanatana Gosvami, the most confidential disciples of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
They convinced him to give up his plan of suicide and impelled him to reveal to
them the spiritually inspiring events of Lord Caitanya'’s later life. Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Gosvami was also residing in Vrndavana at this time, and Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami endowed him with a full comprehension of the transcendental life of ज
Caitanya.

By this time, several biographical works had already been written on the life of
$i Caitanya by contemporary and near-contemporary scholars and devotees.
These included $ Caitanya-carita by Murari Gupta, Caitanya-marigala by Locana
dasa Thakura and Caitanya-bhagavata. This latter text, a work by Vindavana dasa
Thakura, who was then considered the principal authority on आ Caitanya's life,
was highly revered. While composing his important work, Vindavana dasa, fearing
that it would become too voluminous, avoided elaborately describing many of
the events of Sri Caitanya’s life, particulary the later ones. Anxious to hear of these
later pastimes, the devotees of Vrndavana requested Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami,
whom they respected as a great saint, to compose a book to narrate these

vii


--- Page 3 ---
$n Caitanya-caritimrta
episodes in detail. Upon this request, and with the permission and blessings of the
Madana-mohana Deity of Vrndavana, he began compiling Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
which, due to its biographical excellence and thorough exposition of Lord
Caitanya’s profound philosophy and teachings, is regarded as the most significant
of biographical works on $ri Caitanya.

He commenced work on the text while in his late nineties and in failing health,
as he vividly describes in the text itself: “I have now become too old and dis-
turbed in invalidity. While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot remember any-
thing, nor can | see or hear properly. Still | write, and this is a great wonder.” That
he nevertheless completed, under such debilitating conditions, the greatest liter-
ary gem of medieval India is surely one of the wonders of literary history.

This English translation and commentary is the work of His Divine Crace A. C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of In-
dian religious and philosophical thought. His commentary is based upon two
Bengali commentaries, one by his teacher Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami,
the eminent Vedic scholar who predicted, “The time will come when the people
of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,” and the other by
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta’s father, Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

His Divine Crace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is himself a disciplic
descendant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he is the first scholar to execute
systematic English translations of the major works of Sri Caitanya'’s followers. His
consummate Bengali and Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with the
precepts of Sri Krsna Caitanya are a fitting combination that eminently qualifies
him to present this important classic to the English-speaking world. The ease and
clarity with which he expounds upon difficult philosophical concepts lures even a
reader totally unfamiliar with Indian religious tradition into a genuine understand-
ing and appreciation of this profound and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, presented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, represents a contribution of major im-
portance to the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man.

—The Publishers
viii


--- Page 4 ---
CHAPTER 17
The Lord Travels to Vrndavana

The following summary of the Seventeenth Chapter is given by Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. After attending the Ratha-yatra ceremony
of ऽतं Jagannatha, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu decided to start for Vrndavana. Sri
Ramananda Raya and Svarapa Damodara Gosvami selected a brahmana named
Balabhadra Bhattacarya to personally assist $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Early in the
morning before sunrise, the Lord started for the town of Kataka. North of Kataka,
He penetrated a dense forest and visited many tigers and elephants, whom He
engaged in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Whenever He had a chance to
visit a village, He would beg alms and acquire some rice and vegetables. If there
were no village, He would cook whatever rice remained and collect some spinach
from the forest to eat. $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased with the
behavior of Balabhadra Bhattacarya.

In this way the Lord passed through the jungle of Jharikhanda and finally
reached Varanasi. After taking His bath at the Manikarnika-ghata at Varanasi, He
met Tapana Misra, who took the Lord to his place and respectfully gave Him a
comfortable residence. At Varanasi, Vaidya Candrasekhara, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu'’s old friend, also rendered service unto Him. Seeing the behavior of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, one Maharastriya brahmana informed Prakasananda
Sarasvati, the leader of the Mayavadi sannyasis. Prakasananda made various ac-
cusations against the Lord. The Maharastriya brahmana was very sorry about this,
and he brought the news to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, inquiring from Him why
the Mayavadr sannyasis did not utter the holy name of Krsna. In reply, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said that they were offenders and that one should not associate
with them. In this way the Lord bestowed His blessings upon the brahmana.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu next passed through Prayaga and Mathura and then
took His lunch at the home of a Sanodiya brahmana, a disciple of Madhavendra
Puri. He bestowed His blessings upon the brahmana by accepting lunch at his
place. Thereafter the Lord visited the twelve forests of Vrndavana and was filled
with great ecstatic love. As He toured the Vrndavana forests, He heard the chirp-
ing of parrots and other birds.

TEXT 1
গচ্ছন্‌ বৃন্দাবনং গৌরো। व) ददने यनन वटन |
প্রেমোব্মন্তান্‌ ACNE, S31] বিদথে কৃষ্ণজঙ্জিনঃ॥ > ॥
1


--- Page 5 ---
2 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
gacchan vrndavanarm gauro
vyaghrebhaina-khagan vane
premonmattan sahonnrtyan
vidadhe krspa-jalpinah
SYNONYMS

gacchan —going; vrndivanam —to Vindavana-dhama; gaurah—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; vyaghra—tigers; ibha—elephants; ena—deer; khagan—and birds;
vane —in the forest; prema-unmattan —maddened by ecstatic love; saha—with;
unnrtyan—dancing; vidadhe —made; krsna—Lord Krsna's name; jalpinah—
chanting,

TRANSLATION

On His way to Vrndavana, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed through
the forest of Jharikhanda and made all the tigers, elephants, deer and birds
dance and chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Thus all these animals were
overwhelmed by ecstatic love.

TEXT 2
জয় জয় (AcE জয় নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়।দ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ ২ ॥
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS

jaya jaya—all glories; gauracandra—to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya—all glo-
ries; nityananda—to Nitydnanda Prabhu; jaya—all glories; advaita-candra—to
Advaita Acarya; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-vinda—to the devotees of Lord
Caitanya.

TRANSLATION

All glories to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All

glories to Advaitacandra! All glories to all the devotees of the Lord!
TEXT 3
শরৎকাল হৈল, প্রভুর চলিতে হৈল মতি |
রামানন্দ-স্বরূপ-সঙ্গে [ALS যুকতি ॥ ৩ ॥


--- Page 6 ---
Text 5] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 3
sarat-kala haila, prabhura calite haila mati
ramananda-svarapa-sange nibhrte yukati

SYNONYMS
Sarat-kala haila—autumn arrived; prabhura—of Lord 571 Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
calite—to travel; haila—was; mati—desire; ramananda—Ramananda Raya;
svarapa—Svarapa Damodara; sarige—with; nibhrte—solitary; yukati—consulta-
tion.
TRANSLATION
When autumn arrived, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu decided to go to
Vrndavana. In a solitary place, He consulted with Ramananda Raya and
Svaripa Damodara Gosvami.
TEXT 4
“মোর সহায় কর যদি, তুমি-দুই जन |
তবে আমি ब।49 দেখি gatas ॥ ৪ ॥
“mora sahaya kara ১৭01, tumi-dui jana
tabe ami yana dekhi sri-vrndavana
SYNONYMS
mora—of Me; sahdaya—help; kara—you do; yadi—if; tumi—you; dui jana—
two persons; tabe—then; 0711-1; yana—going; dekhi—shall see; ঠা
vrndavana—>Sri Vindavana-dhama.
TRANSLATION
The Lord requested Ramananda Raya and Svaripa Damodara Gosvami to
help Him go to Vrndavana.
TEXT 5
রাত্র্যে উঠি' বনপথে পলাঞা साव |
একাকী যাইব, कोट] সঙ্গে wl লইব ॥ ৫ ॥
ratrye uthi’ vana-pathe 023/373 yaba
ekaki yaiba, kahon sange na la-iba
SYNONYMS
ratrye uthi’—rising at night; vana-pathe—on the road to the forest; palaina
yaba—I shall go away secretly; ekaki yaiba—I shall go alone; kahorn—anyone;
sange —with Me; na la-iba—I shall not take.


--- Page 7 ---
4 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, 1 shall leave early in the morning and go in-
cogpnito, taking the road to the forest. | shall go alone and not take anyone
with Me.
TEXT 6
(कष्ट যদি সঙ্গ লইতে পাছে উঠি” ধায়।
সবারে রাখিব, যেন কেহ নাহি যায় ॥ ৬ ॥
keha yadi sanga la-ite pache uthi’ dhaya
sabare rakhiba, yena keha nahi yaya
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; yadi—if; sanga la-ite—to take company; pache—behind;
uthi’—getting up; dhaya—runs; sabare—everyone; rakhiba—please stop;
yena—so that; keha—anyone; nahi yaya—does not go.
TRANSLATION
‘If someone wants to follow Me, please stop him. | don’t want anyone to go
with Me.
TEXT 7
व्थमन्न zee! सोञ्छ দিবা, ना मानिव। gee ।
তোমা-সবার “FLY পথে হবে মোর সুখ” ॥” ৭ ॥
prasanna hana ajna 0163, na maniba ‘duhkha’
toma-sabara ‘sukhe’ pathe habe mora ‘sukha’ ^
SYNONYMS
prasanna hana—being pleased; ana diba—give permission; na—do not;
maniba duhkha—become unhappy; toma-sabara—of all of you; sukhe—by the
happiness; pathe—on the road; habe —there will be; mora—My; sukha—happi-
ness.
TRANSLATION
‘’Please give Me your permission with great pleasure and do not be un-
happy. If you are happy, | shall be happy on My way to Vrndavana.”
TEXT 8
তুইজন कटर, — “তুমি ঈশ্বর “স্বতন্ত্র” ৷
যেই ইচ্ছ সেই করিবা, नङ्‌ “পরতঙ্ত্র। ॥ ৮ ॥


--- Page 8 ---
Text 10] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 5
dui-jana kahe, —‘tumi i$vara ‘svatantra’
yei iccha, sei kariba, naha ‘paratantra’
SYNONYMS
dui-jana kahe —the two persons replied; tumi—You; isvara—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; svatantra—completely independent; yei iccha—whatever
You desire; sei—that; kariba—You will do; naha—You are not; para-tantra—
dependent on anyone.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this, Ramananda Raya and Svariipa Damodara Gosvami
replied, ‘Dear Lord, You are completely independent. Since You are not
dependent on anyone, You do whatever You desire.
TEXT 9
কিন্তু আমা-দু'হার শুন এক निटवकटन |
“তোমার স্থখে আমার बः কহিল৷ আপনে ॥ > ॥
kintu ama-dunhara suna eka nivedane
‘tomdara sukhe amara sukha’——kabhila apane
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; ama-dunhara—of both of us; suna—please hear; eka nivedane —
one submission; tomdra sukhe —by your happiness; amara sukha—our happiness;
kahila—You have already stated; apane —personally.
TRANSLATION
“10231 Lord, kindly hear our one petition. You have already said that You will
derive happiness from our happiness. This is Your own statement.
TEXT 10
আমা-দু'হার মনে তবে AT FY ZR |
এক নিবেদন যদি ধর, দয়াময় ॥ ১০ ॥
ama-dunhara mane tabe bada ‘sukha’ haya
eka nivedana yadi dhara, dayamaya
SYNONYMS
ama-dunhara—of us two; mane—in the mind; tabe—therefore; bada—very
much; sukha haya—there is happiness; eka nivedana—one request; yadi—if;
dhara—You accept; daya-maya—merciful.


--- Page 9 ---
6 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch.17
TRANSLATION
‘If You will please accept just one request, we shall be very, very happy.
TEXT 11
“উত্তম ত্রান্মণ” এক সঙ্গে অবশ্য চাহি।
few! করি” few! দিবে, যাবে পাত্র বহি ॥ >> ॥
‘uttama brahmana’ eka sange avasya cahi
bhiksa kari’ bhiksa dibe, yabe patra vahi’
SYNONYMS
uttama brahmana—a high-class brahmana,; eka—one; sarige—along; avasya—
certainly; cahi—we want; bhiksa kari’—collecting alms; bhiksa dibe —will give
You food; yabe—will go; patra vahi’—bearing Your waterpot.
TRANSLATION
‘Our Lord, please take one very nice brihmana with You. He will collect
alms for You, cook for You, give You prasada, and carry Your waterpot while
traveling.
TEXT 12
বনপথে যাইতে নাহি “ভোজ্যান্ন-ত্রাহ্মণ।
আজ্ঞা কর, — সঙ্গে চল্দুক বিপ্র একজন ॥ ১২ ॥
vana-pathe yaite nahi ‘bhojyanna’-brahmana
ajna kara, —sange caluka vipra eka-jana’
SYNONYMS
vana-pathe—on the forest path; yaite—going; nahi—there is not; bhojya-
anna-brahmana—a brahmana whose food can be accepted; 3/03 kara—please
give permission; sarge—along; caluka—may go; vipra—brahmana; eka-jana—
one person.
TRANSLATION
‘“When You go through the jungle, there will be no brahmana available from
whom You can accept lunch. Therefore please give permission for at least one
pure brahmana to accompany You.”


--- Page 10 ---
Text 14] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 7
TEXT 13
প্রভু FE, — निज-मक्तौ $icel না लेव |
একজনে নিলে, আমনের मटन দুঃখ হইব ॥ ১৩॥
prabhu kahe, — nija-sargi kanho na la-iba
eka-jane nile, anera mane duhkha ha-iba
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; nija-sarigi—of My associates;
kanho—anyone; na—not; la-iba—I shall take; eka-jane nile—if | take someone;
anera mane —in the mind of others; duhkha ha-iba—there will be unhappiness.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, 1 shall not take any of My associates with
Me because if | choose someone, all the others will be unhappy.
TEXT 14
নুতন সঙ্গী হইবেক,-_ (WH चन्न मन |
এঁছে যবে পাই, তবে লই “এক” জন ॥ ১৪ ॥
1104112 sangi ha-ibeka, — snigdha yanra mana
aiche yabe pai, tabe la-i ‘eka’ jana
SYNONYMS
natana—new; sangi—associate; ha-ibeka—must be; snigdha—very peaceful;
yarra—whose; mana—mind; aiche—such; yabe—if; pdi—| get; tabe—then;
la-i—I take; eka jana—one person.
TRANSLATION
‘Such a person must be a new man, and he must have a peaceful mind. If |
can obtain such a man, | shall agree to take him with Me.”
PURPORT
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu formerly went to South India, a brahmana
named Kala Krsnadasa went with Him. It was Kala Krsnadasa who fell victim to a
woman, and $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had to take the trouble to free him from
the clutches of the gypsies. Therefore the Lord here says that He wants a new
man who is peaceful in mind. One whose mind is not peaceful is agitated by cer-


--- Page 11 ---
8 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
tain drives, especially sex desire, even though he be in the company of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Such a man will become a victim of women and will fall down even
in the company of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Maya is so strong that
unless one is determined not to fall victim, even the Supreme Personality of God-
head cannot give protection. The Supreme Lord and His representative always
want to give protection, but a person must take advantage of their personal con-
tact. If one thinks that the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His representative
is an ordinary man, he will certainly fall down. Thus Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu did
not want a person like Kala Krsnadasa to accompany Him. He wanted someone
who was determined, who had a peaceful mind and who was not agitated by
ulterior motives.
TEXT 15
স্বরূপ কহে, - এই বলভদ্র-ভট্টাচার্য।
তোমাতে স্থঙ্গিষ্ধ বড়, পণ্ডিত, সাধু: আর্য ॥ ১৫ ॥
svarapa kahe, —ei balabhadra-bhattacarya
tomate susnigdha bada, pandita, sadhu, arya
SYNONYMS

svarapa kahe—Svarapa Damodara Gosvami said; ei—this; balabhadra-bhat-
tacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; tomate—unto You; su-snigdha—affectionate;
bada—very; pandita—educated; sadhu—honest; arya—advanced in spiritual
consciousness.

TRANSLATION

Svariipa Damodara then said, “Here is Balabhadra Bhatticarya, who has
great love for You. He is an honest, learned scholar, and he is advanced in
spiritual consciousness.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted a new man, not a person like Kala Krsnadasa
who would fall for women. Svartipa Damodara therefore immediately pointed out
anew brahmana named Balabhadra Bhattacarya. ऽ Svarapa Damodara Gosvami
had studied this person very thoroughly and had seen that he had great love for
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Not only did he love the Lord, but he was also learned
and honest. He was not duplicitous, and he was advanced in Krsna consciousness.
According to a Bengali proverb, ati bhakti corera laksana: “Too much devotion is a
symptom of a thief.” A person who assumes himself to be a great devotee but
mentally is thinking of something else is duplicitous. One who is not duplicitous is


--- Page 12 ---
Text 17] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 9
called sadhu. Svarapa Damodara immediately pointed out that Balabhadra Bhat-
tacarya was quite fit to accompany the Lord because he was a learned scholar and
was simple and had great love for S$riKrsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He was also ad-
vanced in Krsna consciousness; therefore he was considered appropriate to ac-
company the Lord as a personal servant.

The word snigdha (very peaceful) and the word su-snigdha (affectionate) are
used in verses fourteen and fifteen, and they are also found in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.1.8): brayuh snigdhasya sisyasya guravo guhyam apy uta. “A disciple who has
actual love for his spiritual master is endowed, by the blessings of the spiritual
master, with all confidential knowledge.” Srila Sridhara Svami has commented that
the word snigdhasya means prema-vatah.The word prema-vatah indicates that
one has great love for his spiritual master.

TEXT 16
প্রথমেই তোমা-সঙজে আইলা (भौर TTS |
ই"হার ইচ্ছা আছে AAS করিতে ॥ ১৬ ॥
prathamei toma-sange 3//3 83093 haite
inhara iccha ache ‘sarva-tirtha’ karite
SYNONYMS

prathamei—in the beginning; toma-sarige—with You; aili—came; gauda
haite—from Bengal; inhara iccha—his desire; ache —is; sarva-tirtha—all places of
pilgrimage; karite—to go see.

TRANSLATION
‘In the beginning, he came with You from Bengal. It is his desire to see and
visit all the holy places of pilgrimage.
TEXT 17
Ta সঙ্গে আছে বিপ্র এক 'ভূত্য”।
zl পথে করিবেন সেবা-ভিক্ষা-কৃত্য ॥ ১৭ ॥
inhara sarge ache vipra eka ‘bhrtya’
inho pathe karibena seva-bhiksa-krtya
SYNONYMS

inhara sarge —with him; ache—is; vipra—brahmana; eka—one; bhrtya—ser-
vant; inho—this man; pathe—on the way; karibena—will do; seva—service;
bhiksa-krtya—and arrangements for cooking.


--- Page 13 ---
10 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
‘‘In addition, You may take another brahmana who would act as a servant en
route and make arrangements for Your food.
TEXT 18
दे'डोटन्न সঙ্গে লহ यकि, সবার হয় সুখ ।
বম-পথে যাইতে তোমার নহিবে কোন “দুঃখ ॥ ১৮॥
inhare sange laha yadi, sabara haya ‘sukha’
vana-pathe yaite tomara nahibe kona ‘duhkha’
SYNONYMS
inhare —him; 53786 —along; laha—You accept; yadi—if; sabara haya sukha—
everyone will be happy; vana-pathe—on the path through the jungle; yaite —
going; tomara—Your; nahibe —there will not be; kona—any; duhkha—difficulty.
TRANSLATION
“If You can also take him with You, we will be very happy. If two people go
with You through the jungle, there will certainly be no difficulty or inconve-
nience.
TEXT 19
সেই विथ বহি' নিবে বস্ত্রাহ্মুভাজন।
ভট্টাচার্য ভিক্ষা দিবে করি” ভিক্ষাটন ॥ >> ॥
sei ৮1013 vahi’ nibe vastrambu-bhajana
bhattacarya bhiksa dibe kari’ bhiksatana
SYNONYMS
sei vipra—the other brahmana; vahi’ nibe—will carry; vastra-ambu-bhajana—
the cloth and waterpot; bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; bhiksa dibe —will
arrange for cooking; kari’—performing; bhiksa-atana—collecting alms.
TRANSLATION
‘The other brahmana can carry Your cloth and waterpot, and Balabhadra
Bhattacarya will collect alms and cook for You.”


--- Page 14 ---
Text 22] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 11
TEXT 20
তাঁহার वन প্রভু অঙ্গীকার কৈল।
বলভদ্র-ভট্ট।চার্যে সঙ্গে করি” निन ॥ ২০ ॥
tanhara vacana prabhu angikara kaila
balabhadra-bhattacarye sange kari’ nila
SYNONYMS
tanhara vacana—his words; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; angikara
kaila—accepted; balabhadra-bhattacarye—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; sarge kari’
nila—took with Him.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the request of Svariipa Damodara
Pandita and agreed to take BalabhadraBhattacarya with Him.
TEXT 21
পূর্বরাত্র্যে জগন্নাথ দেখি' 'আজ্জ” fel ।
শেষ-রাত্রে উঠি' প্রভু চলিলা tel ॥ ২১ ॥
parva-ratrye jagannatha dekhi’ ‘ajna’ lana
Sesa-ratre uthi’ prabhu calila lukana
SYNONYMS
parva-ratrye—on the previous night; jagannatha dekhi’—seeing Lord )agan-
natha; ajna laha—taking permission; Sesa-ratre—near the end of night; uthi’—ris-
ing; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calila—started; lukana—without being
seen.
TRANSLATION
On the previous night, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had visited Lord Jagan-
natha and taken His permission. Now, near the end of night, the Lord got up
and started immediately. He was not seen by others.
TEXT 22
প্রাতঃকাঙল্ে ভক্তগণ প্রভু না দেখিয়া 1
অন্বেষণ করি” ফিরে ব্যাকুল ₹9। ॥ ২২ ॥


--- Page 15 ---
12 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
pratah-kale bhakta-gana prabhu na dekhiya
anvesana kari’ phire vyakula hana
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—early in the morning; bhakta-gana—all the devotees; prabhu—
Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na dekhiya—not seeing; anvesana kari’—search-
ing; phire—wander; vyakula haia—becoming very anxious.
TRANSLATION
Because the Lord had departed, the devotees, unable to see Him early in the
morning, began to search for Him with great anxiety.
TEXT 23
স্বরূপ-গোসাঞ্জি সবায় टेकल নিবারণ ।
নিবৃত্ত 9 ACE সবে জানি” প্রভুর मन ॥ ২৩ ॥
svarapa-gosani sabaya kaila nivarana
nivrtta hana rahe sabe jani’ prabhura mana
SYNONYMS
svarapa-gosani—Svaripa Damodara Gosvami; sabdya—unto everyone;
kaila—did; nivarana—forbidding; nivrtta hafna—being restrained; rahe —remain;
sabe—all; jani’—knowing; prabhura mana—the mind of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
While all the devotees were searching for the Lord, Svariipa Damodara
restrained them. Then everyone fell silent, knowing the mind of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 24
প্রসিদ্ধ পথ ছাড়ি” প্রভু উপপথে एनिन।।
FB ডাহিনে করি” वटन প্রবেশিলা ॥ ২৪ ॥
prasiddha patha chadi’ prabhu upapathe calila
‘kataka’ dahine kari’ vane pravesila
SYNONYMS
prasiddha—well-known; patha—public way; chadi’—giving up; prabhu—5Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; upapathe—through a bypass; calili—began to walk;


--- Page 16 ---
Text 26} The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 13
kataka—the city of Kataka; dahine—on the right side; kari’—keeping; vane—
within the forest; pravesila—entered.
TRANSLATION
The Lord abandoned walking on the well-known public road and went in-
stead along a bypass. He thus kept the city of Kataka on His right as He en-
tered the forest.
TEXT 25
নির্জন-বনে চলে প্রভু FRA नश |
হস্তি-ব্যাঘ্র পথ ছাড়ে প্রভুরে দেখিয়া ॥ ২৫ ॥
nirjana-vane cale prabhu krspa-nama lana
hasti-vyaghra patha chade prabhure dekhiya
SYNONYMS
nirjana-vane—in a solitary forest; cale—walks; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; krspa-nama lana—chanting the holy name of Krsna; hasti—
elephants; vyaghra—tigers; patha chide —leave the path; prabhure—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dekhiya—seeing.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord passed through the solitary forest chanting the holy name of
Krsna, the tigers and elephants, seeing Him, gave way.
TEXT 26
পালে-পালে वख, হস্তী, গণ্ডার, শুকরগণ |
তার মধ্যে আবেশে প্রভু করিল। গমন ॥ ২৬ ॥
pale-pale vyaghra, 7350, gandara, $akara-gana
tara madhye avese prabhu karila gamana
SYNONYMS
pale-pale—in flocks; vyaghra—tigers; hasti—elephants; gandara—rhinoceros;
sakara-gana—boars; tara madhye—through them; avese—in ecstasy; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karila gamana—passed.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord passed through the jungle in great ecstasy, packs of tigers,
elephants, rhinoceros and boars came, and the Lord passed right through
them.


--- Page 17 ---
14 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 17
TEXT 27
দেখি” ভট্টাচার্যের মনে হয় মহাভয় |
প্রভুর প্রতাপে SIAL এক পাশ হয় ॥ ২৭ ॥
dekhi’ bhattacaryera mane haya maha-bhaya
prabhura pratape tara eka pasa haya
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; bhattacaryera—of Bhattacarya; mane—in the mind; haya—
there was; maha-bhaya—great fear; prabhura pratape —by the influence of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tara—they; eka pasa haya—stand to one side.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhatticirya was very much afraid to see them, but by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s influence, all the animals stood to one side.
TEXT 28
একদিন পথে ব্যাঘ করিয়াছে শয়ন ।
আবেশে তার গায়ে প্রভুর লাগিল চরণ ॥ २४. ॥
eka-dina pathe vyaghra kariyache sayana
avese tara gaye prabhura lagila carana
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; pathe —on the path; vyaghra—a tiger; kariyache sayana—
was lying down; avese—in ecstatic love; tara gaye—on his body; prabhura—of
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; lagila—touched; carana—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
One day a tiger was lying on the path, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, walk-
ing along the path in ecstatic love, touched the tiger with His feet.
TEXT 29
প্রভু কহে,-__কহ FA, ব্যাঘ উঠিল ।
“কৃষ্ণ ‘FR কহি” ব্যাঘ নাচিত্ে লাগিল ॥ ২৯ ॥
prabhu kahe, —kaha 1005$037 vyaghra uthila
‘krspa’ ‘krsna’ kahi’ vyaghra nacite lagila


--- Page 18 ---
Text 31) The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 15
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; kaha krsna—please chant Hare
Krsna; vyaghra uthila—the tiger got up; krspa krsna kahi’—chanting the holy
name of Krsna; vyaghra—the tiger; nacite—to dance; lagila—began.
TRANSLATION
The Lord said, “Chant the holy name of Krsna!”’ The tiger immediately got
up and began to dance and chant, “Krsna! Krsna!”’
TEXT 30
আর দিনে মন্ধাপ্রভু করে নদী স্থান |
TERY আইল করিতে জলপান ॥ ৩০ ॥
९
ara dine mahaprabhu kare nadi snana
matta-hasti-yatha aila karite jala-pana
SYNONYMS
ara dine —another day; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare —does;
nadi snana—bathing in the river; matta-hasti-yatha—a herd of maddened
elephants; aila—came; karite—to do; jala-pana—drinking water.
TRANSLATION
Another day, while Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was bathing in a river, a herd
of maddened elephants came there to drink water.
TEXT 31
প্রভু जल-क्ङ করে, আগে ङो WZ |
‘Fp কহ” বলি” প্রভু জল ফেলি” মারিল। ॥ ৩১ ॥
prabhu jala-krtya kare, age hasti aila
‘krsna kaha’ bali’ prabhu jala pheli’ marila
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jala-krtya kare—bathed and was
chanting the Gayatri mantra within the water; age—in front; hasti—the
elephants; aila—came; krsna kaha—chant Hare Krsna; bali’—saying; prabhu—
Lord शा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jala pheli’—throwing water; marila—struck.


--- Page 19 ---
16 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION

While the Lord was bathing and murmuring the Gayatri mantra, the
elephants came before Him. The Lord immediately splashed some water on
the elephants and asked them to chant the name of Krsna.

PURPORT

Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing the
part of a very great advanced devotee. On the maha-bhagavata platform, the
devotee makes no distinction between friends and enemies. On that platform he
sees everyone as a servant of Krsna. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini
Suni caiva svapake ca
panditah sama-darsinah
“The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned
and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a dog-eater [outcaste].”
(Bg. 5.18)

A maha-bhagavata, being learned and advanced in spiritual consciousness, sees
no difference between a tiger, an elephant or a learned scholar. The test of ad-
vanced spiritual consciousness is that one becomes fearless. He envies no one,
and he is always engaged in the Lord's service. He sees every living entity as an
eternal part and parcel of the Lord, rendering service according to his capacity by
the will of the Supreme Lord. As Bhagavad-gita confirms:

sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto

mattah smrtir jidnam apohanarh ca
“I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness.” (Bg. 15.15)

The maha-bhagavata knows that Krsna is in everyone's heart. Krsna is dictating,
and the living entity is following His dictations. Krsna is within the heart of the
tiger, elephant and boar. Therefore Krsna tells them, “Here is a maha-bhagavata.
Please do not disturb him.” Why, then, should the animals be envious of such a
great personality? Those who are neophytes or even a little progressed in devo-
tional service should not try to imitate the maha-bhagavata. Rather, they should
only follow in their footsteps. The word anukara means “imitating,” and anusara
means “trying to follow in the footsteps.” We should not try to imitate the ac-
tivities of a maha-bhagavata or 51 Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Our best efforts should
be exerted in trying to follow them according to our ability. The maha-bhagavata’s


--- Page 20 ---
Text 33] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 17
heart is completely freed from material contamination, and he can become very
dear even to fierce animals like tigers and elephants. Indeed, the maha-bhagavata
treats them as his very intimate friends. On this platform there is no question of
envy. When the Lord was passing through the forest, He was in ecstasy, thinking
the forest to be Vrndavana. He was simply searching for Krsna.
TEXT 32
সেই জল-বিন্দু-কণা লাগে যার sia ।
সেই ‘FR FR কহে, প্রেমে নাচে, গায় ॥ ৩২ ॥
sei jala-bindu-kana lage yara gaya
sei 'krsna’ *krsna’ kahe, preme nace, gaya
SYNONYMS
sei—those; jala—of water; bindu—drops; kana—particles; lage —touch;
yara—whose; gaya—body; sei—they; krspa krsna—Krsna, Krsna; kahe—say;
preme —in ecstasy; nace —dance; gaya—sing.
TRANSLATION
The elephants whose bodies were touched by the water splashed by the
Lord began to chant, “/Krsna! Krsna!’ and dance and sing in ecstasy.
TEXT 33
কেহ टम পড়ে, কেহ FAC চিৎকার |
দেখি” ভট্টাচার্যের মনে হয় চমৎকার ॥ ৩৩ ॥
keha bhame pade, keha karaye citkara
dekhi’ bhattacaryera mane haya camatkara
SYNONYMS
keha—some of them; bhdme —on the ground; pade —fall down; keha—some
of them; karaye—perform; cit-kara—screaming; dekhi’—seeing; bhattacaryera—
of Bhattacarya; mane—in the mind; haya—there was; camatkara—astonishment.
TRANSLATION
Some of the elephants fell to the ground, and some screamed in ecstasy.
Seeing this, Balabhadra Bhattacarya was completely astonished.


--- Page 21 ---
18 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 34
পথে যাইতে করে AY উচ্চ जर कौन |
মধ্কুর কণ্টধ্বনি শুনি” আইসে FRatel ॥ ৩৪ ॥
pathe yaite kare prabhu ucca sankirtana
madhura kantha-dhvani Suni’ aise mrgi-gana
SYNONYMS
pathe yaite—while passing on the path; kare—does; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ucca—loud; sankirtana—chanting of Hare Krsna; madhura—sweet;
kantha-dhvani—the voice from His throat; suni’—hearing; aise—came; mrgi-
gana—she-deer.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chanted very loudly while passing
through the jungle. Hearing His sweet voice, all the does came near Him.
TEXT 35
ডাহিনে-বামে ধ্বনি শুনি” যায় প্রভু-সঙ্জগে |
প্রভু তার অঙ্গ মুছে, श्री क পড়ে রঙ্গে ॥ ৩৫ ॥
dahine-vame dhvani suni’ yaya prabhu-sange
prabhu tara anga muche, sloka pade range
SYNONYMS
dahine-vame —right and left; dhvani—vibration; suni’—hearing; yaya—they
follow; prabhu-sange—with the Lord; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tara—
their; anga—bodies; muche—pats; sloka—verse; pade —recites; range —in great
curiosity.
TRANSLATION
Hearing the Lord's great vibration, all the does followed Him left and right.
While reciting a verse with great curiosity, the Lord patted them.
TEXT 36
ধন্যাঃ স্ম মূঢ়মতয়োইপি হরিণ্য এতা
যা নন্দনন্দনমুপাত্ত-বিচিত্রবেশম্‌ ৷
আকর্্য বেণুরণিতং সহক্ষষ্ণসারাঃ
পূজাং দধুবিরচিতাং প্রণয়াবলোকৈঃ ॥ ৩৬ ॥


--- Page 22 ---
Text 37] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 19
dhanyah sma miadha-matayo ‘pi harinya eta
ya nanda-nandanam upatta-vicitra-vesam
akarnya venu-ranitam saha-krsna-sarah
pajarn dadhur viracitarh pranayavalokaih
SYNONYMS
dhanyah—fortunate, blessed; sma—certainly; miadha-matayah—foolish, with-
out good sense; api—although; harinyah—she-deer; etah—these; yah—who;
nanda-nandanam—the son of Mahardja Nanda; upatta-vicitra-vesam—dressed
very attractively; akarnya—hearing; venu-ranitam—the sound of His flute; saha-
krsna-sarah —accompanied by the black deer (their husbands); pajam dadhuh—
they worshiped; viracitam—performed; pranaya-avalokaih —by their affectionate
glances.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Blessed are all these foolish deer because they have approached the son of
Maharaja Nanda, who is gorgeously dressed and is playing on His flute. In-
deed, both the does and the bucks worship the Lord with looks of love and
affection.”
PURPORT
This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.21.11) spoken by the gopis of
Vrndavana.
TEXT 37
হেনকালে ব্যাঘ্র তথা আইল नीषए-जांङ |
ব্যাঘ-ম্বগী মিলি” চলে মহাঙও্ছভুর সাথ ॥ ৩৭ ॥
hena-kale vyaghra tatha aila panca-sata
vyaghra-mrgi mili’ cale mahaprabhura satha
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; vyaghra—tigers; tatha—there; aila—came; ‘panca-
sata—five to seven; vyaghra-mrgi—the tigers and deer; mili’—coming together;
cale—go; mahaprabhura satha—with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was passing through the jungle, five or
seven tigers came. Joining the deer, the tigers began to follow the Lord.


--- Page 23 ---
20 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 38
দেখি” মহাপ্রভুর “বৃন্দাবন”-স্মৃতি হৈল |
বৃন্দ।বন-গুণ-বর্ণন শ্লোক পড়িল ॥ ৩৮ ॥
dekhi’ mahaprabhura ‘vrndavana’-smrti haila
vrndavana-guna-varnana sloka padila
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; mahaprabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vrndavana—of
the holy land of Vindavana; smrti haila—there was remembrance; vrndavana—of
Sri Vrndavana; guna—of the qualities; varpana—description; sloka—verse;
padila—recited.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the tigers and deer following Him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu im-
mediately remembered the land of Vrndavana. He then began to recite a verse
describing the transcendental qualitity of Vrndavana.
TEXT 39
यख caRsfQedats नर्मन्‌ ন্ব-মৃগাদয়ঃ ।
মিত্রাণীবাজিতাবাস-দ্রুত-রুট্‌-তর্ষণাদিকম্‌ 1 ৩৯ ॥
yatra naisarga-durvairah
sahasan nr-mrgadayah
mitranivajitavasa-
druta-rut-tarsanadikam
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; naisarga—by nature; durvairah—living in enmity; saha-asan—
live together; nr—human beings; mrga-adayah—and animals; mitrani—friends;
iva—like; ajita—of Lord Sri Krsna; avasa—residence; druta—gone away; ruj—
anger; tarsana-adikam—thirst and so on.
TRANSLATION
“Vrndavana is the transcendental abode of the Lord. There is no hunger,
anger or thirst there. Though naturally inimical, both human beings and fierce
animals live together there in transcendental friendship.”


--- Page 24 ---
Text 41] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 21
PURPORT
This is a statement from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.13.60). After stealing the
cowherd boys, calves and cows of $ti Krsna, Lord Brahma kept them asleep and
hid them. After a moment, Brahma returned to see Krsna's condition. When he
saw that Krsna was still busy with His cowherd boyfriends and animals and was
not disturbed, Lord Brahma appreciated the transcendental opulence of
Vrindavana.
TEXT 40
“কৃষ্ণ কৃষ্ণ কহ” IW প্রভু যবে বলিল ।
‘TR কহি” ব্যাঘ-ম্বগ নাচিতে লাগিল ॥ ৪০ ॥
‘krsna krsna kaha’ kari’ prabhu yabe balila
‘krsna’ kahi’ vyaghra-mrga nacite lagila
SYNONYMS
krsna krsna kaha—chant Krsna, Krsna; kari’—in this way; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; yabe —when; balila—uttered; krsna kahi’—chanting the holy name
of Krsna; vyaghra-mrga—the tigers and deer; nacite lagila—began to dance.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘Chant Krsna! Krsna!” the tigers and
deer began to dance and chant, “Krsna!’’
TEXT 41
নাচে, FT ব্যাম্রগণ মৃগীগণ-সঙ্গে ।
বলভদ্রে-ভট্টাচার্য দেখে অপূর্ব-রঙ্গে ॥ ৪১॥
nace, kunde vyaghra-gana mrgi-gana-sange
balabhadra-bhattacarya dekhe apurva-rarige
SYNONYMS
nace —dance; kunde—jump; vyaghra-gana—the tigers; mrgi-gana-sarige—
with the does; balabhadra-bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; dekhe —sees;
aparva-rarge —with great wonder.
TRANSLATION
When all the tigers and does danced and jumped, Balabhadra Bhattacarya
saw them and was struck with wonder.


--- Page 25 ---
22 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 42
ব্যাষঘ-স্বগ खट्ट করে আলিঙ্গন |
মুখে মুখ দিয় করে SDT চুম্বন ॥ ৪২ ॥
vyaghra-mrga anyonye kare alingana
mukhe mukha diya kare anyonye cumbana
SYNONYMS
vyaghra-mrga—the tigers and deer; anyonye—one another; kare—do;
alingana—embracing; mukhe mukha diya—touching one anothers’ mouths;
kare —do; anyonye cumbana—kissing one another.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, the tigers and deer began to embrace one another, and, touching
mouths, they began to kiss.
TEXT 43
কৌতুক দেখিয়া Ag হাসিতে wife |
তা-সবাকে তাহ टोः আগে চলি” গেলা ॥ ৪৩ ॥
kautuka dekhiya prabhu hasite lagila
ta-sabake tahan chadi’ age cali’ gela
SYNONYMS
kautuka dekhiya—seeing this fun; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; hasite
lagila—began to smile; ta-sabake—all of them; tahan chadi’—leaving there;
age —forward; cali’ gela—advanced.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw all this fun, He began to smile. Finally
He left the animals and continued on His way.
TEXT 44
ময়ূরাদি পক্ষিগণ প্রভুরে দেখিয়া ।
সঙ্গে চলে, “কৃষ্ণ বলি” নাচে ग 29] ॥ 88 ॥
mayaradi paksi-gana prabhure dekhiya
sange cale, ‘krspa’ bali’ nace matta hana


--- Page 26 ---
Text 46] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 23
SYNONYMS
maytra-adi—beginning with peacocks; paksi-gana—different types of birds;
prabhure—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhiya—seeing; sarge cale—go with
Him; krsna bali’—chanting the holy name of Krsna; nace —dance; matta hafna—
becoming mad.
TRANSLATION
Various birds, including the peacock, saw $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
began to follow Him, chanting and dancing. They were all maddened by the
holy name of Krsna.
TEXT 45
“হুরিবোল” वनि" প্রভু করে উচ্চধ্বনি |
चुलर] - ATES, সেই ধ্বনি শুনি” ॥ ৪৫ ॥
‘hari-bola’ bali’ prabhu kare ucca-dhvani
vrksa-lata——praphullita, sei dhvani suni’
SYNONYMS
hari-bola—the vibration of Hari-bol; bali’—chanting; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kare —makes; ucca-dhvani—a loud sound; vrksa-lata—the trees
and creepers; praphullita—very jubilant; sei—that; dhvani—sound; suni’—hear-
ing.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord loudly chanted ‘“Hari bol!” the trees and creepers became
jubilant to hear Him.
PURPORT
The loud chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is so powerful that it can even
penetrate the ears of trees and creepers—what to speak of animals and human
beings. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu once asked Haridasa Thakura how trees and
plants could be delivered, and Haridasa Thakura replied that the loud chanting of
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra would benefit not only trees and plants but insects
and all other living beings. One should therefore not be disturbed by the loud
chanting of Hare Krsna, for it is beneficial not only to the chanter but to everyone
who gets an opportunity to hear.
TEXT 46
“ারিখণ্ডে' স্থাবর-জঙ্গম আছে TS |
কৃষ্ণনাম দিয়া কৈল প্রেমেতে TAG ॥ ৪৬ ॥
‘jharikhande’ sthavara-jangama ache yata
krsna-nama diya kaila premete unmatta


--- Page 27 ---
24 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
jharikhande—in the place known as Jharikhanda; sthavara-jarigama—moving
and not moving; ache—there are; yata—all; krsna-nama diya—giving them the
holy name of Lord Krsna; kaila—made; premete—in ecstasy; unmatta—mad.
TRANSLATION
Thus all living entities—some moving and some standing still in the forest
of Jharikhanda—became maddened by hearing the holy name of Lord Krsna
vibrated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
The great forest of Jharikhanda is a great tract of land including Atagada,
Dhenkanala, Angula, Lahara, Kiyaijhada, Bamada, Bonai, Gangapura, Chota
Nagapura, Yasapura and Saraguja. All these places, which are covered with moun-
tains and jungles, are known as Jharikhanda.
TEXT 47
যেই গ্রাম দিয়া যান, सो] করেন স্থিতি ।
সে-সব গ্রামের লোকের হয় “প্রেমভক্তি” ॥ ৪৭ ॥
yei grama diya yana, yahan karena sthiti
se-saba gramera lokera haya ‘prema-bhakti’
SYNONYMS
yei grama—which villages; diya yana—the Lord goes through; yahan—where;
karena—takes; sthiti—rest; se-saba—all those; gramera—of the villages;
lokera—of the people; haya—there is awakening of; prema-bhakti—ecstatic love
of God.
TRANSLATION
In all the villages through which the Lord passed and in all the places He
rested on His journey, everyone was purified and awakened to ecstatic love of
God.
TEXTS 48-49
(कङ्‌ যদি তার মুখে শুনে FPA ।
ভার মুখে আন শুনে তার মুখে আন ॥ ৪৮ ॥
সবে ‘FR হরি” वनि' নাচে, কান্দে, হাসে ।
পরণ্পরায় “বৈষ্ণব হুইল সর্বদেশে ॥ 85 ॥


--- Page 28 ---
Text 50] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 25
keha yadi tanra mukhe sune krspa-nama
tanra mukhe ana sune tanra mukhe ana
sabe ‘krsna’ ‘hari’ bali’ nace, kande, hase
paramparaya ‘vaispava’ ha-ila sarva dese
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; yadi—when; tanra mukhe —from His mouth; Sune —hears;
krsna-nama—chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra; tarra mukhe —from the mouth
of such chanters; dna sune—someone else hears; tanra mukhe—and from his
mouth; dna—someone else; sabe —all of them; krspa—Lord Krsna's holy name;
hari —another holy name of the Lord; bali’—chanting; nace—dance; kande —cry;
hase —smile; paramparaya—by disciplic succession; vaisnava—devotees; ha-
ila—became; sarva-dese—in all countries.
TRANSLATION
When someone heard the chanting of the holy name from the mouth of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and someone else heard this chanting from that second
person, and someone again heard this chanting from the third person, every-
one in all countries became a Vaisnava through such disciplic succession.
Thus everyone chanted the holy name of Krsna and Hari, and they danced,
cried and smiled.
PURPORT
The transcendental power or potency of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is herein
explained. First, the holy name is vibrated by $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When
someone hears from Him directly, he is purified. When another person hears from
that person, he also is purified. In this way the purification process is advanced
among pure devotees. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and no one can claim His potency. Nonetheless, if one is a pure devo-
tee, hundreds and thousands of men can be purified by his vibration. This po-
tency is within every living being, provided he chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra
offenselessly and without material motives. When a pure devotee chants of-
fenselessly, another person will become a Vaisnava, and from him another
Vaisnava will emerge. This is the parampara system.
TEXT 50
যতপি প্রভু লোক-সংঘট্টের ATA |
প্রেম ‘OR করেন, বাহিরে না প্রকাশে ॥ ৫০ ॥


--- Page 29 ---
26 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
yadyapi prabhu loka-sanighattera trase
prema ‘gupta’ karena, bahire na prakase
SYNONYMS

yadyapi—although; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; loka-sanghattera—of
crowds of people; trase—being afraid; prema—ecstasy; gupta karena—keeps
hidden; bahire—externally; na—does not; prakase—manifest.

TRANSLATION

The Lord did not always manifest His ecstasy. Being afraid of a great assem-

bly of people, the Lord kept His ecstasy concealed.
TEXT 51
তথাপি छत्र দর্শন-শ্রবণ-প্রভাবে।
সকল দেশের লোক হইল CARLA ॥ ৫১ ॥
tathapi tanra darsana-sravana-prabhave
sakala desera loka ha-ila ‘vaisnave’
SYNONYMS

tathapi—still; tanra—His; darsana—of seeing; sravana—of hearing; prabhave —
by the potency; sakala—all; desera—of countries; loka—people; ha-ila—be-
came; vaispave —pure devotees of the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not manifest His natural ecstatic

love, everyone became a pure devotee simply by seeing and hearing Him.
PURPORT

Srila Rapa Gosvami has described Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu as maha-vadanya-
avatara, the most munificent incarnation. Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
not physically present now, simply by chanting His holy name ($ri-krsna-caitanya
prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vinda) people
throughout the world are becoming devotees. This is due to the ecstatic chanting
of the holy name of the Lord. It is said that a pure devotee can see the Lord every
moment, and because of this he is empowered by the Lord. This is confirmed in
Brahma-sarnhita: premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu
vilokayanti. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared five hundred years ago, but it can-
not be said that now the potency of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra 15 less powerful


--- Page 30 ---
Text 53] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 27
than it was in His presence. By hearing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu through the
parampara system, one can be purified. Therefore in this verse it is said: tathapi
tanra darsana-sravana-prabhave. It is not that everyone is able to see Krsna or Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu physically, but if one hears about Him through books
like Sri Caitanya-caritamrta and through the parampara system of pure Vaisnavas,
there is no difficulty in becoming a pure Vaisnava, free from mundane desires and
personal motivations.
TEXT 52
গৌড়, वक्त, উৎকল, দক্ষিণ-দেশে fara |
লোকের निख।त् কৈল আপনে ভ্রমিয়া ॥ ৫২ ॥
gauda, banga, utkala, daksina-dese giya
lokera nistara kaila apane bhramiya
SYNONYMS
gauda—Bengal; banga—East Bengal; utkala—Orissa; daksina-dese —southern
India; giya—going; lokera—of all the people; nistara—liberation; kaila—did;
apane —personally; bhramiya—touring.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally toured Bengal, East Bengal,
Orissa and the southern countries, and He delivered all kinds of people by
spreading Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 53
মণুরা যাইবার ছলে আসেন ঝা রিখণ্ড।
ভিন্লপ্রায় লোক তাহঁ। পরম-পাষণড ॥ ৫৩ ॥
mathura yaibara chale 35973 jharikhanda
bhilla-praya loka (303/) parama-pasanda
SYNONYMS
mathura—to Mathura; yaibara—of going; chale—on the pretext; asena—
came; jharikhanda—to Jharikhanda; bhilla-praya—like the Bheels, a kind of low
people; loka—people; tahan—there; parama-pasanda—without God conscious-
ness.


--- Page 31 ---
28 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to Jharikhanda on His way to
Mathura, He found that the people there were almost uncivilized and were
devoid of God consciousness.
PURPORT
The word bhilla refers to a class of men belonging to the Bheels. The Bheels are
like Black Africans, and they are lower than sadras. Such people generally live in
the jungle, and $f Caitanya Mahaprabhu had to meet them.
TEXT 54
নাম-প্রেম দিয়। কৈল সবার নিস্তার |
চৈতন্ত্যের গুঢ়লীল।৷ বুঝিতে শক্তি কার ॥ ৫৪ ॥
nama-prema diya kaila sabara nistara
caitanyera gadha-lila bujhite Sakti kara
SYNONYMS
nama-prema diya—bestowing upon them ecstatic love and the holy name;
kaila—did; sabara nistara—liberation of all of them; caitanyera—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; gadha-lila—confidential pastimes; bujhite—to understand; sakti—
the power; kara—who has.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave even the Bheels an opportunity to chant the
holy name and come to the platform of ecstatic love. Thus He delivered all of
them. Who has the power to understand the transcendental pastimes of the
Lord?
PURPORT
As evidence of 57 Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mercy, we are experiencing that the
people of Africa are taking to Krsna consciousness, chanting and dancing and tak-
ing prasada like other Vaisnavas. This is all due to the power of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Who can understand how His potency is working all over the
world?
TEXT 55
वन দেখি' व्यम হয়-এই বৃন্দাবন” ।
শৈল দেখি” মনে হয়--এই “গোবর্ধন” ॥ ৫৫ ॥


--- Page 32 ---
Text 57] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 29
vana dekhi’ bhrama haya—ei ‘vrndavana’
Saila dekhi” mane haya—ei ‘govardhana’
SYNONYMS
vana dekhi’—seeing the forest; bhrama haya—there is illusion; ei—this;
vrndavana—Vrndavana forest; saila dekhi’—seeing a hill; mane haya—considers;
ei govardhana—this is Govardhana Hill.
TRANSLATION
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed through the Jharikhanda forest, He
took it for granted that it was Vrndavana. When He passed over the hills, He
took it for granted that they were Govardhana.
TEXT 56
सां] নদী দেখে তাহ মানয়ে-কালিন্দী” ৷
মহাপ্রেমাবেশে নাচে প্রভু পড়ে কান্দি” ॥ ৫৬ ॥
yahan nadi dekhe tahan manaye — ‘kalindi’
maha-premavese nace prabhu pade kandi’
SYNONYMS
yahan—wherever; nadi—river; dekhe—sees; tahan—there; manaye—con-
siders; kalindi—the River Yamuna; maha-prema-avese—in great ecstatic love;
nace —dances; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pade—falls down; kandi’'—
crying.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, whenever Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw a river, He immediately
accepted it as the River Yamuna. Thus while in the forest He was filled with
great ecstatic love, and He danced and fell down crying.
TEXT 57
পথে যাইতে ভট্টাচার্য শাক-মূল-ফল |
खां] যেই পায়েন তাহ লয়েন সকল ॥ ৫৭ |
pathe yaite bhattacarya saka-mala-phala
yahan yei payena tahan layena sakala


--- Page 33 ---
30 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
pathe yaite—while passing on the way; bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya;
$aka—spinach; mala—roots; phala—fruits; yahan—wherever; yei—whatever;
payena—he gets; tahan—there; layena—he takes; sakala—all.
TRANSLATION
Along the way, Balabhadra Bhattiacarya collected all kinds of spinach, roots
and fruit whenever possible.
TEXT 58
যে-গ্রামে রহেন প্রভু, তথায় AH |
পাঁচ-সাত জন আসি” করে নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ev ॥
ye-grame rahena prabhu, tathaya brahmana
panca-sata jana asi’ kare nimantrana
SYNONYMS
ye-grame—in whatever village; rahena—stays; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tathaya—there; brahmana—brahmanas; panca-sata jana—five or
seven persons; asi’—coming; kare—do; nimantrana—invitation.
TRANSLATION
Whenever Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited a village, a few brahmanas—
five or seven— would come and extend invitations to the Lord.
TEXT 59
(कङ्‌ অল্প আনি” দেয় ভট্টাচার্য-স্থানে |
কেহ एफ, দি, কেহ TS, খণ্ড আনে ॥ ৫৯ ॥
keha anna ani’ deya bhattacarya-sthane
keha dugdha, dadhi, keha ghrta, khanda ane
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; anna—grains; ani’—bringing; deya—delivers; bhattacarya-
sthane—before Balabhadra Bhattacarya; keha—someone; dugdha—milk;
dadhi—yogurt; keha—someone; ghrta—ghee; khanda—sugar; ane —brings.


--- Page 34 ---
Text 61] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 31
TRANSLATION
Some people would bring grains and deliver them to Balabhadra Bhat-
tacarya. Others would bring milk and yogurt, and still others would bring
ghee and sugar.
TEXT 60
যাহ বিপ্র নাহি তাহ “শুদ্রমহাজন” |
আসি” जटव ভট্টাচার্থে করে নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ৬০ ॥
yahan vipra nahi tahan ‘sadra-mahajana’
asi’ sabe bhattacarye kare nimantrana
SYNONYMS
yahan—wherever; vipra—brahmana; nahi—there is not; tahan—there; sadra-
maha-jana—devotees born in families other than brahmana; asi’—coming;
sabe—all of them; bhattacarye—to Balabhadra Bhattacarya; kare nimantrana—
make invitation.
TRANSLATION
In some villages there were no brihmanas; nonetheless, devotees born in
non-brahmana families came and extended invitations to Balabhadra Bhat-
tacarya.
PURPORT
Actually a sannyasi or a brahmana will not accept an invitation extended by a
person born in a lower family. However, there are many devotees who are raised
to the platform of brahmana by their initiation. These people are called $00/3-
mahajana. This indicates that one who is born in a non-brahmana family has ac-
cepted the brahmana status by initiation. Such devotees extended invitations to
Balabhadra Bhattacarya. A Mayavadi sannyasi will accept an invitation only from a
brahmana family, but a Vaisnava does not accept an invitation from a brahmana if
he does not belong to the Vaisnava sect. However, a Vaisnava will accept an in-
vitation from a brahmana or sadra-mahajana if that person is an initiated Vaisnava.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself accepted invitations from sadra-mahajanas, and
this confirms the fact that anyone initiated by a Vaisnava mantra can be accepted
as a brahmana. One can accept an invitation from such a person.
TEXT 61
ভট্টাচার্য পাক করে IP-TV |
वश्व) टन প্রভুর আনন্দিত মন ॥ ৬১ ॥


--- Page 35 ---
32 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
bhattacarya paka kare vanya-vyanjana
vanya-vyaiijane prabhura anandita mana
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; paka kare —cooks; vanya-vyanjana—all
varieties of forest vegetables; vanya-vyaijane—by such forest vegetables;
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dnandita mana—the mind is very happy.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya used to cook all kinds of vegetables gathered from
the forest, and $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased to accept these
preparations.
TEXTS 62-63
22-5113 দিনের खन्न রাখেন সংহতি |
যাহা गै বন, লোকের नाडिक বসতি ॥ ৬২ ॥
তাহ সেই खन्न ভট্টাচার্য করে পাক |
ফল-মূলে PAA করে, ID নানা শাক ॥ ৬৩ ॥
dui-cari dinera anna rakhena 53/1009(/
yahan sanya vana, lokera nahika vasati
tahan sei anna bhattacarya kare paka
phala-mdale vyanjana kare, vanya nana saka
SYNONYMS
dui-cari—two to four; dinera—of days; anna—food grains; rakhena—keeps;
sarhhati—in stock; yahan—wherever; sanya vana—the solitary forest; lokera—of
people; nahika—there is not; vasati—habitation; tahar—there; sei—those;
anna—food grains; bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; kare paka—cooks;
phala-mile—with roots and fruits; vyanjana kare—he prepares vegetables;
vanya—from the forest; nana saka—many kinds of spinach.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya used to keep a stock of food grains that would last
from two to four days. Where there were no people, he would cook the grains
and prepare vegetables, spinach, roots and fruits collected from the forest.


--- Page 36 ---
Text 66] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 33
TEXT 64
পরম সন্তোষ প্রভুর বন্য-ভোজমনে |
মহাস্থখ পান, যে দিন রহেন নির্জনে ॥ ৬৪ ॥
parama santosa prabhura vanya-bhojane
maha-sukha pana, ye dina rahena nirjane
SYNONYMS
parama—very much; santosa—satisfaction; prabhura—of the Lord; vanya-bho-
jane —in eating vegetables collected from the forest; maha-sukha pana—gets
great happiness; ye dina—on which day; rahena—stays; nirjane—in a solitary
place.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was always very happy to eat these forest vegetables, and He was
even happier when He had an opportunity to stay in a solitary place.
TEXT 65
ভট্টাচার্য সেব। করে, CCE যৈছে “कोजः |
তার বিপ্র বহে জলপাত্র-বহির্বাস ॥ ৬৫ ॥
bhattacarya seva kare, snehe yaiche ‘dasa’
tanra vipra vahe jala-patra-bahirvasa
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; seva kare—renders service; snehe—in
great affection; yaiche —exactly like; dasa—a servant; tarnra vipra—his brahmana
assistant; vahe—carries; jala-patra—the waterpot; bahirvasa—and garments.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya was so affectionate to the Lord that he was render-
ing service just like a menial servant. His assistant brahmana carried the
waterpot and garments.
TEXT 66
নিঝরেতে छटसभकटक स्नान তিনবার ।
দুইসন্ধ্যা অগ্নিতাপ কাণ্ঠের অপার ॥ ৬৬ ॥


--- Page 37 ---
34 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch.17
nirjharete usnodake snana tina-bara
dui-sandhya agni-tapa kasthera apara
SYNONYMS
nirjharete—in the waterfalls; uspa-udake—in warm water; snana—bath; tina-
bara—thrice; dui-sandhyda—morning and evening; agni-tapa—heating by a fire;
kasthera—of wood; apara—without limit.
TRANSLATION
The Lord used to bathe three times a day in the warm water of the water-
falls. He also used to heat Himself morning and evening with a fire made of the
limitless wood.
TEXT 67
নিরস্তর প্রেমাবেশে নির্জনে গমন |
RY অনুষ্ভবি” প্রভু কহেন বচন ॥ ৬৭ ॥
nirantara premavese nirjane gamana
sukha anubhavi’ prabhu kahena vacana
SYNONYMS
nirantara—always; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; nirjane—in a solitary place;
gamana—going; sukha anubhavi’—feeling happiness; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kahena—says; vacana—statement.
TRANSLATION
While traveling in this secluded forest and feeling very happy, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu made the following statement.
TEXT 68
শুন, SHIGE, “আমি গেলাঙ বছ-দেশ |
বনপথে দুঃখের कां] নাহি পাই (नने ॥ ৬৮ ॥
Suna, bhattacarya,— “ami gelana bahu-desa
vana-pathe duhkhera kahan nahi pai lesa
SYNONYMS
Suna—please hear; bhattacarya—My dear Bhattacarya; ami—I; gelana—trav-
eled; bahu-desa—many countries; vana-pathe —through the forest path;


--- Page 38 ---
Text 70] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 35
duhkhera—of unhappiness; kahan—anywhere; nahi pai—! do not get; lesa—
even a trace.
TRANSLATION
‘My dear Bhattacarya, | have traveled very far through the forest, and | have
not even slightly received any trouble.
TEXT 69
কৃষ্ণ কুপাল্দুঃ আমায় বহুত Fo टेकल। |
বনপথে আমি” আমায় বড় সুখ দিলা ॥ ৬৯ ॥
100503---10003/0, amaya bahuta krpa kaila
vana-pathe ani’ amaya bada sukha dila
SYNONYMS
krsna—Lord Krsna; krpalu—very kind; amaya—upon Me; bahuta—greatly;
krpa—mercy; kaili—showed; vana-pathe —on the path in the forest; ani’—bring-
ing; amaya—unto Me; bada—very much; sukha—happiness; dila—gave.
TRANSLATION
‘’Krsna is very merciful, especially to Me. He has shown His mercy by bring-
ing Me on this path through the forest. Thus He has given Me great pleasure.
TEXT 70
शर्व বৃন্দাবন RCS করিলাঙ বিচার ।
মাতা, গঙ্গা, ভক্তগণে দেখিব একবার ॥ ৭০ ॥
parve vrndavana yaite karilana vicara
mata, ganga, bhakta-gane dekhiba eka-bara
SYNONYMS
parve—formerly; vrndavana—to the holy place of Vrndavana; yaite —to go;
karilana—! did; vicara—consideration; mata—mother; ganga—the Ganges;
bhakta-gane—and devotees; dekhiba—I shall see; eka-bara—once.
TRANSLATION
‘Before this, | decided to go to Vrndavana and on the way see My mother,
the River Ganges and other devotees once again.


--- Page 39 ---
36 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 71
ভক্তগণ-সঙ্গে অবশ্য করিব निलन |
ভক্তগণে ACH FAG যাব “বৃন্দাবন” ॥ ৭১॥
bhakta-gana-sange avasya kariba milana
bhakta-gane sarge 127 yaba ‘vrndavana’
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gana-sange—with all My devotees; avasya—certainly; kariba—shall
do; milana—meeting; bhakta-gane—all the devotees; sarige—along with Me;
lana—taking; yaba—I shall go; vrndavana—to Vrndavana-dhama.
TRANSLATION
‘1 thought that once again | would see and meet all the devotees and take
them with Me to Vrndavana.
TEXT 72
এত ভাবি” গৌড়দেশে wae] গমন ।
মাতা, গঙ্গা र्ट (मथि, FA হৈল मन ॥ ৭২ ॥
eta bhavi’ gauda-dese (८2111८40) gamana
mata, ganga bhakte dekhi’ sukhi haila mana
SYNONYMS
eta bhavi’—thinking like this; gauda-dese —to Bengal; karilun gamana—I went;
mata—My mother; ganga—the Ganges; bhakte—devotees; dekhi’—seeing;
sukhi—happy; haila—became; mana—My mind.
TRANSLATION
“Thus | went to Bengal, and | was very happy to see My mother, the River
Ganges and the devotees.
TEXT 73
ভক্তগণে লঞ তবে চলিলাঙ রঙ্গে |
লক্ষকোটি লোক তাহ হৈল আমা-সঙ্গে ॥ ৭৩ ॥
bhakta-gane 1973 tabe calilana range
laksa-koti loka tahan haila ama-sange


--- Page 40 ---
Text 75] The Lord Travels to Vendavana 37
SYNONYMS
bhakta-gane—all the devotees; lana—taking; tabe—then; calilana rarnge—I
started with great pleasure; laksa-koti—many thousands and millions; loka—
people; tahan—there; haila—became; ama-sarige—My companions.
TRANSLATION
“However, when | started for Vrndavana, many thousands and millions of
people gathered and began to go with Me.
TEXT 74
সনাতন-মুখে কৃষ্ণ আম। শিখাইলা |
তাহা विन्न করি” বনপথে eel আইল) ॥ ৭৪ ॥
sanatana-mukhe krsna ama sikhaila
taha vighna kari’ vana-pathe 1275 aila
SYNONYMS
sanatana-mukhe —from the mouth of Sanatana; krsna—Lord Krsna; ama —unto
Me; sikhaila—gave instructions; tdha—that; vighna kari’—making a hindrance;
vana-pathe —on the path through the forest; laina—taking; aila—came.
TRANSLATION
“Thus | was going to Vrndavana with a big crowd, but through the mouth of
Sanatana, Krsna taught Me a lesson. Thus by making some impediment, He
has brought Me on a path through the forest to Vrndavana.
TEXT 75
কপার সমুদ্র, দীন-হীনে দয়াময় |
কৃষ্ণকূপ| বিনা কোন gu নাহি इद्र ॥” ৭৫ ॥
krpara samudra, dina-hine dayamaya
krsna-krpa vina kona ‘sukha’ nahi haya”
SYNONYMS
krpara samudra—ocean of mercy; dina-hine—unto the poor and fallen; daya-
maya—very merciful; krspa-krpa—the mercy of Krsna; vina—without; kona—
any; sukha—happiness; nahi haya—there is not.


--- Page 41 ---
38 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
“Krsna is an ocean of mercy. He is especially merciful to the poor and
fallen. Without His mercy, there is no possibility of happiness.”
TEXT 76
ভট্টাচার্যে আলিঙ্গিয়। তঁাহারে কহিল |
“তোমার প্রসাদে আমি এত खश পাইল” ॥ ৭৬ ॥
bhattacarye alingiya tanhare kahila
‘tomdra prasade ami eta sukha paila’
SYNONYMS
bhattacarye—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; alingiya—embracing; tanhare—unto
him; kahila—said; tomara praside—by your kindness; ami—I; eta—so much;
sukha—happiness; paila—got.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then embraced Balabhadra Bhatticarya and told
him, “It is only by your kindness that | am now so happy.”
TEXT 77
তেঁহো! কহেন, “তুমি “কৃষ্ণ, তুমি “দয়াময়” |
অধম জীব Gla, মোরে হইল। সদয় ॥ ৭৭ ॥
tenho (৪0679, — “tumi ‘krsna’, tumi ‘dayamaya’
adhama jiva mui, more ha-ila sadaya
SYNONYMS
tenho kahena—Bhattacarya said; tumi krspa—You are Krsna Himself; tumi—
You; daya-maya—merciful; adhama—the lowest of the low; jiva—living entity;
mufi—I|; more—unto me; ha-ili—You have been; sa-daya—favorable.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya replied, “My dear Lord, You are Krsna Himself, and
therefore You are merciful. | am a fallen living entity, but You have bestowed a
great favor upon me.


--- Page 42 ---
Text 80] The Lord Travels to Vendavana 39
TEXT 78
गू ছার, মোরে তুমি সঙ্গে Awl wigan |
Fol করি” মোর হাতে ‘AY ow কৈল। ॥ १४. ॥
171८101 chara, more tumi sange lana aila
krpa kari’ mora hate ‘prabhu’ bhiksa kaila
SYNONYMS
17/71 1; chara—most fallen; more —me; tumi—You; sarige—with; lana —tak-
ing; dila—have come; krpa kari’—showing great mercy; mora hate—from my
hand; prabhu—my Lord; bhiksa kaila—You accepted food.
TRANSLATION
“Sir, | am most fallen, yet You have brought me with You. Showing great
mercy, You have accepted food prepared by me.
TEXT 79
অধম-কাকেরে टेकल्‌। গকরুড়-সমান |
“স্বতন্ত্র ঈশ্বর” তুমি- স্বয়ং ভগবান্‌ ॥” ৭৯ ॥
adhama-kakere kaila garuda-samana
‘svatantra isvara’ tumi——svayarn bhagavan”
SYNONYMS
adhama-kakere —the most condemned crow; kaila—You have made; garuda-
samana—like Garuda; svatantra—independent; isvara—Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tumi—You; svayam bhagavan—the original Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
“You have made me Your carrier Garuda, although | am no better than a
condemned crow. Thus You are the independent Personality of Godhead, the
original Lord.
TEXT 80
Fe Fife বাচালং Age লজ্ঘয়তে গিরিম্‌ ।
TWF) তমহং বন্দে পরমানন্দ-মাধবম্‌ ॥ ৮০ ॥


--- Page 43 ---
40 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
makam karoti vacalam
panguri langhayate girim
yat-krpa tam ahari vande
paramananda-madhavam
SYNONYMS
makam—a person who cannot speak; karoti—makes; vacalam—an eloquent
speaker; pargum—a person who cannot even walk; larighayate —causes to cross
over; girim—the mountain; yat-krpa—whose mercy; tam—unto Him; aham—i;
vande —offer ~obeisances; parama-ananda—the transcendentally blissful;
madhavam —Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead has the form of sac-cid-ananda-
vigraha, transcendental bliss, knowledge and eternity. ॥ offer my respectful
obeisances unto He who turns the dumb into eloquent speakers and enables
the lame to cross mountains. Such is the mercy of the Lord.’ ”"
PURPORT
This is a quotation from the Bhavartha-dipika commentary on $rimad-
Bhagavatam (1.1.1).
TEXT 81
এইমত বলভদ্রে করেন खवन |
প্রেমসেব৷ করি” তুষ্ট কৈল প্রভুর मन ॥ ৮১ ॥
ei-mata balabhadra karena stavana
prema-seva kari’ tusta kaila prabhura mana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; balabhadra—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; karena—offers;
stavana—nprayers; prema-seva kari’—rendering service in love; tusta—pacified;
kaila—made; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
In this way Balabhadra Bhattacarya offered his prayers to the Lord. By ren-
dering service unto Him in ecstatic love, He pacified the Lord’s mind.


--- Page 44 ---
Text 83] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 41
TEXT 82
এইমত নানা-স্থুখে প্রভু আইল।৷ FA ।
মধ্যাহু-স্নান কৈল মণিকণিকায় আসি” ॥ ৮২ ॥
ei-mata nana-sukhe prabhu aila ‘kasi’
madhyahna-snana kaila manikarnikaya asi’
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; nana-sukhe—in great happiness; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; aila—came; kasi—to the holy place named Kasi; madhyahna-
snana—afternoon bath; kaila—took; manikarnikdya—to the bathing place
known as Manikarnika; dsi’—coming.
TRANSLATION
Finally the Lord with great happiness arrived at the holy place called Kasi.
There He took His bath in the bathing ghat known as Manikarnika.
PURPORT
Kasi is another name for Varanasi (Benares). It has been a place of pilgrimage
since time immemorial. Two rivers named Asih and Varuna merge there. Manikar-
nika is famous because, according to the opinion of great personalities, a be-
jeweled earring fell there from the ear of Lord Visnu. According to some, it fell
from the ear of Lord Siva. The word mani means “jewel,” and karnika means “from
the ear.” According to some, Lord Visvanatha is the great physician who cures the
disease of material existence by delivering a person through the ear, which
receives the vibration of the holy name of Lord Rama. Because of this, this holy
place is called Mani-karnika. It is said that there is no better place than where the
River Ganges flows, and the bathing ghat known as Manikarnika is especially
sanctified because it is very dear to Lord Visvanatha. In the Kasi-khanda it is said:
sarnsari-cintamanir atra yasmat tarakarn sajjana-karpikayam. sivo ‘bhidhatte saha-
santa-kale tad giyate ‘sau mani-karniketi. mukti-laksmi maha-pitha-manis tac-
caranabjayoh. karnikeyari tatah prahur yam jana mani-karnikam. According to the
Kasi-khanda, if one gives up his body at Manikarnika, he is liberated simply by
remembering Lord ৩1435 name.
TEXT 83
সেইকালে তপনমিশ্র করে AATF |
প্রভু দেখি” হৈল তার কিছু বিস্ময় জ্ঞান ॥ ৮৩ ॥


--- Page 45 ---
42 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
sei-kale tapana-misra kare ganga-snana
prabhu dekhi’ haila tanra kichu vismaya 64/12
SYNONYMS
sei-kale—at that time; tapana-misra—a brahmana named Tapana Misra; kare
ganga-snana—was taking his bath in the Ganges; prabhu dekhi’—seeing the
Lord; haila—there was; tarira—his; kichu—some; vismaya jAiana—astonishment.
TRANSLATION
At that time, Tapana Misra was taking his bath in the Ganges, and he was
astonished to see the Lord there.
TEXT 84
“পুর্বে শুনিয়াছি প্রভু কর্যাছ্ছেন AA |
নিশ্চয় করিয়। হৈল হৃদয়ে উল্লাস ॥ ৮৪ ॥
‘parve suniyachi prabhu karyachena sannyasa’
niscaya kariya haila hrdaye ullasa
SYNONYMS
parve —formerly; suniyachi—l have heard; prabhu—Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karyachena sannyasa—has accepted the renounced order of life;
niscaya kariya—ascertaining that; haila—there was; hrdaye—within the heart;
ullasa—great jubilation.
TRANSLATION
Tapana Misra then began to think, “I have heard that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has accepted the renounced order.” Thinking this, Tapana Misra
became very jubilant within his heart.
TEXT 85
প্রভুর চরণ ধরি করেন রোদন |
প্রভু তারে Thiel কৈল আলিজন॥ ৮৫ ॥
prabhura carana dhari’ karena rodana
prabhu tare uthana kaila alingana


--- Page 46 ---
Text 86] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 43
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of 67 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carana—lotus feet; dhari’—touching;
karena—does; rodana—crying; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tare —him;
uthana—raising; kaila—did; alingana—embracing.
TRANSLATION
He then clasped the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and began to cry.
The Lord raised him up and embraced him.
TEXT 86
প্রভু नयग গেলা বিশ্বেশ্বর-দরশনে ।
তবে আসি” দেখে বিন্দুমাধব-চরণে ॥ ৮৬ ॥
prabhu lana gela visvesvara-darasane
tabe asi’ dekhe bindu-madhava-carane
SYNONYMS
prabhu lana—taking the Lord; gela—he went; visvesvara-darasane —to visit the
temple of Viéve$vara; tabe—thereafter; asi’—coming; dekhe—see; bindu-
madhava-carane —the lotus feet of Bindu Madhava.
TRANSLATION
Tapana Misra then took Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to visit the temple of
Visvesvara. Coming from there, they saw the lotus feet of Lord Bindu
Madhava.
PURPORT
This Bindu Madhava is the oldest Visnu temple in Varanasi. Presently this
temple is known as Veni Madhava, and it is situated on the banks of the Ganges.
Formerly five rivers converged there, and they were named Dhutapapa, Kirana,
Sarasvati, Ganga and Yamuna. Now only the River Ganges is visible. The old
temple of Bindu Madhava, which was visited by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, was
later dismantled by Aurangzeb, the great Hindu-hating emperor of the Mogul
dynasty. In the place of this temple, he constructed a big majida, or mosque. Later,
another temple was constructed by the side of the mosque, and this temple is still
existing. In the temple of Bindu Madhava there are Deities of four-handed
Narayana and the goddess Laksmi. In front of these Deities is a column of Sri
Garuda, and along the side are deities of Lord Rama, Sita, Laksmana and Sri
Hanumaniji.


--- Page 47 ---
44 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
In the province of Maharastra is a state known as Satara. During the time of
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, the native prince belonged to the Vaisnava
cult. Being a brahmana, he took charge of worshiping the Deity. He was known as
Srimanta Balasaheba Pantha Maharaja. The state still bears the expenditure for
temple maintenance. The first king in this dynasty to take charge of worship in the
temple, two hundred years ago, was Maharaja Jagatjivana Rao Saheba.
TEXT 87
ঘরে লঞ। আইলা প্রভুকে আনন্দিত হঞা।
সেবা করি” নৃত্য করে ব্ু উড়াঞা ॥ ৮৭ ॥
ghare lana aila prabhuke anandita hana
seva kari’ nrtya kare vastra udana
SYNONYMS
ghare laAa—taking to his home; aildi—came; prabhuke—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; anandita haia—in great happiness; seva kari’—rendering service;
nrtya kare—began to dance; vastra udana—waving his cloth.
TRANSLATION
With great pleasure Tapana Misra brought Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his
home and rendered service unto Him. Indeed, he began to dance, waving his
cloth.
TEXT 88
প্রভুর চরণোদক সবংশে কৈল गोन |
ভট্টাচার্যের शंख কৈল San जनान ॥ ৮৮ ॥
prabhura caranodaka 53৮31756 kaila pana
bhattacaryera paja kaila kariya sammana
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; carana-udaka—the water used to
wash the lotus feet; sa-vamse —with his whole family; kaila pana—drank; bhat-
tacaryera—of Bhattacarya; puja—worship; kaila—performed; kariya—showing;
sammana—respect.
TRANSLATION
He washed the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and afterwards he
and his whole family drank the wash water. He also worshiped Balabhadra
Bhattacarya and showed him respect.


--- Page 48 ---
Text 90] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 45
TEXT 89
প্রভুরে fone করি” ঘরে few! দিল ।
বলভদ্র-ভট্টাচার্যে পাক করাইল ॥ ৮৯ ॥
prabhure nimantrana kari’ ghare bhiksa dila
balabhadra-bhattacarye paka karaila
SYNONYMS

prabhure nimantrana kari’—inviting the Lord; ghare—at home; bhiksa dila—
gave lunch; balabhadra-bhatticarye—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; paka karaila—he
had cook.

TRANSLATION

Tapana Misra invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to take lunch at his home,

and he had Balabhadra Bhattacarya cook.
PURPORT

While at Varanasi (Benares), $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at the house of
Tapana Misra. Near Tapana Miéra’s house was a bathing ghat known as
Paficanadi-ghata. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to take His bath daily at this ghat,
and He used to see the temple of Bindu Madhava. Then He took His lunch at
Tapana Miéra’s house. Near the Bindu Madhava temple is a big banyan tree, and it
is said that after eating, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to rest beneath the tree.
That banyan tree is still known today as Caitanya-vata. Gradually, due to changes
in language, the name became Yatana-vata. The local people still call that place
Yatana-vata.

Presently, beside a lane there is a tomb of Vallabhacarya, but there is no sign
that Caitanya Mahaprabhu ever lived there. Vallabhacarya was also known as
Mahaprabhu among his disciples. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu probably lived at
Yatana-vata, but there is no sign of Candrasekhara’s or Tapana Misra’s house, nor
is there sign of the Mayavadi sannyasi Prakasananda Sarasvati, with whom Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu discussed Vedanta-satra. A little distance from Yatana-vata
is a temple of Gaura-Nityananda established by $asibhasana Niyogi Mahasaya of
Calcutta. This temple is now managed by the mother-in-law of Sasibhaisana and
his brother-in-law Narayana-candra Ghosh.

TEXT 90
fowl করি” মহাপ্রভু করিল৷ শয়ন ।
মিশ্রপুজ্ঞ রঘু করে পাদ-সন্বাহুন ॥ ৯০ ॥


--- Page 49 ---
46 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
bhiksa kari’ mahaprabhu karila sayana
misra-putra raghu kare pada-samvahana
SYNONYMS
bhiksa kari’—after finishing His lunch; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
karila sayana—took rest; misra-putra—the son of Tapana Misra; raghu—Raghu;
kare—does; pada-samvahana—massaging the legs.
TRANSLATION
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took His rest after lunch, the son of Tapana
Misra, named Raghu, used to massage His legs.
TEXT 91
প্রভুর ‘carat’ মিশ্র সবংশে খাইল |
প্রভু আইল!” শুনি” চন্দ্রশেখর আইল ॥ ৯১ ॥
prabhura ‘$esanna’ misra savamse khaila
‘prabhu ३115“ Suni’ candrasekhara aila
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sesa-anna—remnants of food; misra—
Tapana Misra; sa-varhse—along with his family; khaila—ate; prabhu ila—the
Lord has arrived; suni’—hearing; candrasekhara aila—Candrasekhara came.
TRANSLATION
The remnants of food left by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu were taken by the
whole family of Tapana Misra. When news spread that the Lord had come,
Candrasekhara also came to see Him.
TEXT 92
মিথ্খের সখা ८ऊटङ) প্রভুর পূর্ব দাস ।
বৈদজাতি, লিখনবুত্তি, বারাণসী-বাস ॥ ৯২ ॥
misrera sakha tenho prabhura parva dasa
vaidya-jati, likhana-vrtti, varanasi-vasa
SYNONYMS
misrera sakha—friend of Tapana Misra; teriho—he; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; parva dasa—former servant; vaidya-jati—by caste a physician;
likhana-vrtti—by profession a clerk; varanasi-vasa—resident of Varanasi.


--- Page 50 ---
Text 94] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 47
TRANSLATION
Candrasekhara happened to be a friend of Tapana Misra’s, and he was long
known to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as His servant. He was a physician by
caste, and by profession he was a clerk. At the time he was living in Varanasi.
TEXT 93
RH প্রভু-পদে পড়ি' করেন রোদন |
প্রভু উঠি' তারে কৃপায় কৈল আলিঙন ॥ ৯৩ ॥
asi’ prabhu-pade padi’ karena rodana
prabhu 01011 tanre krpaya kaila alingana
SYNONYMS
asi’—coming; prabhu-pade—at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
padi’—falling down; karena—does; rodana—crying; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; uthi’—standing; tanre—unto him; krpaya—out of mercy; kaila—
did; alingana—embracing.
TRANSLATION
When Candresekhara came there, he fell down before the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and began to cry. The Lord, standing up, embraced him
out of His causeless mercy.
TEXT 94
চন্দ্রশেখর কহে,-_“প্রভু, বড় Fo কৈলা।
আপনে আসিয়া res দরশন দিলা ॥ ৯৪ ॥
candrasekhara kahe,— “prabhu, 2393 krpa kaila
apane asiya bhrtye darasana dila
SYNONYMS
candrasekhara kahe —Candra$ekhara said; prabhu—my dear Lord; bada krpa
kaila—You have shown Your causeless mercy; apane —personally; dsiya—com-
ing; bhrtye—unto Your servant; darasana dili—gave Your audience.
TRANSLATION
Candrasekhara said, “My dear Lord, You bestowed Your causeless mercy
upon me because | am Your old servant. Indeed, You have come here per-
sonally to give me Your audience.


--- Page 51 ---
48 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 95
আপন-প্রারক্ধে বসি” বারাণসী-স্থানে।
মায়া”, “लचकः শব্দ বিনা নাহি শুনি কাণে ॥ ৯৫ ॥
apana-prarabdhe vasi’ varanasi-sthane
‘maya’, ‘brahma’ sabda vina nahi suni kane
SYNONYMS
apana-prarabdhe —because of my past deeds; vasi’—staying; varanasi-
sthane—in the place known as Varanasi; mdya—madya; brahma—and brahma;
Sabda—the words; vind—except; nahi suni—I do not hear; kane —in the ear.
TRANSLATION
‘Due to my past deeds, | am residing at Varanasi, but here .I do not hear
anything but the words maya and Brahman.”
PURPORT
The word prarabdhe (past deeds) is important in this verse. Since
Candrasekhara was a devotee, he was always eager to hear about Krsna and His
transcendental pastimes. Most of the inhabitants of Benares were and are imper-
sonalists, worshipers of Lord Siva and followers of the paficopasana method. The
impersonalists imagine some form of the impersonal Brahman, and to facilitate
meditation they concentrate upon the forms of Visnu, Siva, Ganesa, Sarya and
goddess Durga. Actually these paficopasakas are not devotees of anyone. As it is
said, to be a servant of everyone is to be the servant of no one. Varanasi, or Kasi, is
the chief holy place of pilgrimage for impersonalists, and it is not at all suitable for
devotees. A Vaisnava likes to live in a visnu-tirtha, a place where Lord Visnu's
temples are present. In Varanasi there are many hundreds and thousands of Lord
Siva’s temples, or paficopasaka temples. Consequently Candrasekhara expressed
great unhappiness as he informed Lord Caitanya that he was obliged to live at
Benares due to his past misdeeds. In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is also said, durjaty-
arambhakam papam yat syat prarabdham eva tat. “According to one's past
misdeeds, one takes birth on a lower platform.” In the Brahma-sarhita (5.54) it is
said: karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam. There is no karma attached to the
past deeds or misdeeds of one in devotional service. A devotee is not subjected
to karma-phala, the effect of fruitive activity. Karma-phala is applicable to karmis,
not bhaktas.
There are three kinds of devotees: those who are eternally on the transcenden-
tal platform (nitya-siddha), those elevated to the transcendental platform by the
execution of devotional service (sadhana-siddha), and those who are neophytes


--- Page 52 ---
Text 96] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 49
advancing toward the perfectional platform (sadhaka). The sadhakas are gradually
becoming free from fruitive reaction. Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.17) describes
the symptoms of bhakti-yoga thus:
klesa-ghni subhada moksa-
laghutakrt sudurlabha
sandrananda-visesatma
Sri-krsnakarsini ca sa
Devotional service is klesa-ghni even for beginners. This means that it reduces or
nullifies all kinds of suffering. The word subhada indicates that devotional service
bestows all good fortune, and the words krsna-akarsini indicate that devotional
service gradually attracts Krsna toward the devotee. Consequently a devotee is
not subject to any sinful reaction. In Bhagavad-gita (18.66) Krsna says:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekarn saraparn vraja
aham (व) sarva-papebhyo
moksayisydmi ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. । shall deliver you
from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.”

Thus a fully surrendered, sincere devotee immediately receives relief from all
kinds of sinful reaction. There are three stages of fructification for sinful activity.
At one stage, one commits the sinful act. Before that, the seed of this act exists,
and before that there is ignorance whereby one commits the sin. Suffering is in-
volved in all three stages. However, Krsna is merciful to His devotee, and conse-
quently He immediately nullifies all three stages —the sin, the seed of sin and the
ignorance that leads one to sin. Padma Purana confirms this:

aprarabdha-phalarih papa
kata bijarh phalonmukham
kramenaiva praliyeta
visnu-bhakti-ratatmanam
For a further explanation of this, The Nectar of Devotion should be consulted.
TEXT 96
ষড় দর্শন-ব্যাখ্যা বিনা কথা নাহি अवा ।
মিশ্র Foil করি' মোরে শুনান কৃষ্ণকথা ॥ ৯৬ ॥


--- Page 53 ---
50 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
sad-darsana-vyakhya vina katha nahi etha
misra krpa kari’ more sunana krsna-katha
SYNONYMS
sat-darsana—of six kinds of philosophical theses; vyakhya—explanation;
vind—except; katha—talk; nahi—not; etha—here; misra—Tapana Misra; krpa
kari’—being very merciful; more—unto me; sunana—explains; krspa-katha—
topics of Lord Sri Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Candrasekhara continued, ‘There is no talk at Varanasi other than discus-
sions on the six philosophical theses. Nonetheless, Tapana Misra has been
very kind to me, for he speaks about topics relating to Lord Krsna.
PURPORT
The six philosophical treatises are: (1) vaisesika, propounded by Kanada Rsi, (2)
nydya, propounded by Gautama Rsi, (3) yoga or mysticism, propounded by
Patanjali Rsi, (4) the philosophy of sankhya, propounded by Kapila Rsi, (5) the phi-
losophy of karma-mimarnsa, propounded by Jaimini Rsi, and (6) the philosophy of
brahma-mimarisa, or Vedanta, the ultimate conclusion of the Absolute Truth (jan-
mady asya yatah), propounded by Vedavyasa. Actually Vedanta philosophy is
meant for the devotees because in Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna says, vedanta-krd
veda-vid eva caham: “1 am the compiler of Vedanta, and | am the knower of the
Vedas.” (Bg. 15.15) Vyasadeva is an incarnation of Krsna, and consequently Krsna
is the compiler of Vedanta philosophy. Therefore Krsna clearly knows the purport
of Vedanta philosophy. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, whoever hears Vedanta phi-
losophy from Krsna is actually aware of the real meaning of Vedanta. The
Mayavadis who have called themselves Vedantists do not at all understand the
purport of Vedanta philosophy. Not being properly educated, people in general
think that Vedanta means the Sankarite interpretation.
TEXT 97
নিরস্তর দু'হে চিন্তি তোমার চরণ ।
‘ares ঈশ্বর” তুমি দিলা দরশন ॥ ৯৭ ॥
nirantara dunhe cinti tomara carana
‘sarvajia iSvara’ tumi dila darasana


--- Page 54 ---
Text 99] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 51
SYNONYMS
nirantara—incessantly; dunhe—we two; cinti—think of; tomara carana—Your
lotus feet; sarva-jfa—omniscient; isvara—Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tumi—You; dila darasana—gave Your audience.
TRANSLATION
“My dear Lord, we two think of Your lotus feet incessantly. Although You
are the omniscient Supreme Personality of Godhead, You have granted us Your
audience.
TEXT 98
শুনি, -__“মহাপ্রভু' যাবেন Bic |
দিন কত রহি* তার” TST তুইজনে ॥ ৯৮ ॥
Suni,—‘mahaprabhu’ yabena sri-vrndavane
dina kata rahi’ tara’ bhrtya dui-jane”
SYNONYMS
$uni—1 hear; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yibena—will go; $ri-
vrndavane—to Vrndavana; dina kata—for some days; rahi’—staying; tara’—
please deliver; bhrtya—servants; dui-jane—two persons.
TRANSLATION
“‘My Lord, ! have heard that You are going to Vrndavana. After You stay here
at Varanasi for some days, please deliver us, for we are Your two servants.”
TEXT 99
মিশ্র কহে, “य्‌, যাবৎ কাশীতে রহিবা।
মোর femme বিনা অন্য না মানিবা ॥” >> ॥
misra kahe,— ‘prabhu, yavat kasite rahiba
mora nimantrana vind anya na maniba’
SYNONYMS
misra kahe—Tapana Misra said; prabhu—my Lord; yavat—as long as; kasite
rahiba—You will stay at Kasi, Varanasi; mora nimantrana —my invitation; vina—
besides; anya—others; na maniba—do not accept.


--- Page 55 ---
52 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
Tapana Misra then said, “My dear Lord, as long as You stay at Varanasi,
please do not accept any invitation other than mine.”
TEXT 100
এইমত মহাপ্রভু তুই ভূত্যের বশে |
ইচ্ছা নাহি, তবু তথা রহিল৷ দিন-দশে ॥ ১০০ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu dui bhrtyera vase
iccha nahi, tabu tatha rahila dina-dase
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahaprabhu -5त Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dui—two;
bhrtyera—by servants; vase —being obliged; iccha nahi—there-was no such
desire; tabu—still; tatha—there; rahila—remained; dina-dase—for ten days.
TRANSLATION
Even though He had not made such a plan, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
remained for ten days at Varanasi, being obligated by the requests of His two
servants.
TEXT 101
মহারাষ্ট্রীয় বিপ্র আইসে প্রভু দেখিবারে।
প্রভুর রূপ-প্রেম দেখি” হয় চমৎকারে ॥ ১০১ ॥
maharastriya vipra aise prabhu dekhibare
prabhura rdpa-prema dekhi’ haya camatkare
SYNONYMS
maharastriya—belonging to the Maharastra state; vipra—one brahmana; dise —
comes; prabhu dekhibare—to see Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prabhura—of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rdpa-prema—beauty and ecstatic love; dekhi’—
seeing; haya camatkare —becomes astonished.
TRANSLATION
At Varanasi there was a Maharastriyan brahmana who used to come daily to
see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This brahmana was simply astonished to see the
Lord's personal beauty and ecstatic love for Krsna.


--- Page 56 ---
Text 103] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 53
TEXT 102
विथ्थे সব নিমন্ত্রয়, প্রভু নাহি माटम ।
প্রভু কহে, “सांकि মোর হুঞাছে fame’ ॥००२॥
vipra 5303 nimantraya, prabhu nahi mane
prabhu kahe,— ‘ji mora hanache nimantrane’
SYNONYMS
vipra—the brahmanas; saba—all; nimantraya—invite; prabhu—Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nahi mane—does not accept; prabhu kahe—the Lord
replies; dji—today; mora—My; hafdache—has been; nimantrane—invitation.
TRANSLATION
When the brahmanas of Varanasi would invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to
lunch, the Lord would not accept their invitations. He would reply, “1 have
already beeninvitedsomewhere else.”
TEXT 103
এইমত প্রতিদিন করেন aga |
FEIT সঙ্গ-ভয়ে না मोटनम्‌ নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১০৩ ॥
ei-mata prati-dina karena vafncana
sannyasira sariga-bhaye na manena nimantrana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; prati-dina—daily; karena vaficana—denies other inviters;
sannyasira—of the Mayavadi sannydsis; sanga-bhaye —from fear of the associa-
tion; na manena—does not accept; nimantrana—invitation.
TRANSLATION
Every day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu refused their invitation because He
feared associating with Mayavadi sannyasis.
PURPORT
A Vaisnava sannyasi never accepts an invitation from a party who considers
Mayavadi sannyasis and Vaisnava sannydsis to be one and the same. In other
words, Vaisnava sannyasis do not at all like to associate with Mayavadi sannyasis,
to say nothing of eating together. This principle must be followed by the san-


--- Page 57 ---
54 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
nyasis of the Krsna consciousness movement. That is the instruction of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu given by His personal behavior.
TEXT 104
প্রকাশালন্দ প্রীপাদ সভাতে বসিয়া |
‘CARI’ পড়ান वद्‌ শিষ্যগণ লঞ।৷ ॥ ১০৪ ॥
prakasananda sripada sabhate vasiya
‘vedanta’ padana bahu Sisya-gana lana
SYNONYMS
prakasananda—Prakasananda; s$ripada—a great sannydsi; sabhate—in the
assembly; vasiya—sitting down; vedanta—Vedanta philosophy; padana—in-
structs; bahu—many; sisya-gana—disciples; lana —taking.
TRANSLATION
There was a great Mayavadi sannyasi named Prakasananda Sarasvati who
used to teach Vedanta philosophy to a great assembly of followers.
PURPORT
51108५2 Prakasananda Sarasvati was a Mayavadi sannyasi, and his characteristics
have been described in Caitanya-bhagavata (Madhya-khanda Chapter Three):
‘hasta’, ‘pada’, ‘mukha’ mora nahika ‘locana’
veda more ei-mata kare vidambana
kasite padaya veta ‘prakasa-ananda’
sei veta kare mora anga khanda-khanda
vakhanaye veda, mora vigraha na mane
sarvange ha-ila kustha, tabu nahi jane
sarva-yajfiamaya mora ye-anga——pavitra
‘aja’, ‘bhava’ adi gaya yanhara caritra
‘punya’ pavitrata paya ye-anga-parase
taha ‘mithya’ bale veta kemana sahase


--- Page 58 ---
Text 104] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 55
In the Madhya-khanda, Chapter Twenty, it is said:

sannyasi ‘prakasananda’ vasaye kasite

more khanda-khanda veta kare bhala-mate

padaya ‘vedanta’, mera ‘vigraha’ na mane

kustha karailun ange, tabu nahi jane

‘satya’ mora ‘lila-karma’, ‘satya’ mora ‘sthana’

iha ‘mithya’ bale, more kare khan-khan

Prakasananda Sarasvati used to explain impersonalism, the Absolute Truth, as
being without hands, legs, mouths or eyes. In this way he used to cheat the
people by denying the personal form of the Lord. Such a foolish person was Pra-
kasananda Sarasvati, whose only business was to sever the limbs of the Lord by
proving the Lord impersonal. Although the Lord has form, Prakasananda Sarasvati
was attempting to cut off the hands and legs of the Lord. This is the business of
demons. The Vedas state that people who do not accept the Lord's form are ras-
cals. The form of the Lord is factual, for Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (15.15):
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. When Krsna says aham, He says “| am,” which
means “I,” the person. He adds the word eva, which is used for conclusive
verification. It is by Vedanta philosophy that one has to know the Supreme Per-
son. Whoever describes Vedic knowledge as impersonal is a demon. One be-
comes successful in life by worshiping the form of the Lord. The Mayavadi san-
nyasis deny the form of the Lord, which delivers all fallen souls. Indeed, this form
is cut to pieces by Mayavadi demons.

The Personality of Godhead is worshiped by exalted demigods like Lord Brahma
and Lord Siva. The original Mayavadi sannyasi, Sankaracarya, also accepted the
fact that the Lord's form is transcendental. Narayanah paro ‘vyaktat: “Narayana,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond the avyakta, the unmanifested
material energy.” Avyaktad anda-sambhavah: “This material world is a creation of
that unmanifested material energy.” However, Narayana has His own eternal
form, which is not created by material energy. Simply by worshiping the form of
the Lord, one is purified. However, Mayavadi sannyasis are impersonalist philoso-
phers, and they describe the form of the Lord as maya, or false. How can one be
purified by worshiping something false? Mayavadi philosophers have no sufficient
reason for being impersonalists. They blindly follow a principle that cannot be
supported by reason or argument. This was the situation with Prakasananda
Sarasvati, the chief Mayavadi sannyasi of Benares. He was supposed to teach
Vedanta philosophy, but he would not accept the form of the Lord; therefore he
was attacked with leprosy. Nonetheless, he continued to commit sins by describ-


--- Page 59 ---
56 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
ing the Absolute Truth as impersonal. The Absolute Truth, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, always displays pastimes and activities, but Mayavadi san-
nyasis claim that these activities are false.

Some people falsely claim that Prakasananda Sarasvati later became known as
Prabodhananda Sarasvati, but this is not a fact. Prabodhananda Sarasvati was the
uncle and spiritual master of Gopala Bhatta Gosvami. In his grhastha life, Pra-
bodhananda Sarasvati was a resident of जा Ranga-ksetra, and he belonged to the
Vaisnava Ramanuja-sampradaya. It 15 a mistake to consider Prakasananda Sarasvati
and Prabodhananda Sarasvati the same man.

TEXT 105
এক विष्यं দেখি' wren প্রভুর ব্যবহার |
প্রকাশানন্দ-অ।গে কহে চরিত্র ভাহ।র ॥ ১০৫ ॥
eka vipra dekhi’ dila prabhura vyavahara
prakasananda-age kahe caritra tanhara
SYNONYMS

eka vipra—one brahmana; dekhi’—seeing; dili—came; prabhura—of Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vyavahara—activities; prakasananda-age—before the
Mayavadi sannyasi Prakasananda; kahe—says; caritra tanhara—His charac-
teristics.

TRANSLATION

One brihmana who saw the wonderful behavior of S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu came to Prakasananda Sarasvati and described the Lord's charac-
teristics.

TEXT 106
“এক সঙ্ন্যাসী আইলা জগন্নাথ LTS |
ভাহার মহিম।-প্রতাপ না পারি বরণিতে ॥ ১০৬ ॥
“eka sannyasi 3//3 jagannatha haite
tanhara mahima-pratapa na pari varnite
SYNONYMS

eka—one; sannyasi—person in the renounced order of life; aila—has come;
jagannatha haite—from Jagannatha Puri; tanhara—His; mahima—glories; pra-
tapa—influence; na pari varnite—I cannot describe.


--- Page 60 ---
Text 108] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 57
TRANSLATION
The brahmana told Prakasananda Sarasvati, “There is a sannyasi who has
come from Jagannatha Puri, and | cannot describe His wonderful influence
and glories.
TEXT 107
সকল দেখিয়ে ভাতে Bg, Swe |
প্রকাণ্ড-শরীর, শুদ্ধকাঞ্চন-বরণ ॥ ১০৭ ॥
sakala dekhiye tante adbhuta-kathana
prakanda-sarira, sSuddha-kancana-varana
SYNONYMS
sakala dekhiye —I see everything; tante—in Him; adbhuta-kathana—wonderful
description; prakanda-sarira—very large body; suddha—pure; kancana—gold;
varana—complexion.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Everything is wonderful about that sannyasi. He has a very well built and
luxurious body, and His complexion is like purified gold.
TEXT 108
আজানুলমন্দিত gw, কমল-ন্য়ন।
যত কিছু ঈশ্বরের সর্ব সল্লক্ষণ ॥ ১০৮ ॥
ajanu-lambita bhuja, kamala-nayana
yata kichu isvarera sarva sal-laksana
SYNONYMS
ajanu-lambita—reaching down to the knees; bhuja—arms; kamala-nayana—
eyes like the petals of a lotus flower; yata—as many as; kichu—any; isvarera—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva—all; sat-laksana—transcendental
symptoms.
TRANSLATION
‘He has arms that extend to His knees, and His eyes are like the petals of a
lotus. In His person are all the transcendental symptoms of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.


--- Page 61 ---
58 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 109
তাহা দেখি” জ্ঞান ZH — a @ নারায়ণ” |
যেই ভারে দেখে, করে কৃষ্ণসংকীর্তন ॥ ১০৯ ॥
(303 dekhi’ 78/12 haya— ‘ei narayana
yei tanre dekhe, kare krsna-sankirtana
SYNONYMS
taha dekhi’—seeing that; (72/02 haya—one comes to the conclusion; ei
narayana—He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana Himself; yei—
anyone who; tanre—Him; dekhe—sees; kare —performs; krsna-sankirtana—
chanting of the holy name of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
“When one sees all these features, one takes Him to be Narayana Himself.
Whoever sees Him immediately begins to chant the holy name of Krsna.
TEXT 110
“মহাতভাগবত”-লক্ষণ শুনি ভাগবতে।
সে-সব লক্ষণ প্রকট দেখিয়ে তাহাতে ॥ ১১০ ॥
‘maha-bhagavata’-laksana suni bhagavate
se-saba laksana prakata dekhiye tanhate
SYNONYMS
maha-bhagavata —of a first-class devotee; laksana—symptoms; suni—we
hear; bhagavate—in Srimad-Bhagavatam; se-saba laksana—all those symptoms;
prakata—manifest; dekhiye—I see; tanhate—in Him.
TRANSLATION
“We have heard about the symptoms of a first-class devotee in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and all those symptoms are manifest in the body of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 111
মিরজ্ভর কৃষ্ণনাম” fowl Sa ohm
তুই-নেত্রে TE বহে গলাধারা-প্রায় ॥ ১১১ ॥


--- Page 62 ---
Text 113] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 59
‘nirantara krsna-nama’ jihva tanra gaya
dui-netre asru vahe gariga-dhara-praya
SYNONYMS
nirantara—incessantly; krspa-nama—the holy name of the Lord; jihva—
tongue; tanra—His; gaya—chants; dui-netre—in the two eyes; asru—tears;
vahe —flow; ganga-dhara-praya—like the flow of the Ganges.
TRANSLATION
‘‘His tongue is always chanting the holy name of Krsna, and from His eyes
tears incessantly fall like the flowing Ganges.
TEXT 112
ক্ষণে নাচে, হাসে, গায়, করয়ে FW |
ক্ষণে TEE করে,__সিংহের গর্জন ॥ ১১২ ॥
ksane nace, hase, gaya, karaye krandana
ksane huhurkara kare, —simhera garjana
SYNONYMS
ksane—sometimes; nace —dances; hase—laughs; gaya—sings; karaye kran-
dana—cries; ksane—sometimes; huhun-kdara—loud vibrations; kare —makes;
simhera garjana—the roaring of a lion.
TRANSLATION
‘Sometimes He dances, laughs, sings and cries, and sometimes He roars
like a lion.
TEXT 113
জগৎমজল ভার ‘FRET |
নাম, রূপ, গুণ ভার, সব-_অনুপম ॥ ১১৩ ॥
jagat-mangala tarnra ‘krsna-caitanya’-nama
nama, rapa, guna tanra, saba——anupama
SYNONYMS
jagat-mangala—all-auspicious to the whole world; tanra—His; krsna-
caitanya—Sri Krsna Caitanya; ndama—name; ndma—name; rapa—form; guna—
the quality; tanra—His; saba—all; anupama—unparalleled.


--- Page 63 ---
60 इ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
‘’His name, Krsna Caitanya, is all-auspicious to the world. Everything about
Him —His name, form, and qualities —is unparalleled.
TEXT 114
দেখিলে সে জানি ভার “ঈশ্বরের রীতি”।
অলোকিক কথা শুনি” কে করে প্রভীতি ?” ১১৪ ॥
dekhile se jani tarra ‘iSvarera riti’
alaukika katha suni’ ke kare pratiti?”
SYNONYMS
dekhile—simply by seeing; se—Him; jani—| understand; tarira—His; isvarera
riti—characteristics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; alaukika—uncom-
mon; katha—story; suni’—hearing; ke—who; kare pratiti—will believe.
TRANSLATION
“Simply by seeing Him, one understands that He possesses all the charac-
teristics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such characteristics are cer-
tainly uncommon. Who will believe it?’
TEXT 115
শুনিয়া প্রকাশানন্দ বহুত হাসিলা।
face উপহাস করি” কহিতে লাগিল ॥ ১১৫ ॥
Suniya prakasananda bahuta hasila
vipre upahasa kari’ kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing; prakasananda—Prakasananda Sarasvati; bahuta hasila—
laughed very much; vipre—at the brahmana; upahasa kari’—jokingly laughing;
kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Prakasananda Sarasvati laughed very much to hear this description. Joking
and laughing at the brahmana, he began to speak as follows.


--- Page 64 ---
Text 116] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 61
TEXT 116
~. ६
“শুনিয়াছি গৌড়দেশের AMIN “ङ तुक |
কেশব-ভারতী-শিষ্য, লোকপগ্রতারক ॥ ১১৬ ॥
“Suniyachi gauda-desera sannyasi— ‘bhavuka’
kesava-bharati-isya, loka-prataraka
SYNONYMS
Suniyachi—I| have heard; gauda-desera sannyasi—the sannyasi from Bengal;
bhavuka—sentimental; kesava-bharati-sisya—disciple of Ke$ava Bharati; loka-
prataraka—a first-class pretender.
TRANSLATION
Prakasananda Sarasvati said, “Yes, | have heard about Him. He is a sannyasi
from Bengal, and He is very sentimental. | have also heard that He belongs to
the Bharati-sampradaya, for He is a disciple of Kesava Bharati. However, He is
only a pretender.”
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was considered bhavuka (sentimental) because He
was always seen in the bhava stage. That is, He always exhibited ecstatic love for
Krsna. However, foolish people considered Him sentimental. In the material world,
so-called devotees sometimes exhibit emotional symptoms. Caitanya
Mahaprabhu'’s ecstatic love cannot be compared to the imitative emotional ex-
hibitions of pretenders. Such exhibitions do not continue for very long. They are
temporary. We actually see that some emotional imitators exhibit certain
symptoms, but immediately after their exhibition, they are attracted to smoking
and other things. In the beginning, when Prakasananda Sarasvati heard of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s activities, he considered them to be those of a pretender.
Consequently he called Him a loka-prataraka, a pretender. Mayavadis cannot
understand the transcendental symptoms exhibited by a devotee; therefore
when such symptoms are manifest, the Mayavadis equate them with temporary
emotional feelings. However, Prakasananda Sarasvati’s statement is offensive, and
consequently he should be considered an atheist (pasandi. According to Srila
Rapa Gosvam, since Prakasananda Sarasvati was not engaged in the Lord's devo-
tional service, his sannydsa is to be considered phalgu-vairagya. This means that
since he did not know how to use things for the Lord's service, his renunciation of
the world was artificial.


--- Page 65 ---
62 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 117
“চৈতন্ক-নাম তার, ভাবুকগণ लयभ |
দেশে দেশে গ্রামে গ্রামে বুলে নাচাএা ॥ ১১৭ ॥
‘caitanya’-nama (37773, bhavuka-gana lana
dese dese grame grame bule nacana
SYNONYMS
caitanya—Caitanya; nama tarra—His name; bhavuka-gana land—accom-
panied by some sentimentalists; dese dese—from country to country; grame
grame —from village to village; bule—travels; nacana—causing to dance.
TRANSLATION
Prakasananda Sarasvati continued, ‘I know that His name is Sri Krsna
Caitanya and that He is accompanied by many sentimentalists. His followers
dance with Him, and He tours from country to country and village to village.
TEXT 118
যেই ভারে দেখে, সেই ঈশ্বর করি” कट्‌ |
এঁছে মোহন-বিত্যা-_ যে দেখে সে মোহে ॥ ১১৮ ॥
yei tanre dekhe, sei isvara kari’ kahe
aiche mohana-vidya— ye dekhe se mohe
SYNONYMS
yei—anyone who; tanre—Him; dekhe —sees; sei—that person; isvara kari’'—
as the Supreme Personality of Codhead; kahe—says; aiche—such; mohana-
vidya—hypnotism; ye dekhe—anyone who sees; se mohe—he becomes illu-
sioned.
TRANSLATION
“Whoever sees Him accepts Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Since He has some mystic power by which He hypnotizes people, everyone
who sees Him is illusioned.
TEXT 119
সার্বভৌম ভট্টাচার্য_ পণ্ডিত প্রবল ।
শুনি' Lesa সঙে হুইল পাগল ॥ ১১৯ ॥


--- Page 66 ---
Text 121] The Lord Travels to Vrndivana 63
sarvabhauma bhattacarya— pandita prabala
Suni’ caitanyera sarge ha-ila pagala
SYNONYMS
sarvabhauma bhattacarya—Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya; pandita prabala—a
learned scholar; suni’—l have heard; caitanyera sange—in the association of
Caitanya; ha-ila pagala—has become a madman.
TRANSLATION
‘’Sarvabhauma Bhatticirya was a very learned scholar, but I have heard that
he also has become a madman due to his association with this Caitanya.
TEXT 120
সঙ্গ্যাসী”- নাম-মাত্র, মহা-ইন্দ্রজালী !
“কাশীপুরে” না বিকাবে ভার ভাবকালি ॥ ১২০ ॥
‘sannyasi’——nama-matra, maha-indrajali!
‘kasipure’ na vikabe tanra bhavakali
SYNONYMS
sannydsi—in the renounced order of life; nama-matra—in name only; maha-in-
drajali—first-class magician; kasipure—in Kasi; na vikabe—will not sell; tarra—
His; bhavakali—sentimental activities.
TRANSLATION
‘This Caitanya is a sannyasi in name only. Actually He is a first-class magi-
cian. In any case, His sentimentalism cannot be very much in demand here in
Kasi.
TEXT 121
‘CS শ্রেবণ কর, A वाटे ভার नाग |
छन्ड. স্বল-লোক-সঙ্গে দুইলোক-নাশ ॥” ১২১ ॥
‘vedanta’ sravana kara, na yaiha tanra pasa
ucchrnkhala-loka-sarige dui-loka-nasa”
SYNONYMS
vedanta—the philosophy of Vedanta; sravana kara—go on hearing; na—do
not; yaiha—go; tanra pasa—near Him; ucchrrikhala—upstart; loka—people;


--- Page 67 ---
64 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
sange—in the association of; dui-loka-nasa—destruction in this world and the
next.
TRANSLATION
“Do not go to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Just continue hearing Vedanta.
If you associate with upstarts, you will be lost in this world and in the next.”
PURPORT
The word ucchrikhala, meaning “whimsical,” is significant in this verse. In
Bhagavad-gita (16.23), Lord Krsna Himself says:
yah $astra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kama-karatah
na sa siddhim avapnoti
na sukham na param gatim
If one acts whimsically and does not follow the $astric principles, he will never at-
tain perfection, happiness or the spiritual world.
TEXT 122
এত শুনি” সেই fae! মহ দুঃখ পাইলা।
“কৃষ্ণ “কৃষ্ণ কহি” তথা হৈতে TF গেলা ॥ ১২২ ॥
eta Suni’ sei vipra maha-duhkha paila
‘krsna’ ‘krspa’ kahi’ tatha haite uthi’ gela
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; sei vipra—that brahmana; maha-duhkha paila—be-
came very much aggrieved; krspa krsna kahi’—uttering the holy name of Lord
Krsna; tatha haite—from there; 0101 gela—got up and went away.
TRANSLATION
When the brahmana heard Prakasananda Sarasvati speak like this about Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he became very grief-stricken. Chanting the holy name
of Krsna, he immediately left.
TEXT 123
প্রভুর দরশনে শুদ্ধ হঞাছে কভার गन |
প্রভু-আগে দুঃখী <| কহে বিবরণ ॥ ১২৩ ॥


--- Page 68 ---
Text 125] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 65
prabhura darasane suddha hafiache tanra mana
prabhu-age duhkhi hana kahe vivarana
SYNONYMS
prabhura darasane —by seeing personally the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
Suddha—purified; hafache —was; {३012 mana—his mind; prabhu-age—before
the Lord; duhkhi hada —being very much unhappy; kahe vivarana—described the
incidents.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana’s mind was already purified by seeing the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He therefore went to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and described what took place before the Mayavadi
sannyasi Prakasananda.
TEXT 124
শুনি” মহাপ্রভু তবে Fae राजिन |
পুনরপি সেই विष्य প্রভুরে পুছেল৷ ॥ ১২৪ ॥
Suni’ mahaprabhu tabe 1590 hasila
punarapi sei vipra prabhure puchila
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tabe—then; fsat—
mildly; hasila—smiled; punarapi —again indeed; sei—that; vipra—brahmana;
prabhure puchila—inquired from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu mildly smiled. The braihmana then
spoke again to the Lord.
TEXT 125
“তার আগে যবে আমি তোমার নাম লইল |
(गङ्‌ তোমার নাম জানে__আপনে কহিল ॥ ১২৫ ॥
“tara age yabe ami tomara nama la-ila
seha tomara nama jane, —apane kahila


--- Page 69 ---
66 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
tara age —before him; yabe —when; ami—I; tomara—Your; nama—name; la-
ila—uttered; seha—he; tomdra—Your; nama—name; jane—knows; dpane
kahila—he said himself.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana said, ‘As soon as | uttered Your name before him, he im-
mediately confirmed the fact that he knew Your name.
TEXT 126
তোমার “দোষ” কহিতে করে নামের উচ্চার।
We “চৈতদ্ক” করি” কহে তিনবার ॥ ১২৬ ॥
tomara ‘dosa’ kahite kare namera uccara
‘caitanya’ ‘caitanya’ kari’ kahe tina-bara
SYNONYMS
tomara dosa—Your fault; kahite—describing; kare—does; namera—of the
name; uccara—utterances; caitanya caitanya—Caitanya, Caitanya; kari’—in that
way; kahe tina-bara—he uttered three times.
TRANSLATION
‘While finding fault with You, he uttered Your name three times, saying,
‘Caitanya, Caitanya, Caitanya.’
TEXT 127
তিনবারে 'কৃষ্ণনাম” না আইল তার মুখে ।
“অবজ্ঞা'তে নাম লয়, শুনি” পাই দুঃখে ॥ ১২৭ ॥
tina-bare ‘krsna-nama’ na aila tara mukhe
‘avajia’te nama laya, suni’ pai duhkhe
SYNONYMS
tina-bare —three times; krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna; na aila—did not
come; tara mukhe —in his mouth; avajia’te—in contempt; nama laya—takes Your
name; suni’—hearing; pai duhkhe—I was very much aggrieved.


--- Page 70 ---
Text 128] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 67
TRANSLATION
“Although he spoke Your name three times, he did not utter the name of
Krsna. Because he uttered Your name in contempt, | was very much aggrieved.
PURPORT
Prakasananda Sarasvati vilified and blasphemed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Words like brahma, caitanya, atma, paramatma, jagadisa, isvara, virat, vibhu,
bhama, visvarapa and vyapaka all indirectly indicate Krsna. However, the chanter
of these names is not actually attracted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Krsna and His transcendental pastimes. One may get a little light from these
names, but one cannot understand that the holy name of the Lord is identical
with the Lord. One considers the Lord's names material due to a poor fund of
knowledge. Mayavadi philosophers and the pafcopasakas cannot in the least
understand the existence of the spiritual world and the blissful variegatedness
there. They cannot understand the Absolute Truth and its spiritual varieties —
name, form, qualities and pastimes. Consequently they conclude that Krsna’'s
transcendental activities are maya. Due to this, one has to directly cultivate
knowledge about the holy name of the Lord. Mayavadr philosophers do not know
this fact, and therefore they commit great offenses. One should not hear anything
about Krsna or devotional service from the mouths of Mayavadi impersonalists.
TEXT 128
ইহার কারণ মোরে কহ Fo করি”।
তোমা দেখি” মুখ মোর বলে “কৃষ্ণ” “হরি” ॥ ১২৮ ॥
ihara [3/303 more kaha krpa kari’
toma dekhi’ mukha mora bale ‘krsna’ ‘hari’
SYNONYMS
ihara—of this; karana—cause; more—unto me; kaha—please speak; krpa
kari’—by Your causeless mercy; toma dekhi’—seeing You; mukha—mouth;
mora—my; bale—says; krsna hari—the holy names of Krsna and Hari.
TRANSLATION
“Why could Prakasananda not utter the names of Krsna and Hari? He
chanted the name Caitanya thrice. As far as | am concerned, simply by seeing
You | am moved to chant the holy names of Krsna and Hari.”


--- Page 71 ---
68 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 129
वेद्‌ कट, — “TAA কুষ্ণে অপরাধী |
aw, “আত্মা” চৈতন্য” কহে নিরবধি ॥ ১২৯ ॥
prabhu kahe, — “mayavadi krsne aparadhi
‘brahma’, ‘atma’ ‘caitanya’ kahe niravadhi
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; mayavadi—the impersonalists;
krsne—unto Krsna; aparadhi—great offenders; brahma—brahma; atma—atma;
caitanya—caitanya; kahe—say; niravadhi—without stopping.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, ‘“Mayavadi impersonalists are great
offenders unto Lord Krsna; therefore they simply utter the words Brahman,
atma and caitanya.
TEXT 130
অতএব তার মুখে ন। আইসে FRA |
FANT, “কুষ্ণন্বরূপ”- देर “সমান” ॥ ১৩০ ॥
ataeva tara mukhe na aise krsna-nama
‘krsna-nama’, ‘*krsna-svardpa’—duita ‘samana’
SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; tara mukhe—in their mouths; na—not; aise —manifests;
krspa-nama—the holy name of Krsna; krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna;
krsna-svarapa—the personality of the Lord; duita samana—both identical.
TRANSLATION
‘The holy name of Krsna is not manifest in their mouths because they are
offenders unto Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is identical
with His holy name.
TEXT 131
নাম”, “বিগ্রহ” “স্বরূপ” छिन अकक्रगं ।
তিনে “ভেদ” না হি, তিন “চিদানম্দ-রূপ” 1 ১৩১ ॥


--- Page 72 ---
Text 132] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 69
‘nama’, ‘vigraha’, ‘svarapa’——tina eka-rapa
tine ‘bheda’ nahi,—tina ‘cid-ananda-rapa’
SYNONYMS
nama—the name; vigraha—form; sva-rapa—personality; tina—all three; eka-
rapa—one and the same; tine—between the three; bheda nahi—there is no dif-
ference; tina—all three; cit-ananda-rapa—transcendentally blissful.
TRANSLATION
“The Lord’s holy name, His form and His personality are all one and the
same. There is no difference between them. Since all of them are absolute,
they are transcendentally blissful.
TEXT 132
দেহ-দেহীর, নাম-নামীর কৃষ্ণে নাহি खल? ।
জীবের ধর্ম নাম-দেহ-স্বক্ূপে “বিভেদ” ॥ ১৩২ ॥
deha-dehira, nama-namira krsne nahi ‘bheda’
jivera dharma ——nama-deha-svarape ‘vibheda’
SYNONYMS
deha-dehira—of the body and the owner of the body; nama-namira—of the
name and the owner of the name; krsne—in Krsna; nahi bheda—there is no dif-
ference; jivera dharma—the situation of the conditioned soul; nama—name;
deha—body; sva-rape —original form; vibheda—different.
TRANSLATION
“There is no difference between Krsna’s body and Himself or between His
name and Himself. As far as the conditioned soul is concerned, everything is
different. One’s name is different from the body, from one’s original form and
so on.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is herein pointing out to the brahmana that Mayavadi
philosophers cannot understand that the living entity is equal in quality with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because they do not accept this, they think that
the living entity has been falsely divided from the original Brahman due to being
conditioned by maya. Mayavadis believe that the Absolute Truth is ultimately im-
personal. When an incarnation of God or God Himself comes, they think He is


--- Page 73 ---
70 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 17
covered by maya. In other words, Mayavadi impersonalists think that the Lord's
form is also a product of this material world. Due to a poor fund of knowledge,
they cannot understand that Krsna has no body separate from Himself. His body
and Himself are both the same Absolute Truth. Not having perfect knowledge of
Krsna, such impersonalists certainly commit offenses at His lotus feet. Therefore
they do not utter the original name of the Absolute Truth, Krsna. In their imper-
sonal way, they utter the name of impersonal Brahman, spirit soul. In other words,
they indulge in indirect indications of the Absolute Truth. Even if they happen to
utter the name of Govinda, Krsna or Madhava, they still cannot understand that
these names are as good as Govinda, Krsna or Madhava the person. Because they
are ultimately impersonalists, their uttering of the personal name has no potency.
Actually they do not believe in Krsna but consider all these names to be material
vibrations. Not being able to appreciate the holy name of the Lord, they simply ut-
ter indirect names like Brahman, atma and caitanya.

It is a fact, however, that the name of Krsna and Krsna the person are both
spiritual. Everything about Krsna is transcendental, blissful and objective. For a
conditioned soul, the body is different from the soul, and the name given by the
father is also different from the soul. The conditioned living entity's identification
with material objects keeps him from attaining his actual position. Although he is
an eternal servant of Krsna, he acts differently. The svarapa, or actual identifica-
tion of the living entity, is described by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu 25 jivera
‘svarapa’ haya——krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’. The conditioned soul has forgotten the real
activities of his original position. However, this is not the case with Krsna. Krsna's
name and His person are identical. There is no such thing as maya Krsna because
Krsna is not a product of the material creation. There is no difference between
Krsna's body and His soul. Krsna is simultaneously both soul and body. The dis-
tinction between body and soul applies to conditioned souls. The body of the
conditioned soul is different from the soul, and the conditioned soul's name is dif-
ferent from his body. One may be named Mr. John, but if we call for Mr. John, Mr.
John may never actually appear. However, if we utter the holy name of Krsna,
Krsna is immediately present on our tongue. In the Padma Purana, Krsna says,
mad-bhakta yatra gayanti tatra tisthami narada: “O Narada, | am present wherever
My devotees are chanting.” When the devotees chant the holy name of Krsna—
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare —Lord Krsna is immediately present.

TEXT 133
নাম চিনস্তামণিঃ রুষ্ণশ্চৈতন্যরসবিগ্রহঃ |
পূর্ণঃ শুদ্ধে। নিত্যমুক্তোই ভিন্নস্বান্নামনা মিনোঃ ॥ ১৩৩ ॥


--- Page 74 ---
Text 134] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 71
nama cintamanih krsnas
caitanya-rasa-vigrahah
parnah suddho nitya-mukto
‘bhinnatvan nama-naminoh
SYNONYMS

namah—the holy name; cintamanih —transcendentally blissful giver of all
spiritual benedictions; krsnah —not different from Krsna; caitanya-rasa-vigrahah —
the form of all transcendental mellows; parnah—complete; Suddhah—pure,
without material contamination; nitya—eternal; muktah—liberated; abhinna-
tvat—due to not being different; nama—of the holy name; naminoh—and of the
person who has the name.

TRANSLATION

‘The holy name of Krsna is transcendentally blissful. It bestows all
spiritual benedictions, for it is Krsna Himself, the reservoir of all pleasure.
Krsna’s name is complete, and it is the form of all transcendental mellows. It is
not a material name under any condition, and it is no less powerful than Krsna
Himself. Since Krsna’s name is not contaminated by the material qualities,
there is no question of its being involved with maya. Krsna’s name is always
liberated and spiritual; it is never conditioned by the laws of material nature.
This is because the name of Krsna and Krsna Himself are identical.’

PURPORT
This is a quotation from Padma Purana.
TEXT 134
অতএব FLT “লাম” “দেহ, “বিলাস” |
প্রাকৃতেন্ছিয়-গ্রাহু নহে, হয় স্বপ্রকাশ ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
ataeva krsnera ‘nama’, ‘deha’, ‘vilasa’
prakrtendriya-grahya nahe, haya sva-prakasa
SYNONYMS

ataeva—therefore; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; nama—the holy name; deha—the
spiritual body; vildsa—the pastimes; prakrta-indriya—by the dull senses made of
matter;  grahya—perceptible; nahe—not; haya—are; sva-prakasa—self-
manifested.


--- Page 75 ---
72 इ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
‘The holy name of Krsna, His body and His pastimes cannot be understood
by blunt material senses. They are manifest independently.
PURPORT
The transcendental body of Krsna, His name, form, qualities, pastimes and en-
tourage all constitute the Absolute Truth and are as good as Krsna (sac-cid-
ananda-vigraha). As long as the living entity is conditioned by the three modes of
material nature— (goodness, passion and ignorance) —the objects of his material
senses —material form, taste, smell, sound and touch—will not help him under-
stand spiritual knowledge and bliss. Rather, these are revealed to the pure devo-
tee. One's material name, form and eualities are certainly different from one
another. In the material world, there is no conception of absolute; however, when
we come to Krsna consciousness we find that there is no material difference be-
tween Krsna's body and His names, activities and entourage.
TEXT 135
FRAT, FRC, FAIR |
কৃষ্ণের স্বকূপ-সম- সব छ्िक्तोनन्त ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
krsna-nama, krsna-guna, krsna-lila-vrnda
krsnera svarGpa-sama——saba cid-ananda
SYNONYMS
krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna; krsna-guna—the transcendental
qualities of Krsna; krsna-lila-vinda—the transcendental pastimes of Lord Krsna;
krsnera sva-rapa—Krsna's personality; sama—equal; saba—all; cit-ananda—
spiritual and full of bliss.
TRANSLATION
‘The holy name of Krsna, His transcendental qualities and pastimes as well
as Lord Krsna Himself are all equal. They are all spiritual and full of bliss.
TEXT 136
wo: Appar न उ्टवन्‌शार्मिखिटैग्रः |
সেবোস্মুখে হি জিহ্বাদৌ স্ব়মেব স্ফুরত্যদঃ ॥১৩৬॥


--- Page 76 ---
Text 137] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 73
atah sri-krspa-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
SYNONYMS
atah—therefore (because Krsna's name, form, quality are all on the absolute
platform); $ri-krspa-nama-adi—Lord Krsna's name, form, quality, pastimes and so
on; na—not; bhavet—can be; grahyam—perceived; indriyaih—by the blunt ma-
terial senses; seva-unmukhe—to one engaged in His service; hi—certainly; jihva-
adau—beginning with the tongue; svayam—personally; eva—certainly;
sphurati—become manifest; adah—those (Krsna's name, form, quality, and so
on).
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Therefore material senses cannot appreciate Krsna’s holy name, form,
qualities and pastimes. When a conditioned soul is awakened to Krsna con-
sciousness and renders service by using his tongue to chant the Lord’s holy
name and taste the remnants of the Lord’s food, the tongue is purified, and
one gradually comes to understand who Krsna really 15.”
PURPORT
This verse is recorded in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.234).
TEXT 137
ব্রচ্ধানন্দ হৈতে পূর্ণানন্দ লীলারস |
QE या कर्सिग्न। করে আত্মবশ ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
brahmananda haite parpananda lila-rasa
brahma-jAani akarsiya kare atma-vasa
SYNONYMS
brahma-ananda —the pleasure of self-realization; haite —from; parna-ananda—
complete pleasure; lild-rasa—the mellows of the pastimes of the Lord; brahma-
jiani—those who are on the platform of Brahman understanding; akarsiya—at-
tracting; kare—make; atma-vasa—subordinate to Krsna.
TRANSLATION
“The mellows of Lord Krsna’s pastimes, which are full of bliss, attract the
jhani from the pleasure of Brahman realization and conquer him.


--- Page 77 ---
74 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
PURPORT

When one understands that he belongs not to the material world but to the
spiritual world, one is called liberated. Being situated in the spiritual world is cer-
tainly pleasurable, but those who realize the transcendental name, form, qualities
and pastimes of Lord Krsna enjoy transcendental bliss many times more than one
who has simply realized the self. When one is situated on the platform of self-
realization, he can certainly be easily attracted by Krsna and become a servant of
the Lord. This is explained in Bhagavad-gita:

brahma-bhatah prasannatma
na socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhatesu
mad-bhaktirh labhate param
“One who 15 thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything; he is equally
disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service
unto Me.” (Bg. 18.54)

When one becomes spiritually realized (brahma-bhita), he becomes happy
(prasannatma, for he is relieved from material conceptions. One who has attained
this platform is not agitated by material action and reaction. He sees everyone on
the platform of spirit soul (panditah sama-darsinah). When one is completely
realized, he can rise to the platform of pure devotional service (mad-bhaktirir
labhate param). When one comes to the platform of bhakti, devotional service, he
automatically realizes who Krsna is.

bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato marn tattvato jnatva
visate tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service.
And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he
can enter into the kingdom of God.” (Bg. 18.55)

It is only on the bhakti platform that one can understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead Krsna and His transcendental name, form, qualities, pastimes
and entourage. Being thus qualified spiritually (visate tad-anantaram), one is
allowed to enter the spiritual kingdom of God and return home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 138
স্বহুখনিভৃতচেতাস্তদ্ব্যুদস্তাম্যভাবে-
হপ্যজিতরুচিরলীলাক্বইসারস্তদীয়ম্‌ |


--- Page 78 ---
Text 139] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 75
TOFS FAT যস্তত্বদীপং পুরাণং
তমধথিলবৃজিনস্নং IAAT নতোইস্মি ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
svasukha-nibhrta-cetas tad vyudastanya-bhavo
‘py ajita-rucira-lilakrsta-saras tadiyam
vyatanuta krpaya yas tattva-dipam puranam
tam akhila-vrjina-ghnarm vyasa-sanum nato ‘smi
SYNONYMS
sva-sukha—in happiness of the self; nibhrta—solitary; cetah—whose con-
sciousness; tat—because of that; vyudasta—given up; anya-bhavah—any other
type of consciousness; api—although; ajita—of त Krsna; rucira—pleasing; lila—
by the pastimes; akrsta—attracted; sarah—whose heart; tadiyam —consisting of
the activities of the Lord; vyatanuta—spread, manifested; krpaya—mercifully;
yah—who; tattva-dipam—the bright light of the Absolute Truth; puranam—the
Purana (Srimad-Bhagavatam); tam—unto him; akhila-vrjina-ghnam—defeating
everything inauspicious; vyasa-sinum—the son of Vyasadeva; natah asmi—I
offer my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, the son
of Vyasadeva, Sukadeva Gosvami. It is he who defeats all inauspicious things
within this universe. Although in the beginning he was absorbed in the happi-
ness of Brahman realization and was living in a secluded place, giving up all
other types of consciousness, he became attracted by the most melodious
pastimes of Lord Sri Krsna. He therefore mercifully spoke the supreme Purana,
known as Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is the bright light of the Absolute Truth
and which describes the activities of Lord Krsna.”
PURPORT
This verse was spoken by Sata Gosvami in $rimad-Bhagavatam (12.12.68).
TEXT 139
ব্রহ্মানন্দ হৈতে পূর্ণানন্দ কৃষ্ণগুণ |
অতএব আকর্ষয়ে আত্মারামের मन ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
brahmananda haite parnananda krsna-guna
ataeva akarsaye atma-ramera mana
SYNONYMS
brahma-ananda—the pleasure of Brahman realization; haite—from; parpa-
ananda—complete bliss; krspa-guna—the qualities of Lord Krsna; ataeva—


--- Page 79 ---
76 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
therefore; akarsaye—attract; atma-ramera mana —the minds of self-realized per-
sons.
TRANSLATION
“The transcendental qualities of Sri Krsna are completely blissful and
relishable. Consequently Lord Krsna’s qualities attract even the minds of self-
realized persons from the bliss of self-realization.
TEXT 140
আত্মারামাস্চ মূনয়ো নিগ্রস্থা অপুযুরুত্রমে।
কুবহাযহৈতুকীং হুরিঃ ॥ ১৪০
atmaramas ca munayo
nirgrantha apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukiri bhaktim
ittham-bhata-guno harih
SYNONYMS
adtma-aramah —persons who take pleasure in being transcendentally situated in
the service of the Lord; ca—also; munayah—great saintly persons who have
completely rejected material aspirations, fruitive activities, and so forth;
nirgranthah—without interest in any material desire; api—certainly; urukrame —
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, whose activities are wonderful;
kurvanti—do; ahaitukim —causeless, or without material desires; bhaktim—devo-
tional service; ittham-bhiata—so wonderful as to attract the attention of the self-
satisfied; gunah—who has transcendental qualities; harih—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Those who are self-satisfied and unattracted by external material desires
are also attracted to the loving service of Sri Krsna, whose qualities are tran-
scendental and whose activities are wonderful. Hari, the Personality of God-
head, is called Krsna because He has such transcendentally attractive
features.’
TEXT 141
এই जव রহু - কুষ্ণচরণ-সম্বন্ধে |
আত্মারামের মন হরে তুলসীর গন্ধে ॥ ১৪১॥


--- Page 80 ---
Text 142] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 77
ei saba rahu——krsna-carana-sambandhe
atmaramera mana hare tulasira gandhe
SYNONYMS
ei saba rahu—apart from the pastimes of Lord Krsna; krspa-carana-sam-
bandhe —in relation to the lotus feet of Krsna; atma-aramera—of self-realized per-
sons; mana—the mind; hare—attracts; tulasira gandhe—the aroma of tulasi
leaves.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Apart from the pastimes of Lord Krsna, when tulasi leaves are offered at
the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, even the aroma of the leaves attracts the minds of
self-realized persons.
TEXT 142
তস্যারবিন্দনয়নস্য পদারবিন্দ-
কিঞ্তক্কমিশ্রতুলসীমকরন্দবায়ুঃ।
wg: স্ববিবরেণ চকার care
সংক্ষে।ভমক্ষরজুয।মপি চিন্ততন্থে:॥ ১৪২ ॥
tasyaravinda-nayanasya padaravinda-
kinjalka-misra-tulasi-makaranda-vayuh
antargatah svavivarena cakara tesam
sanksobham aksara-jusam api citta-tanvoh
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; aravinda-nayanasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus; pada-aravinda—of the lotus feet;
kinjalka—with saffron; misra—mixed; tulasi—of tulasi leaves; makaranda—with
the aroma; vayuh—the air; antargatah—entered; sva-vivarena—through the
nostrils; cakara—created; tesam—of them; sanksobham—strong agitation; ak-
sara-jusam—of the impersonally self-realized (Kumaras); api—also; citta-tan-
voh—of the mind and body.
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘When the breeze carrying the aroma of tulasi leaves and saffron from the
lotus feet of the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead entered through the
nostrils into the hearts of those sages [the Kumaras], they experienced a


--- Page 81 ---
78 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
change in both body and mind, even though they were attached to impersonal
Brahman understanding.’
PURPORT
This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.15.43). Vidura and Maitreya dis-
cussed the pregnancy of Diti. [0105 pregnancy caused the demigods to be very
much afraid, and the demigods went to see Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma explained
the original incident involving the cursing of Jaya and Vijaya by the Catuhsana
Kumaras. Sometimes the Catuhsana Kumaras went to Vaikuntha to visit Narayana,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and once they were stopped from entering
the palace at the seventh gate by two doorkeepers named Jaya and Vijaya. Due
to their jealousy, Jaya and Vijaya would not allow the Kumaras entry, and conse-
quently the Kumaras became angry and cursed Jaya and Vijaya, condemning
them to take birth in a family of asuras in the material world. The omniscient Per-
sonality of Godhead could immediately understand the incident,.and He came
with His eternal consort the goddess of fortune. The Catuhsana Kumaras im-
mediately offered their obeisances unto the Lord. Simply by seeing the Lord and
smelling the aroma of tulasi and saffron from His lotus feet, the Kumaras became
devotees and abandoned their long-cherished impersonalism. Thus the four
Kumaras were turned into Vaisnavas simply by smelling the aromatic tulasi mixed
with saffron. Those who are actually on the platform of Brahman realization and
who have not offended the lotus feet of Krsna can immediately become
Vaisnavas simply by smelling the aroma of the Lord's lotus feet. However, those
who are offenders or demons are never attracted to the Lord's personal feature,
even though they may visit the Lord's temple many times. In Vrndavana we have
seen many Mayavadi sannyasis who do not even come to the temple of Govin-
daji, Gopinatha or Madana-mohana because they think that such temples are
maya. Therefore they are called Mayavadis. Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu
therefore said that the Mayavadis are the greatest offenders.
TEXT 143

অতএব “কৃষ্ণনাম” न। আইসে তার মুখে |

মায়াবাদি-গণ যাতে মহ বহিমুখে ॥ ১৪৩ ॥

ataeva ‘krspa-nama’ na aise tara mukhe

mayavadi-gana yate maha bahirmukhe

SYNONYMS
ataeva—therefore; krsna-nama—the holy name of Krsna; na—does not; aise—

come; tara mukhe—in their mouths; mayavadi-gana—all the Mayavadis; yate—
because; maha bahih-mukhe—great offenders by dint of strong atheism.


--- Page 82 ---
Text 145] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 79
TRANSLATION
‘Because the Mayavadis are great offenders and atheistic philosophers, the
holy name of Krsna does not come from their mouths.
PURPORT
Because they are constantly blaspheming the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by saying that He has no head, hands or legs, Mayavadi philosophers remain
offenders for many, many births, even though they have partially realized Brah-
man. However, if such impersonalists are not offenders at the lotus feet of the
Lord, they immediately become devotees in the association of a devotee. In other
words, if an impersonalist is not an offender, he can become a devotee if he gets a
chance to associate with other devotees. If he is an offender, he cannot be con-
verted even by the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sri Krsna
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very much afraid of this Mayavadi offender; therefore
He spoke as follows.
TEXT 144
ভাবকালি বেচিতে আমি আইলাঙ কানশীপুরে ।
গ্রাহক নাহি, না বিকায়, न যাব ঘরে ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
bhavakali vecite ami ailana kasipure
grahaka nahi, na vikaya, lana yaba ghare
SYNONYMS
bhavakali—devotional sentiments; vecite—to sell; ami—I; ailana—came;
kasipure—to the city of Kasi; grahaka nahi—there is no customer; na vikdaya—do
not sell; lana yaba ghare —then | must take my commodity back home.
TRANSLATION
1 have come here to sell My emotional ecstatic sentiments in this city of
Kasi, but ॥ cannot find any customers. If they are not sold, | must take them
back home.
TEXT 145
ভারী (वाका লঞা আইলাঙ, কেমনে Awl যাব ?
অল্প-স্বল্প-মূল্য পাইলে, এথাই বেচিব ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
bhari bojha lana ailana, kemane lana yaba?
alpa-svalpa-malya paile, ethai veciba


--- Page 83 ---
80 ওরা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS

bhari bojha—heavy load; lana—bearing; ailana—| came; kemane—how; lana
yaba—shall | take it back; alpa-svalpa-malya—a fraction of the real price; paile—
if | get; ethai—here; veciba—I shall sell.

TRANSLATION

‘1 have brought a heavy load to sell in this city. To take it back again is a
very difficult job; therefore if | get but a fraction of the price, 1 shall sell it here
in this city of Kasi.”

PURPORT

$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was selling the transcendental holy name of the Lord.
However, Kasi was a city of Mayavadis (impersonalists), and such people will
never chant the holy names of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Consequently Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was feeling disappointed. How could He teach the
Mayavadis the importance of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra? The attrac-
tion for chanting the holy name of the Lord belongs absolutely to pure devotees,
and there was no possibility of finding pure devotees at Kasi. Consequently Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s commodity was certainly very heavy. The Lord therefore
suggested that even though there were no pure devotees in Kasi, if someone was
a little inclined to chant the Hare Krsna mantra, He would deliver this big load, al-
though the proper price was not paid.

Actually we experienced this when we came to preach the Hare Krsna move-
ment in the West. When we came to New York in 1965, we never expected that
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra would be accepted in this country. Nonetheless, we
invited people to our storefront to join in chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, and the
Lord's holy name is so attractive that simply by coming to our storefront in New
York, fortunate young people became Krsna conscious. Although this mission was
started with insignificant capital, it is now going nicely. The spreading of the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra in the West has become successful because the young people
were not offenders. The youths who joined this movement were not very ad-
vanced as far as purity was concerned, nor were they very well educated in Vedic
knowledge, but because they were not offenders, they could accept the impor-
tance of the Hare Krsna movement. We are now very happy to see that this
movement is advancing more and more in the Western countries. We therefore
conclude that the so-called mlecchas and yavanas of the Western countries are
more purified than offensive Mayavadis or atheistic impersonalists.

TEXT 146
এত বলি” সেই विटय আত্মসাথ করি”।
প্রাতে উঠি' মধুর एनिन। গৌরহরি ॥ ১৪৬ ॥


--- Page 84 ---
Text 148] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 81
eta bali’ sei vipre atmasatha kari’
prate uthi mathura calila gaurahari
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; sei vipre—that brahmana; atmasatha kari’—accepting as
His devotee; prate uthi—rising early in the morning; mathura calila—started for
Mathura; gaurahari—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted that brihmana as His
devotee. The next morning, rising very early, the Lord started for Mathura.
TEXT 147
সেই তিন সঙ্গে চলে, প্রভু নিষেধিল |
দুর হৈতে তিনজনে ঘরে পাঠাইল ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
sei tina sange cale, prabhu nisedhila
dara haite tina-jane ghare pathaila
SYNONYMS
sei tina—those three; sange—with ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cale—go;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nisedhila—forbade; dara haite —from a dis-
tance; tina-jane—the three persons; ghare —home; pathaila—sent back.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started for Mathura, all three devotees
started to go with Him. However, the Lord forbade them to accompany Him,
and from a distance He asked them to return home.
TEXT 148
অরভুর বিরহে তিনে একত্র fafa
প্রভুগুণ গান করে প্রেমে मं 2 ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
prabhura virahe tine ekatra miliya
prabhu-guna gana kare preme matta hana
SYNONYMS
prabhura virahe—because of separation from the Lord; tine—all three;
ekatra—together; miliya—meeting; prabhu-guna—the transcendental qualities
of the Lord; gana kare—chant; preme —with love; matta hafia—being mad.


--- Page 85 ---
82 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
Feeling separation from the Lord, the three used to meet and glorify the
holy qualities of the Lord. Thus they were absorbed in ecstatic love.
TEXT 149
“্রয়াগে” আসিয়া প্রভু কৈল বেণী-স্লান |
মাধব দেখিয়া প্রেমে কৈল নৃত্যগান ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
‘prayage’ asiya prabhu kaila veni-snana
‘madhava’ dekhiya preme kaila nrtya-gana
SYNONYMS
praydge—to Prayaga; asiyi—coming; prabhu—Sri Caitanya® Mahaprabhu;
kaila—did; veni-snana—bathing in the confluence of the Canges and Yamuna;
madhava—the predominating Deity there, Veni Madhava; dekhiya—seeing;
preme—in ecstatic love; kaila—performed; nrtya-gana—dancing and chanting.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then went to Prayaga, where He bathed at the
confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna. He then visited the temple of Veni
Madhava and chanted and danced there in ecstatic love.
PURPORT
The city of Prayaga is situated a few miles from the city of Allahabad. The name
Prayaga is given due to successful sacrifices performed there. It is said: prakrstah
yagah yaga-phalam yasmat. If one performs sacrifices at Prayaga, he certainly gets
immediate results without difficulty. Prayaga is also called Tirtharaja, the king of all
places of pilgrimage. This holy place is situated on the confluence of the Rivers
Canges and Yamuna. Every year a fair takes place there known as Magha-mela,
and every twelve years a Kumbha-mela is also held. In any case, many people
come to bathe there every year. During Magha-mela, people from the local dis-
trict generally come, and during Kumbha-mela people come from all over India to
live there and bathe in the Ganges and Yamuna. Whoever goes there immediately
feels the places spiritual influence. A fort located there was constructed by the
Emperor Akbar about five hundred years ago, and near the fort is a place called
Triveni. On the other side of Prayaga is an old place known as Pratisthana-pura. It
is also well known as Jhunsi. Many saintly people live there, and consequently it is
very attractive from the spiritual point of view.


--- Page 86 ---
Text 152] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 83
TEXT 150
T= দেখিয়। প্রেমে পড়ে ঝীপ fami)
আস্তে-ব্যস্তে ভট্টাচার্য উঠায় ধরিয়। ॥ ১৫০ ॥
yamuna dekhiya preme pade jharpa diya
aste-vyaste bhattacarya uthaya dhariya
SYNONYMS
yamuna—the River Yamuna; dekhiyd—seeing; preme—in ecstatic love;
pade—falls down; jharpa diya—jumping; dste-vyaste—in great haste; bhat-
tacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; uthdya—raises; dhariya—catching.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the River Yamuna, He threw Him-
self in it. Balabhadra Bhattacarya hastily caught the Lord and very carefully
raised Him up again.
TEXT 151
এইমত তিনদিন প্রয়াগে রহিল৷ |
কৃষ্ণ-নাম-প্রেম দিয়। লোক নিস্তারিল। ॥ ১৫১ ॥
ei-mata tina-dina prayage rahila
krsna-nama-prema diya loka nistarila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; tina-dina—for three days; prayage —at Prayaga; rahila—
remained; krsna-nama—the holy name of Lord Krsna; prema—and ecstatic love;
diya—delivering; loka nistarila—delivered the people.
TRANSLATION
The Lord stayed at Prayaga for three days. He delivered the holy name of
Krsna and ecstatic love. Thus He delivered many people.
TEXT 152
“মথুরা” চলিতে পথে যথা রহি' যায়।
কৃষ্ণ-নাম-প্রেম দিয়৷। লোকেরে নাচায় ॥ ১৫২ ॥
‘mathura’ calite pathe yatha rahi’ yaya
krsna-nama-prema diya lokere nacaya


--- Page 87 ---
84 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
mathura—to Mathura; calite—going; pathe—on the road; yatha—wherever;
rahi’—staying; yaya—goes; krsna-nama-prema—the holy name of Krsna and His
ecstatic love; diya—delivering; lokere nacaya—made the people dance.
TRANSLATION
Wherever the Lord stopped to rest on the way to Mathura, He delivered the
holy name of Krsna and ecstatic love of Krsna. Thus He made the people
dance.
TEXT 153
পূর্বে যেন “দক্ষিণ' যাইতে লোক नि त्निम्‌। ।
“পশ্চিম'-দেশে তৈছে সব “বৈষ্ণব” করিলা ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
parve yena ‘daksina’ yaite loka nistarila
‘pascima’-dese taiche saba ‘vaisnava’ karila
SYNONYMS
parve—formerly; yena—as; daksipa—South India; yaite—going to; loka—the
people; nistarilai—He delivered; pascima-dese—in the western countries;
taiche —similarly; saba—all; vaisnava—devotees; karila—made.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord toured South India, He delivered many people, and when He
traveled in the western sector, He similarly converted many people to
Vaisnavism.
PURPORT
Formerly आ Caitanya Mahaprabhu converted people when He toured southern
and western India. Similarly, this Hare Krsna movement is now delivering the
people of the Western world wherever devotees are chanting the holy names.
This is all being done by the Lord's mercy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu predicted that
He would deliver people in every city and village of the world by giving them a
chance to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
TEXT 154
পথে Ti যাহ হয় যমুনা-দর্শন |
তাহা ঝাঁপ দিয়া পড়ে প্রেমে অচেতন ॥ ses ॥


--- Page 88 ---
Text 156] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 85
pathe yahan yahan haya yamuna-darsana
tahan jhanpa diya pade preme acetana
SYNONYMS
pathe—on the road; yahan yahan—wherever; haya—there is; yamuna-dar-
sana—meeting with the Yamuna River; tahan—there; jhanpa diya pade —jumps
over and falls down; preme acetana—unconscious in the ecstasy of love.
TRANSLATION
While the Lord was going to Mathura, He came across the River Yamuna
several times, and as soon as He saw the River Yamuna, He would immediately
jump in, falling unconscious in the water in the ecstasy of love of Krsna.
TEXT 155
মধুরা-নিকটে আইলা-_মধ্ুর| দেখিয়া |
দণ্ডবৎ TP] পড়ে প্রেমাবিষ্ট হঞ। ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
mathura-nikate aila—mathura dekhiya
dandavat hana pade premavista hana
SYNONYMS
mathura-nikate —near Mathura; aila—came; mathura dekhiya —seeing the city
of Mathura; dandavat hana—offering obeisances; pade—falls down; prema-
avista hana—in the great ecstasy of love.
TRANSLATION
When He approached Mathura and saw the city, He immediately fell to the
ground and offered obeisances with great ecstatic love.
TEXT 156
मुत्त Wf কৈল। “বিশ্রান্তি-তীর্ঘথে F191
জন্মস্থানে” কেশব” দেখি” TAS প্রণাম ॥ ১৫৬ ॥
mathura asiya kaila ‘visranti-tirthe’ snana
‘janma-sthane’ ‘kesava’ dekhi’ karila prapama
SYNONYMS
mathura asiya—coming in to Mathura; kaila—performed; visranti-tirthe —at
the bathing place known as Visrama-ghata; snana—bathing; janma-sthane —at


--- Page 89 ---
86 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 17
the place of Lord Krsna's birth; kesava—the Deity named Kesava; dekhi’—seeing;
karila pranama—offered His respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered the city of Mathura, He took His
bath at Visrama-ghata. He then visited the birthplace of Krsna and saw the
Deity named Kesavaji. He offered His respectful obeisances to this Deity.
PURPORT
At the present moment, the temple of Kesavaji is very much improved. At one
time, Ke$avaji-mandira was attacked by the emperor Aurangzeb, who con-
structed such a big mosque there that the temple of Kesavaji was insignificant in
comparison. However, with the help of many rich Madwaris, the temple has im-
proved, and a very large temple is now being constructed so that the mosque is
now appearing diminished in comparison. Many archeological discoveries have
been made there, and many people from foreign countries are beginning to ap-
preciate Krsna's birthplace. This Krsna consciousness movement is attracting
many foreigners to the Ke$avaji temple, and now they will also be attracted by
the Krsna-Balarama temple in Vrndavana.
TEXT 157
CATACH নাচে, গায়, जयन TWIT |
প্রভুর প্রেমাবেশ দেখি” লোকে চমৎকার ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
premanande nace, gaya, saghana hunkara
prabhura premavesa dekhi’ loke camatkara
SYNONYMS
prema-anande—in ecstatic love; nace—dances; gaya—chants; saghana—
repeatedly; hurnkira—tumultuous sound vibrations; prabhura—of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-avesa—ecstatic love; dekhi’'—seeing; loke—all
people; camatkara—astonished.
TRANSLATION
When ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu chanted, danced and made loud vibrations,
all the people were astonished to see His ecstatic love.
TEXT 158
একবিপ্রি পড়ে প্রভুর চরণ ধরিয়া ।
প্রভু-সঙ্গে নৃত্য করে প্রেমাবিষ্ট হঞএ| ॥ ১৫৮ ॥


--- Page 90 ---
Text 160] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 87
eka-vipra pade prabhura carapa dhariya
prabhu-sange nrtya kare premavista hana
SYNONYMS
eka-vipra—one brahmana; pade—falls down; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; carana dhariya—catching the lotus feet; prabhu-sange—with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nrtya kare—he dances; prema-avista hana—being ab-
sorbed in ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
One brahmana fell at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and then
began to dance with Him in ecstatic love.
TEXT 159
তু'হে প্রেমে নৃত্য করি” করে কোলাকুলি ।
হরি কৃষ্ণ কহ দুহে বলে বাহু ভুলি” ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
dunhe preme nrtya kari’ kare kolakuli
hari krsna kaha dunhe bale bahu tuli’
SYNONYMS
durihe—both of them; preme—in ecstatic love; nrtya kari’—dancing; kare —
do; kolakuli—embracing; hari—the holy name of Hari; krspna—the holy name of
Krsna; kaha—go on chanting; dunhe —both of them; bale —speak; bahu tuli’'—
raising the arms.
TRANSLATION
Both of them danced in ecstatic love and embraced one another. Raising
their arms, they said, ‘Chant the holy names of Hari and Krsna!’’
TEXT 160
লোক হরি” 'হরি' বলে, কোলাহল হৈল ।
“কেশব-সেবক প্রভুকে মাল। পরাইল ॥ ১৬০ ॥
loka ‘hari’ *hari’ bale, kolahala haila
‘kesava’-sevaka prabhuke mala paraila
SYNONYMS
loka—all the people; hari hari bale —began to chant the holy names Hari, Hari;
kolahala haila—there was a great uproar; kesava-sevaka—the priest in the service


--- Page 91 ---
88 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
of Lord Ke$ava; prabhuke —unto ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mala paraila—offered
a garland.
TRANSLATION
All the people then began to chant, “Hari! Hari!” and there was a great
uproar. The priest in Lord Ke$ava's service offered Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu a
garland.
TEXT 161
লোকে কহে প্রভু দেখি” হঞা বিস্ময়!
এছে হেন প্রেম “লৌকিক?” কভু নয় ॥ ১৬১ ॥
loke kahe prabhu dekhi’ haha vismaya
aiche hena prema ‘laukika’ kabhu naya
SYNONYMS
loke kahe—the people said; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhi’—
seeing; hana vismaya—being struck with wonder; aiche —such; hena—similar;
prema—love of Godhead; laukika—ordinary; kabhu naya—never is.
TRANSLATION
When the people saw $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s dancing and chanting,
they were struck with wonder, and they all said, ‘Such transcendental love is
never an ordinary thing.”
TEXT 162
যাহার कर्नटिन লোকে প্রেমে মত্ত < |
হাসে, কান্দে, নাচে, গায়, কৃষ্ণনাম Fel ॥ ১৬২ ॥
yanhara darsane loke preme matta hana
hase, kande, nace, gaya, krsna-nama lana
SYNONYMS
yanhara darsane—by seeing whom; loke—people; preme—in love; matta
hana—becoming mad; hase—laugh; kande—cry; nace—dance; gaya—chant;
krsna-nama lana—taking the holy name of Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
The people said, “Simply by seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, everyone is
maddened with love of Krsna. Indeed, everyone is laughing, crying, dancing,
chanting and taking the holy name of Krsna.


--- Page 92 ---
Text 165] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 89
TEXT 163
সর্বধা-নিশ্চিত- दे tel কৃষ্ণ-অবতার |
RYT WIRE লেকের করিতে নিস্তার ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
sarvatha-niscita——inho krspa-avatara
mathura ila lokera karite nistara
SYNONYMS
sarvatha—in every respect; niscita—ascertained; inho—He; krspa-avatara—in-
carnation of Lord Krsna; mathura aila—has come to Mathura; lokera—of the
people; karite—to perform; nistara—deliverance.
TRANSLATION
“Certainly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is in all respects the incarnation of
Lord Krsna. Now He has come to Mathura to deliver everyone.”
TEXT 164
তবে মহাপ্রভু সেই ल।क्रटन लग] |
তাহারে পুছিল৷ কিছু Mors বলিয়া ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
(306 mahaprabhu sei brahmane 13703
tanhare puchila kichu nibhrte vasiya
SYNONYMS
tabe—after that; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sei—that;
brahmane —brahmana; landa—taking; tanhare—unto him; puchila—inquired;
kichu—something; nibhrte vasiya—sitting in a solitary place.
TRANSLATION
After this, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took aside the brahmana. Sitting in a
solitary place, the Lord began to question him.
TEXT 165
“আর্য, সরল, তুমি ` বৃদ্ধ ত্রাহ্মণ |
কাই হৈতে পাইলে তুমি এই প্রেমধন ?” ১৬৫ ॥
‘arya, sarala, tumi——vrddha brahmana
kahan haite paile tumi ei prema-dhana?’


--- Page 93 ---
90 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
SYNONYMS
arya—advanced in devotional service; sarala—simple; tumi—you; vrddha
brahmana—elderly brahmana; kahan haite—from where; pile tumi—did you ob-
tain; ei—this; prema-dhana—transcendental opulence of ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘You are an elderly braihmana, you are sin-
cere, and you are advanced in spiritual life. Wherefrom have you gotten this
transcendental opulence of ecstatic love for Krsna?’’
TEXT 166
বিপ্র কহে,-__“জীপাদ লীমাধবেন্দ্রপুরী |
ভ্রনিতে ভ্রমিতে আইল মথুরা-নগরী ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
vipra kahe, — 4110503 sri-madhavendra-puri
bhramite bhramite aila mathura-nagari
SYNONYMS
vipra kahe —the brahmana said; sripada—His Holiness; $ri-madhavendra-puri—
Sri Madhavendra Puri; bhramite bhramite —while touring; dila—came; mathura-
nagari—to the city of Mathura.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana replied, “1115 Holiness Srila Madhavendra Puri came to the
city of Mathura while he was on a tour.
TEXT 167
कृश] করি” (Seal মোর নিলয়ে खोदेन।
মোরে শিষ্য করি” মোর হাতে “ভিক্ষা” কৈল। ॥১৬৭॥
krpa kari’ (21300 mora nilaye aila
more Sisya kari’ mora hate ‘bhiksa’ kaila
SYNONYMS
krpa kari’—by his causeless mercy; ternho—he; mora nilaye—to my humble
place; dila—came; more —me; Sisya kari’—accepting as his disciple; mora hate —
from my hand; bhiksa kaila—accepted lunch.


--- Page 94 ---
Text 169] The Lord Travels to Vendavana 91
TRANSLATION
“While at Mathura, Sripada Madhavendra Puri visited my house and ac-
cepted me as a disciple. He even took lunch at my home.
TEXT 168
গোপাল শ্রকট করি' সেবা কৈল “মহাশয়” ।
অত্যাপিহ তাহার (AT "(भौं व নে” হয় ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
gopala prakata kari’ seva kaila ‘mahasaya’
adyapiha tanhara seva ‘govardhane’ haya
SYNONYMS
gopala—the Deity Gopala; prakata kari’—installing; seva—service; kaila—did;
mahasaya—that great personality; adyapiha—still now; tanhara—of that Deity
Copala; seva—the service; govardhane—on the Govardhana Hill; haya—is con-
ducted.
TRANSLATION
“After installing the Deity Gopala, Srila Madhavendra Puri rendered Him
service. That very Deity is still being worshiped at Govardhana Hill.”
TEXT 169
শুনি” প্রভু কৈল তার চরণ বন্দন |
ভয় পাঞা প্রভু-পায় পড়িল लोकन ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
Suni’ prabhu kaila tanra carana vandana
bhaya pana prabhu-paya padila brahmana
SYNONYMS
Suni’—after hearing; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—did; tarra—of
him; (गावब vandana—worshiping the feet; bhaya pana—being afraid; prabhu-
pdaya—at the lotus feet of ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu; padila—fell down;
brahmana—the brahmana.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard about Madhavendra Puri’s relation-
ship with the brahmana, He immediately offered obeisances at his feet. Be-
coming fearful, the brahmana also immediately fell at the Lord's feet.


--- Page 95 ---
92 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 170
প্রভু কহে, “তুমি “গুরু”, আমি “শিষ্য-প্রায়।
‘RDF Zl ‘THCY নমস্কার না TAF ॥ ১৭০ ॥
prabhu (८2/0९, — “tumi ‘guru’, ami “Sisya’-praya
‘guru’ hana ‘Sisye’ namaskara na yuyaya
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; tumi—you; guru—My spiritual
master; ami—I; Sisya-praya—Ilike your disciple; guru hana—being the spiritual
master; Sisye—unto the disciple; namaskara—obeisances; na yuyaya—is not
befitting.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “You are on the platform of My spiritual
master, and | am your disciple. Since you are My spiritual master, it is not
befitting that you offer Me obeisances.’”
TEXT 171
শুনিয়া विश्छिङ विव्यं কহে ভয় नै 49| |
এঁছে বাত, কহ কেনে गन्ना नो ङग ॥ ১৭১ ॥
Suniya vismita vipra kahe bhaya pana
aiche vat kaha kene sannyasi hana
SYNONYMS
suniya—after hearing; vismita—astonished; vipra—the brahmana; kahe —said;
bhaya pana—being afraid; aiche vat—such a statement; kaha—You say; kene—
why; sannyasi hana—although You are a sannyasi.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this, the brahmana became afraid. He then said, ‘Why do You
speak like this? You are a sannyasi.
TEXT 172
কিন্তু তোমার প্রেম দেখি” মনে অনুমানি ।
নমাধবেন্দ্র-পুরীর “সম্বন্ধ ধর _জানি ॥ ১৭২ ॥


--- Page 96 ---
Text 174] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 93
kintu tomara prema dekhi’ mane anumani
madhavendra-purira ‘sambandha’ dhara—jani

SYNONYMS
kintu—still; tomara prema —Your ecstatic love; dekhi’—after seeing; mane —in
my mind; anumani—I imagine; madhavendra-purira—of Sri Madhavendra Puri;
sambandha—relationship; dhara—You have; jani—I can understand.
TRANSLATION
‘“Upon seeing Your ecstatic love, | can just imagine that You must have
some relationship with Madhavendra Puri. This is my understanding.
TEXT 173
কৃষ্ণপ্রেমা Siz), যাহা তাহার Aww’ |
তাহা विन এই প্রেমার iE নাহি গন্ধ ॥ ১৭৩ ॥
krsna-prema (3703, yanha tanhara ‘sambandha’
tahan vina ei premara kahan nahi gandha
SYNONYMS
krsna-prema—love of Krsna; tanha—there; yanha —where; tanhara—his; sam-
bandha—relationship; tahan vina—without him; ei premara—of this ecstatic
love; kahan nahi gandha—there is no possibility of even a scent.
TRANSLATION
“This kind of ecstatic love can be experienced only when one has a rela-
tionship with Madhavendra Puri. Without him, even a scent of such transcen-
dental ecstatic love is impossible.”
TEXT 174
তবে ভট্টাচার্য তারে “সম্বন্ধ” কহিল ।
শুনি” আনন্দিত fae নাচিতে লাগিল ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
tabe bhattacarya tare ‘sambandha’ kahila
Suni’ anandita vipra nacite lagila
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter; bhatticarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; tare—unto the
brahmana; sambandha kahila—explained the relationship; suni’—after hearing;
anandita—being pleased; vipra—the brahmana; nacite lagila—began to dance.


--- Page 97 ---
94 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya then explained the relationship between Madha-
vendra Puri and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. After hearing this, the brahmana
became very pleased and began to dance.
TEXT 175
তবে বিপ্র প্রভুরে লঞা৷ আইলা নিজ-ঘরে।
আপন-ইচ্ছায় প্রভুর নান৷ সেবা করে ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
tabe vipra prabhure 1205 aila nija-ghare
apana-icchaya prabhura nana seva kare
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; vipra—the brahmana; prabhure —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
lana—taking; dila—came back; nija-ghare—to his home; apana-icchaya—by his
own will; prabhura—of 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nana—various; seva—services;
kare —rendered.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana then took Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his home and, out of
his own free will, began to serve the Lord in various ways.
TEXT 176
few! লাগি” ভট্টাচার্ধে করাইলা ame |
তবে মহাপ্রভু হাসি” বলিলা৷ বচন ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
bhiksa lagi’ bhattacarye karaila randhana
tabe mahaprabhu hasi’ balila vacana
SYNONYMS
bhiksa lagi’—for lunch; bhattacarye —Balabhadra Bhattacarya; karaila
randhana—made to cook; tabe—at that time; mahaprabhu—Sii Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hasi’—smiling; balila vacana—said these words.
TRANSLATION
He asked Balabhadra Bhattacarya to cook Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s lunch.
At that time, the Lord, smiling, spoke as follows.


--- Page 98 ---
Text 178] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 95
TEXT 177
“পুবী-গোসাঞ্ি তোমার ঘরে কর্যাছেন few |
মোরে তুমি ভিক্ষা দেহ,- এই মোর “শিক্ষা'॥” ১৭৭॥
“puri-gosani tomara ghare karyachena bhiksa
more tumi bhiksa deha,—ei mora ‘Siksa’ ^
SYNONYMS
puri-gosani—Madhavendra Puri; tomara ghare—at your place; karyachena
bhiksa—accepted lunch; more—for Me; tumi bhiksa deha—better for you to
cook; ei—that; mora $iksa—My instruction.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “Madhavendra Puri has already taken lunch
at your place. Therefore you may cook and give Me the food. That is My in-
struction.”
TEXT 178
যদ্যদাচরতি শেষ্ঠন্ডত্তদেবেতরে। खनः |
म यर প্রমাণং কুরুতে লোকমস্তদবর্ততে ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
yad yad 303/31/ sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
SYNONYMS
yat yat—however; acarati—behaves; srestah—the best man; tat tat—that;
eva—certainly; itarah—the lesser; janah—men; sah—he; yat—which; pra-
manpam—standard; kurute—shows; lokah —the people; tat—that; anuvartate—
follow.
TRANSLATION
‘Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow. And
whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.”
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (3.21).


--- Page 99 ---
96 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 179
TQ 'সনোড়িয়া” হয় সেইত ত্রাহ্মণ |
সনোড়িয়।-ঘরে সল্্যালী না| করে ভোজন ॥ ১৭৯ ॥
yadyapi ‘sanodiya’ haya seita brahmana
sanodiya-ghare sannyasi na kare bhojana
SYNONYMS

yadyapi—although; sanodiya—a priest of the Sanodiya community; haya—
was; seita—that; brahmana—brahmana; sanodiya-ghare—in the house of a
Sanodiya (goldsmith); sannyasi—a person in the renounced order of life; na kare
bhojana—does not accept food.

TRANSLATION

The brahmana belonged to the Sanodiya brahmana community, and a san-

nyasi does not accept food from such a brahmana.
PURPORT

In northwestern India, vaisyas are divided in various subdivisions. Srila Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura points out that they are divided as Agaraoyala, Kalaoyara and
Sanoyada. Out of them, the Agaraoyalas are supposed to be first-class vaisyas,
and the Kalaoyaras and Sanoyadas are considered lower due to their occupational
degradation. The Kalaoyaras generally take wine and other intoxicants. Although
they are vaisyas, they are considered to belong to a lower class. The priests who
guide the Kalaoyaras and the Sanoyadas are called Sanodiya brahmanas. Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura states that the word sanoyada in Bengal indicates suvarpa-
vanik. In Bengal there are priests who guide the suvarpa-vanik community, which
is also considered a low class. There is little difference between the Sanoyada and
the suvarpa-vanik. Generally the suvarpa-vaniks are bankers dealing in gold and
silver. In western India, the Agaraoyalas also belong to the banking profession.
This is the original business of the suvarpa-vanik or Agaraoyala community.
Historically, the Agaraoyalas came from the up-country named Ayodha, and the
suvarpa-vanik community came from Ayodha. It appears that the suvarpa-vaniks
and the Agaraoyalas belong to the same community. The Sanodiya brahmanas
were the guides of the Kalaoyara and Sanoyada. They are therefore considered to
be lower-class brahmanas, and a sannyasiis not allowed to take alms or food from
them. However, ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted lunch cooked by a Sanodiya
brahmana simply because he belonged to Madhavendra 2015 community. Srila
Madhavendra Purl was the spiritual master of Tévara Puri, who was the spiritual
master of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thus a spiritual relationship is established on
the spiritual platform without consideration of material inferiority or superiority.


--- Page 100 ---
Text 182] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 97
TEXT 180
তথাপি পুরী দেখি” সার श्देवस्‌श्व'-खात्र |
frp’ করি” Siw ভিক্ষা কৈল অঙ্গীকার ॥ ১৮০ ॥
tathapi puri dekhi’ {4/2 ‘vaispava’-acara
‘Sisya’ kari’ tanra bhiksa kaila angikara
SYNONYMS
tathapi —still; puri—Madhavendra Puri; dekhi’—after seeing; tarira—of the
brahmana; vaisnava-acara—behavior like a Vaisnava; Sisya kari’—accepting him
as his disciple; tanra bhiksa—food offered by him; kaila arigikara—accepted.
TRANSLATION
Although the brihmana belonged to the Sanodiya community, Srila
Maidhavanedra Puri saw that he behaved like a Vaisnava and therefore ac-
cepted him as his disciple. The food he cooked was also accepted by Madha-
vendra Puri.
TEXT 181
মহাপ্রভু ভারে যদি Few মাগিল ।
we করি” সেই fae কছিতে লাগিল ॥ ১৮১ ॥
mahaprabhu tanre yadi ‘bhiksa’ magila
dainya kari’ sei vipra kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarre—from him; yadi—when;
bhiksa magila—requested lunch; dainya kari’—out of humility; sei vipra—that
brahmana; kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu willingly requested food from the
brahmana, and the brahmana, feeling a natural humility, began to speak as
follows.
TEXT 182
তোমারে “ভিক্ষা” দিব- वणु ভাগ্য সে আমার ।
তুমি ঈশ্বর, নাহি তোমার বিধি-ব্যবহার ॥ ১৮২ ॥


--- Page 101 ---
98 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
tomare ‘bhiksa’ diba— bada bhagya se amara
tumi——1I$vara, nahi tomara vidhi-vyavahara

SYNONYMS

tomare—unto You; bhiksa diba—I shall offer food; bada bhagya—great for-
tune; se—that; amara—my; tumi—You; isvara—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; nahi—there is not; tomara—of You; vidhi-vyavahara—regulative behavior.

TRANSLATION

“It is a great fortune for me to offer You food. You are the Supreme Lord,

and, being in the transcendental position, You are not restricted in any way.
TEXT 183
“মুরহগঃ-লোক করিবেক তোমার निन्नन |
সহিতে না পারিমু সেই ‘GTR’ বচন ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
‘markha’-loka karibeka tomara nindana
sahite na parimu sei ‘duste’ra vacana
SYNONYMS

miarkha-loka—foolish persons; karibeka—will do; tomara nindana—blasphem-
ing You; sahite na parimu—I shall not be able to tolerate; sei—those; dustera
vacana—words of mischievous persons.

TRANSLATION

‘Foolish people will blaspheme You, but | shall not tolerate the words of

such mischievous people.”
PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks that although the brahmana did

not belong to a superior community, he fearlessly chastised so-called caste
brahmanas because he was situated on the platform of pure devotional service.
There are people who are opposed to $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s accepting a
Vaisnava belonging to a lower caste. Such people do not consider maha-prasada
transcendental, and therefore they are described here as markha (foolish) and
dusta (mischievous). A pure devotee has the power to challenge such high-caste
people, and his brave statements are not to be considered proud or puffed up. On
the contrary, he is to be considered straightforward. Such a person does not like
to flatter high-class brahmanas who belong to the non-Vaisnava community.


--- Page 102 ---
Text 184] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 99
TEXT 184
প্রভু কহে, 51S, স্মৃতি, যত খাষিগণ |
লবে “এক -মত নহে, ভিন্ন ভিন্ন ধর্ম ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
prabhu kahe, —sruti, 57710, yata rsi-gana
sabe ‘eka’-mata nahe, bhinna bhinna dharma
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Lord ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; sruti—the Vedas; smrti—the
Puranas; yata—all; rsi-gana—great sages; sabe—all of them; eka-mata nahe —do
not agree; bhinna bhinna dharma—different grades of religious principles.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, “1116 Vedas, Puranas and great learned
sages are not always in agreement with one another. Consequently there are
different religious principles.
PURPORT
Unless one comes to the Absolute Truth, there is no possibility of agreement.
Nasav rsir yasya matari na bhinnam: it is said that a great learned scholar or sage
cannot be exalted unless he disagrees. On the material platform, there is no
possibility of agreement; therefore there are different kinds of religious systems.
However, the Absolute Truth is one, and when one is situated in the Absolute
Truth, there is no disagreement. On that absolute platform the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is worshipable. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.55): bhaktya
mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah. On the absolute platform, the worship-
ful Deity is one, and the process of worship is also one. That process is bhakti.
There are many different religions throughout the world because they are not
all on the absolute platform of devotional service. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(18.66): sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekar saranam vraja. The word ekam
means “one,” Krsna. On this platform, there are no different religious systems. Ac-
cording to Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.2): dharmah projjhita-kaitavo ‘tra. On the ma-
terial platform, religious systems are different. Srimad-Bhagavatam describes them
from the very beginning as dharmah kaitavah, cheating religions. None of these
religions are actually genuine. The genuine religious system is that which enables
one to become a lover of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the words of
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.6):
sa vai purhsarn paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje


--- Page 103 ---
100 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati
“The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which men can at-
tain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional ser-
vice must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order to completely satisfy the
self.”

On this platform there is nothing but the service of the Lord. When a person
has no ulterior motive, there is certainly oneness and agreement of principles.
Since everyone has a different body and mind, different types of religions are
needed. But when one is situated on the spiritual platform, there are no bodily
and mental differences. Consequently on the absolute platform there is oneness
in religion.

TEXT 185
ধর্ম-স্থাপন-হেতু সাধুর ব্যবহার ।
পুবী-গোসাঞ্র যে আচরণ, সেই ধর্ম সার ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
dharma-sthapana-hetu sadhura vyavahara
puri-gosaiira ye acarana, sei dharma sara
SYNONYMS

dharma-sthapana-hetu—to establish the principles of religion; sadhura
vyavahara—behavior of a devotee; puri-gosanira—of Madhavendra Puri; ye
acarana—the behavior; sei—that; dharma sara—the essence of all religion.

TRANSLATION

“A devotee’s behavior establishes the true purpose of religious principles.
The behavior of Madhavendra Puri Gosvami is the essence of such religious
principles.”

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives the following commentary on this
passage. A sadhu or an honest man is called a mahajana or a mahatma. The mahat-
ma is thus described in Bhagavad-gita:

mahatmanas tu marh partha
daivirh prakrtim asritah

bhajanty ananya-manaso
jAatva bhatadim avyayam


--- Page 104 ---
Text 185] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 101
“O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protec-
tion of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because
they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and inexhaust-
ible.” (Bg. 9.13)

In the material world, the word mahatma is understood in different ways by dif-
ferent religionists. Mundaners also come up with their different angles of vision.
For the conditioned soul busy in sense gratification, a mahdajana is recognized ac-
cording to the proportion of sense gratification he offers. For instance, a business-
man may consider a certain banker to be a mahajana, and karmis desiring material
enjoyment may consider philosophers like Jaimini to be mahajanas. There are
many yogis who want to control the senses, and for them Patafjali Rsi is a maha-
jana. For the jAianis, the atheist Kapila, Vasistha, Durvasa, Dattatreya and other im-
personalist philosophers are mahajanas. For the demons, Hiranyaksa,
Hiranyakasipu, Ravana, Ravana's son Meghanada, Jarasandha and others are ac-
cepted as mahdjanas. For materialistic anthropologists speculating on the evolu-
tion of the body, a person like Darwin is a mahdjana. The scientists who are
bewildered by Krsna’s external energy have no relationship with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, yet they are accepted by some as mahajanas. Similarly, phi-
losophers, historians, literary men, public speakers and social and political leaders
are sometimes accepted as mahajanas. Such mahajanas are respected by certain
men who have been described in S$rimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.19):

$va-vid-varahostra-kharaih
samstutah purusah pasuh
na yat-karpa-pathopeto
jatu nama gadagrajah
“Men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and asses praise those men who never
listen to the transcendental pastimes of Lord $ri Krsna, the deliverer from evils.”

Thus on the material platform animalistic leaders are worshiped by animals.
Sometimes physicians, psychiatrists and social workers try to mitigate bodily pain,
distress and fear, but they have no knowledge of spiritual identity and are bereft
of a relationship with God. Yet they are considered mahajanas by the illusioned.
Self-deceived persons sometimes accept leaders or spiritual masters from a
priestly order that has been officially appointed by the codes of material life. In
this way, they are deceived by official priests. Sometimes people accept as maha-
janas those who have been designated by Srila Vindavana dasa Thakura as
dhanga-vipras (imposter brahmanas). Such imposters imitate the characteristics of
Srila Haridasa Thakura, and they envy Haridasa Thakura, who was certainly a
mahgjana. They make great artificial endeavors, advertising themselves as great
devotees of the Lord or as mystic hypnotists knowledgeable in witchcraft, hyp-
notism and miracles. Sometimes people accept demons like Patana, Trnavarta,


--- Page 105 ---
102 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
Vatsa, Baka, Aghasura and Dhenuka, Kaliya and Pralamba. Some people accept
imitators and adversaries of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such as
Paundraka, Srgala Vasudeva, the spiritual master of the demons (Sukracarya), or
atheists like Carvaka, King Vena, Sugata and Arhat. Such people have no faith in
$i Caitanya Mahaprabhu as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Rather, they ac-
cept godless cheaters who present themselves as incarnations of God and cheat
foolish people within the material world by word jugglery. Thus many rascals are
accepted as 12/12/2125.

In this material world a person may be famous as a karma-vira, a successful
fruitive worker, or one may be very successful in performing religious duties, or he
may be known as a hero in mental speculation (jidna-vira), or he may be a very
famous renunciant. In any case, $rimad-Bhagavatam (3.23.56) gives the following
opinion in this matter.

neha yat karma dharmaya
na viragaya kalpate
na tirtha-pada-sevayai
jivann api mrto hi sah
“Anyone whose work is not meant to elevate him to religious life, anyone whose
religious ritualistic performances do not raise him to renunciation, and anyone
situated in renunciation that does not lead him to devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead must be considered dead, although he is
breathing.”

The conclusion is that all pious activity, fruitive activity, religious principles and
renunciation must ultimately lead to devotional service. There are different types
of processes for rendering service. One may serve his country, people, society,
the varpasrama-dharma, the sick, the poor, the rich, women, demigods and so on.
All this comes under the heading of sense gratification, or enjoyment in the ma-
terial world. It is most unfortunate that people are more or less attracted by such
material activity and that the leaders of these activities are accepted as maha-
janas, great ideal leaders. Actually they are only misleaders, but an ordinary man
cannot understand how he is being misled.

Narottama dasa Thakura says: sadhu-sastra-guru-vakya, cittete kariya aikya. A
sadhu is a great personality like Sti Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The $astras are the in-
junctions of revealed scriptures. Those who are devoid of devotional service
sometimes mistake those who have mundane motives for mahajanas. The only
motive must be krspa-bhakti, devotional service to the Lord. Sometimes fruitive
workers, dry philosophers, nondevotees, mystic yogis and persons attached to
material opulence, women and money are considered mahdajanas. However,
Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.3.25) gives the following statements about such
unauthorized mahajanas:


--- Page 106 ---
Text 185] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 103
prayena veda tad idarh na mahajano ‘yar
devya vimohita-matir bata mayayalam
trayyam jadi-krta-matir madhu-puspitayar
vaitanike mahati karmani yujyamanah
In this material world, karmis (fruitive actors) are accepted as mahajanas by foolish
people who do not know the value of devotional service. Their mundane intelli-
gence and mental speculative methods are under the control of the three modes
of material nature. Consequently they cannot understand unalloyed devotional
service. They are attracted by material activities, and they become worshipers of
material nature. Thus they are known as fruitive actors. They even become en-
tangled in material activities disguised as spiritual activities. In Bhagavad-gita, such
people are described as veda-vada-rata. They do not understand the real purpose
of the Vedas, yet they think of themselves as Vedic authorities. People versed in
Vedic knowledge must know Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. (Bg. 15.15)

A man covered by illusion cannot understand the proper way; therefore ওলা
Caitanya Mahaprabhu says: dharma-sthapana-hetu sadhura vyavahara. The
behavior of a devotee is the criterion for all other behavior. $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu Himself followed the devotional principles and taught others to
follow them. Puri-gosarira ye acarana, sei dharma sara. ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu
personally followed the behavior of Madhavendra Puri and advised others to
follow his principles. Unfortunately, people have been attracted to the material
body since time immemorial.

yasyatma-buddhih kunape tridhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih
yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
janesv abhijiiesu sa eva go-kharah
“A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his self,
who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who considers the
land of birth worshipable, and who goes to the place of pilgrimage simply to take
a bath rather than meet men of transcendental knowledge there is to be con-
sidered like an ass or a cow.” (Bhag. 10.84.13) Those who accept the logic of gad-
dalika-pravaha and follow in the footsteps of pseudo-mahajanas are carried away
by the waves of maya. Bhaktivinoda Thakura therefore warns:
miche mayara vase, yaccha bhese,
khaccha habudubu, bhai
jiva krsna-dasa, € 15/25,
(८३416 ta’ ara duhkha nai


--- Page 107 ---
104 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
“Don't be carried away by the waves of maya. Just surrender to the lotus feet of
Krsna, and all miseries will end.” Those who follow social customs and behavior
forget to follow the path chalked out by the mahajanas; thus they are offenders at
the feet of the mahajanas. Sometimes they consider such mahajanas very conser-
vative, or they create their own mahajanas. In this way they ignore the principles
of the paramapara system. This is a great misfortune for everyone. If one does not
follow in the footsteps of a real mahajana, one’s plans for happiness will be frus-
trated. This is elaborately explained in Madhya-lila (Chapter Twenty-
five, verses 55, 56 and 58). It is there stated:

parama karana isvare keha nahi mane

sva-sva-mata sthape para-matera khandane

tate chaya darsana haite ‘tattva’ nahi jani

‘mahajana’ yei kahe, sei ‘satya’ mani

sri-krsna-caitanya-vani—amrtera dhara

tinho ye kahaye vastu, sei ‘tattva’—sara
People are so unfortunate that they do not accept the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Instead, they want to be supported by so-called maha-
janas, authorities. Tate chaya darsana haite ‘tattva’ nahi jani: we cannot ascertain
the real truth simply by following speculators. We have to follow the footsteps of
the mahajanas in the disciplic succession. Then our attempt will be successful. $ri-
krsna-caitanya-vani—amrtera dhara: “Whatever is spoken by अ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is an incessant flow of nectar.” Whoever accepts His words as reality
can understand the essence of the Absolute Truth. No one can ascertain the Ab-
solute Truth by following the philosophy of Sankhya or Patafjali, for the followers
of Sankhya or Patadjali do not accept Lord Visnu as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum). The ambition of such people is
never fulfilled; therefore they are attracted by the external energy. Although
mental speculators may be renowned all over the world as great authorities, ac-
tually they are not. Such leaders are themselves conservative and not at all liberal.
However, if we preach this philosophy, people will consider Vaisnavas very sec-
tarian. Srila Madhavendra Puri was a real mahajana, but misguided people cannot
distinguish the real from the unreal. However, a person who is awakened to Krsna
consciousness can understand the real religious path chalked out by the Lord and
His pure devotees. $ri Madhavendra Puri was a real mahajana because he under-
stood the Absolute Truth properly and throughout his life behaved like a pure
devotee. ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu approved the method of $i Madhavendra
Puri. Therefore, although from the material viewpoint the Sanodiya brahmana was
on a lower platform, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considered him situated on the
highest platform of spiritual realization.


--- Page 108 ---
Text 186] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 105

S$rimad-Bhagavatam (6.3.20) states that there are twelve mahajanas: Brahma,
Narada, Sambhu, Kumara, Kapila, Manu, Prahlada, Janaka, Bhisma, Bali, Sukadeva
and Yamaraja.

To select our mahajanas in the Gaudiya-sampradaya, we have to follow in the
footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His representatives. His next represen-
tative is Sri Svaripa Damodara Gosvami, and the next are the six Gosvamis — ऽग
২03, Sri Sanitana, Bhatta Raghunatha, Sri Jiva, Gopala Bhatta and Dasa
Raghunatha. The follower of Visnusvami was Sridhara Svami, the most well
known commentator on Srimad-Bhagavatam. He was also a mahajana. Similarly,
Candidasa, Vidyapati and Jayadeva were all mahajanas. One who tries to imitate
the mahajanas just to become an imitative spiritual master is certainly far away
from following in the footsteps of the mahajanas. Sometimes people cannot ac-
tually understand how a mahajana follows other mahajanas. In this way people
are inclined to fall from devotional service.

TEXT 186
তর্কোইপ্রতিষ্ঠঃ weal বিভিন্ন!
নাসাবুষিধষস্য মতৎ न fax
ধর্মস্য তত্বং নিহিতং গুহায়াং.
মহাজনে। যেন जडः म পদ্থাঃ॥ ১৮৬ ॥

tarko 12131051030 Srutayo vibhinna
nasav rsir yasya matarh na bhinnam
dharmasya tattvarn nihitarn guhayarn
mahajano yena gatah sa panthah
SYNONYMS

tarkah—dry argument; apratisthah—not fixed; srutayah— Vedas; vibhinnah—
possessing different departments; na—not; asau —that; rsih—great sage; yasya—
whose; matam—opinion; na—not; bhinnam—separate; dharmasya—of religious
principles; tattvam —truth; nihitam—placed; guhayam—in the heart of a realized
person; maha-janah—self-realized predecessors; yena—by which way; gatah—
acted; sah—that; panthah—the pure unadulterated path.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, // ‘Dry arguments are inconclusive. A
great personality whose opinion does not differ from others is not considered
a great sage. Simply by studying the Vedas, which are variegated, one cannot
come to the right path by which religious principles are understood. The solid
truth of religious principles is hidden in the heart of an unadulterated self-


--- Page 109 ---
106 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
realized person. Consequently, as the $astras confirm, one should accept
whatever progressive path the mahajanas advocate.’ ^“
PURPORT
This is a verse spoken by Yudhisthira Maharaja in the Mahabharata, Vana-parva
(313.117).
TEXT 187
তবে সেই वि প্রভুকে छिष्क] করাইল |
মধুপুরীর লোক সব প্রভুকে দেখিতে আইল ॥১৮৭॥
tabe sei vipra prabhuke bhiksa karaila
madhu-purira loka saba prabhuke dekhite aila
SYNONYMS
tabe—after that; sei vipra—that brahmana; prabhuke—unto Lord $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhiksa karaila—gave lunch; madhu-purira—of Mathura; loka—
people in general; saba—all; prabhuke —$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhite aila—
came to see.
TRANSLATION
After this discussion, the brahmana gave lunch to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Then all the people residing in Mathura came to see the Lord.
TEXT 188
লক্ষ-সংখ্য লোক আইসে, नाडिक গণমন |
বাহির হঞা প্রভু দিল দরশন ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
laksa-sankhya loka aise, nahika ganana
bahira hana prabhu dila darasana
SYNONYMS
laksa-sarnkhya—numbering hundreds of thousands; loka aise—people came;
nahika ganana—there is no counting; bahira haAd—coming out; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dila darasana—gave audience.
TRANSLATION
People came by hundreds of thousands, and no one could count them.
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came out of the house to give audience to
the people.


--- Page 110 ---
Text 190] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 107
TEXT 189
বাছ তুলি” বলে প্রভু 'হরিবোল১-ধ্বনি ।
প্রেমে মত্ত নাচে লোক করি” হরিধ্বনি ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
bahu tuli’ bale prabhu ‘hari-bola’-dhvani
preme matta nace loka kari’ hari-dhvani
SYNONYMS
bahu tuli’—raising the arms; bale —says; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
hari-bola-dhvani—the transcendental sound vibration Hari bol; preme—in
ecstasy; matta—maddened; ndce—dance; loka—the people; kari’ hari-dhvani—
making the transcendental vibration Hari.
TRANSLATION
When the people assembled, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu raised His arms and
said very loudly, “Hari bol!”” The people responded to the Lord and became
ecstatic. As if mad, they began to dance and vibrate the transcendental sound,
“Hari!”
TEXT 190
যমুনার “চবিবশ चोदक" প্রভু কৈল प्रान |
সেই विय टक দেখায় তীর্থস্থান ॥ ১৯০ ॥
yamundra ‘cabbisa ghate’ prabhu kaila snana
sei vipra prabhuke dekhaya tirtha-sthana
SYNONYMS
yamundra—of the River Yamuna; cabbisa ghate —in the twenty-four ghats, or
bathing places; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—performed; snana—
bathing; sei vipra—that brahmana; prabhuke—unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dekhaya—shows; tirtha-sthana—the holy places of pilgrimage.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bathed in twenty-four ghats along the banks of
the Yamuna, and the brahmana showed Him all the places of pilgrimage.
PURPORT
The twenty-four ghats (bathing places) along the Yamuna are (1) Avimukta, (2)
Adhiradha, (3) Guhya-tirtha, (4) Prayaga-tirtha, (5) Kanakhala-tirtha, (6) Tinduka,


--- Page 111 ---
108 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
(7) Sarya-tirtha, (8) Vatasvami, (9) Dhruva-ghata, (10) Rsi-tirtha, (11) Moksa-tirtha,
(12) Bodha-tirtha, (13) Gokarna, (14) Krsnaganga, (15) Vaikuntha, (16) Asi-kunda,
(17) Catuh-samudrika-kapa, (18) Akrara-tirtha, (19) Yajiika-vipra-sthana, (20)
Kubja-kapa, (21) Ranga-sthala, (22) Maiica-sthala, (23) Mallayuddha-sthana and
(24) Dasdasvamedha.
TEXT 191
স্বয়স্ত, বিশ্রাম, দীর্ঘবিবুঃ, ভুতেখ্বর।
अङ वि, গোকর্ণাদি দেখিলা বিস্তর ॥ ১৯১ ॥
svayambhu, visrama, dirgha-visnu, bhatesvara
mahavidya, gokarnadi dekhila vistara
SYNONYMS
svayambhu—Svayambhu; visrama—Visrama; dirgha-visnu—Dirgha Visnu;
bhatesvara—Bhutesvara; mahavidya—Mahavidya; gokarna—Gokarna; adi—and
so on; dekhila—saw; vistara—many.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited all the holy places on the banks of the
Yamuna, including Svayambhu, Visrama-ghata, Dirgha Visnu, Bhitesvara,
Mahavidya and Gokarna.
TEXT 192
“বন” দেখিবারে যদি প্রভুর मन হৈল |
সেইত लाक्ष প্রভু সঙ্গেতে লইল ॥ ১৯২ ॥
‘vana’ dekhibare yadi prabhura mana haila
sei ta brahmane prabhu sangete la-ila
SYNONYMS
vana—the forests; dekhibare—to see; yadi—when; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; mana—mind; haila—was; sei ta—indeed that; brahmane—
brahmana; prabhu—5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sangete la-ila—took along.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to see the various forests of
Vrndavana, He took the brahmana with Him.


--- Page 112 ---
Text 194] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 109
TEXT 193
FYI, তাল, FF, AGAR গেলা |
তাহ डा) স্লান করি” প্রেমাবিষ্ট হৈল। ॥ ১৯৩ ॥
madhu-vana, tala, kumuda, bahula-vana gela
tahan tahan snana kari’ premavista haila
SYNONYMS
madhu-vana—Madhuvana; tila—Talavana; kumuda—Kumudavana; bahula-
vana—Bahulavana; gela—He visited; tahan taharn—here and there; snana kari’—
taking bath; prema-avista haili—became overwhelmed by ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited the different forests, including
Madhuvana, Talavana, Kumudavana and Bahulavana. Wherever He went, He
took His bath with great ecstatic love.
PURPORT
The word vana means “forest.” Vrndavana is the name given to the forest
where Srimati Vindadevi (Tulasidevi) grows profusely. Actually it is not a forest as
we ordinarily consider a forest because it is very thick with green vegetation.
There are twelve such vanas in Vrndavana. Some are located on the western side
of the Yamuna and others on the eastern side. The forests situated on the eastern
side are Bhadravana, Bilvavana, Lauhavana, Bhandiravana and Mahavana. On the
western side are Madhuvana, Talavana, Kumudavana, Bahulavana, Kamyavana,
Khadiravana and Vrndavana. These are the twelve forests of the Vrndavana area.
TEXT 194
পথে গান্ডীঘট। চরে প্রভুরে দেখিয়া |
প্রভুকে (ATH আসি” ছঙ্কার Fam ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
pathe gabhi-ghata care prabhure dekhiya
prabhuke bedaya asi’ hunkara kariya
SYNONYMS
pathe—on the road; gabhi-ghata—groups of cows; care—graze; prabhure
dekhiya—after seeing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prabhuke bedaya—they
surrounded the Lord; asi’—coming; hun-kara kariya—making a loud vibration.


--- Page 113 ---
110 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed through Vrndavana, herds of graz-
ing cows saw Him pass and, immediately surrounding Him, began to moo very
loudly.
TEXT 195
গাভী (णथि' BF প্রভু প্রেমের তরঙ্গে ৷
বাঙসলো্যে গাভী প্রভুর চাটে সব-অঙ্গে ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
gabhi dekhi’ stabdha prabhu premera tarange
vatsalye gabhi prabhura cate saba-ange
SYNONYMS
gabhi dekhi’—seeing the cows; stabdha—stunned; prabhu—S$r Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; premera tarange—in the waves of ecstatic love; vatsalye—in great
affection; gabhi—all the cows; prabhura—of ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cate —
licked; saba-ange—all over the body.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the herds approach Him, the Lord was stunned with ecstatic love.
The cows then began to lick His body in great affection.
TEXT 196
WE হঞ। প্রভু করে অঙ্গ-কঙ্য়ন |
প্রভু-সঙ্গে চলে, নাহি ছাড়ে ধেনুগণ ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
sustha hana prabhu kare anga-kandayana
prabhu-sanige cale, nahi chade dhenu-gana
SYNONYMS
sustha haina—becoming patient; prabhu—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare—
does; anga—of the body; kanddyana—scratching; prabhu-sange—with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cale—go; nahi chade—do not give up; dhenu-gana—all
the cows.
TRANSLATION
Becoming pacified, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to caress the cows, and
the cows, being unable to give up His company, went with Him.


--- Page 114 ---
Text 199] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 111
TEXT 197
FRR (धस्‌ जव রাখিল গোয়াল |
প্রভুকণধ্বনি শুনি” আইসে FAH ॥ ১৯৭ ॥
kaste-srstye dhenu saba rakhila goyala
prabhu-kantha-dhvani Suni’ aise mrgi-pala
SYNONYMS
kaste-srstye—with great difficulty; dhenu —the cows; saba—all; rakhila—kept
back; goyala—the cowherd men; prabhu-kantha-dhvani—the musical voice of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; suni’—hearing; dise —came; mrgi-pala—flocks of deer.
TRANSLATION
It was with great difficulty that the cowherd men were able to keep the
cows back. Then when the Lord chanted, all the deer heard His sweet voice
and approached Him.
TEXT 198
মৃগ-ম্থগী মুখ দেখি” প্রভু-অঙ্গ চাটে |
ভয় নাহি করে, সঙ্গে যায় বাটে-বাটে ॥ ১৯৮ ॥
mrga-mrgi mukha dekhi’ prabhu-ariga cate
bhaya nahi kare, sange ydya vate-vate
SYNONYMS
mrga-mrgi—the deer, both male and female; mukha dekhi’—seeing His face;
prabhu-ariga cate—began to lick the body of the Lord; bhaya nahi kare—they
were not at all afraid; sarige yadya—go with Him; vate-vate—all along the road.
TRANSLATION
When the does and bucks came and saw the Lord's face, they began to lick
His body. Not being at all afraid of Him, they accompanied Him along the
path.
TEXT 199
শুক, পিক, BF প্রভুরে দেখি” “পঞ্চম” গায়।
শিখিগণ নৃত্য করি” প্রভু-আগে যায় ॥ >>> ॥


--- Page 115 ---
112 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
Suka, pika, bhrriga prabhure dekhi’ ‘paficama’ gaya
Sikhi-gana nrtya kari’ prabhu-age yaya
SYNONYMS
$uka—parrots; pika—cuckoos; bhriga—bumblebees; prabhure—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dekhi’—seeing; paficama—the fifth musical note; gaya—sing;
Sikhi-gana—peacocks; nrtya—dancing; kari’—performing; prabhu-age —in front
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yaya—go.
TRANSLATION
Bumblebees and birds like the parrot and cuckoo all began to sing loudly on
the fifth note, and the peacocks began to dance in front of the Lord.
TEXT 200
প্রভু দেখি” বৃন্দাবনের বৃক্ষ-নতাগণে।
অঙ্কুর-পুলক, মধু- অশ্ব বরিষণে ॥ ২০০ ॥
prabhu dekhi’ vindavanera vrksa-lata-gane
ankura pulaka, madhu-asru varisane
SYNONYMS
prabhu—S$ri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu;  dekhi’—seeing;  vindavane—of
Vrndavana; vrksa-lata-gane—the trees and creepers; ankura—twigs; pulaka—
jubilant; madhu-asru—tears in the form of honey; varisane—pour.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the trees and creepers of Vrndavana
became jubilant. Their twigs stood up, and they began to shed tears of ecstasy
in the form of honey.
TEXT 201
ফুল-ফল ভরি” ডাল পড়ে প্রভু-পায়।
বন্ধু দেখি” বন্ধু যেন “ভেট” লঞ যায় ॥ ২০১ ॥
phula-phala bhari’ dala pade prabhu-paya
bandhu dekhi’ bandhu yena 'bheta’ {278 yaya
SYNONYMS
phula-phala bhari’—loaded with fruits and flowers; dala—the branches;
pade—fall down; prabhu-paya—at the lotus feet of the Lord; bandhu dekhi’'—


--- Page 116 ---
Text 2031 The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 113
seeing one friend; bandhu—another friend; yena—as if; bheta—a presentation;
lana—taking; ydya—goes.
TRANSLATION
The trees and creepers, overloaded with fruits and flowers, fell down at the
lotus feet of the Lord and greeted Him with various presentations as if they
were friends.
TEXT 202
প্রভু দেখি” বৃন্দাবনের স্থাবর-জঙ্গম |
আনন্দিত- বন্ধু যেন দেখে বন্ধুগণ ॥ ২০২ ॥
prabhu dekhi’ vindavanera sthavara-jangama
anandita—bandhu yena dekhe bandhu-gana
SYNONYMS
prabhu dekhi’—seeing the Lord; vindavanera—of Vindavana; sthavara-
jangama—all living entities, moving and not moving; dnandita—very jubilant;
bandhu—friend; yena—as if; dekhe—see; bandhu-gana—friends.
TRANSLATION
Thus all the moving and nonmoving living entities of Vrndavana became
very jubilant to see the Lord. It was as if friends were made happy by seeing
another friend.
TEXT 203
তা-সবার প্রীতি (कथि, প্রভু ভাবাবেশে |
সবা-সনে FIG] করে ग তার বশে ॥ ২০৩ ॥
ta-sabara priti dekhi’ prabhu bhavavese
saba-sane krida kare hana tara vase
SYNONYMS
ta-sabara—of all of them; priti—affection; dekhi’—seeing; prabhu —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhava-avese—in ecstatic love; saba-sane—with all of
them; krida—sporting; kare—performs; hana—being; tara—their; vase —under
control.
TRANSLATION
Seeing their affection, the Lord was moved by ecstatic love. He began to
sport with them exactly as a friend sports with another friend. Thus He volun-
tarily came under the control of His friends.


--- Page 117 ---
114 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TEXT 204
প্রতি बुक्रलङ। ङ्‌ করেন আলিঙ্গন |
शरेष्णे पिं ধ্যানে করেন FLW সমর্পণ ॥ ২০৪ ॥
prati vrksa-lata prabhu karena alingana
puspadi dhyane karena krsne samarpana
SYNONYMS
prati—each and every; vrksa-latai—tree and creeper; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena alingana—embraced; puspa-adi—all the flowers and fruits;
dhyane—in meditation; karena—do; krsne —unto Lord Krsna; samarpana—offer-
ing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to embrace each and every tree and
creeper, and they began to offer their fruits and flowers as if in meditation.
TEXT 205
অশ্রু-কম্প-পুলক-ঞ্জেমে শরীর सखिटन्न |
FR বল, ‘FR’ वन्‌ --वटन উ্চৈঃস্বরে ॥ ২০৫॥
asru-kampa-pulaka-preme sarira asthire
‘krsna’ bala, *krspa’ bala——bale uccaihsvare
SYNONYMS
asru—tears; kampa—trembling; pulaka—jubilation; preme —in ecstatic love;
sarira—the whole body; asthire —restless; krsna bala—say Krsna; krsna bala—say
Krsna; bale—the Lord says; uccaih-svare—very loudly.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s body was restless, and tears, trembling and jubilation were
manifest. He said very loudly, ‘Chant Krsna! Chant Krsna!’’
TEXT 206
স্থাবর-জলম মিলি” করে কৃষ্ণধ্বনি ।
প্রভুর গম্ভীর-স্বরে যেন প্রতিধ্বনি ॥ ২০৬ ॥
sthavara-janigama mili’ kare krsna-dhvani
prabhura gambhira-svare yena prati-dhvani


--- Page 118 ---
Text 208] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 115
SYNONYMS
sthavara-jangama—all living entities, nonmoving and moving; mili’—meeting
together; kare —perform; krsna-dhvani—vibration of the sound Hare Krsna;
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gambhira-svare—deep voice; yena—as
if; prati-dhvani—responsive vibration.
TRANSLATION
All moving and nonmoving creatures then began to vibrate the transcen-
dental sound of Hare Krsna, as if they were echoing the deep sound of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 207
মগের গল৷ ধরি” প্রভু করেন রোদনে |
ম্বগের পুলক खटकः, WEP নয়নে ॥ ২০৭ ॥
mrgera gala dhari’ prabhu karena rodane
mrgera pulaka ange, asru nayane
SYNONYMS
mrgera—of the deer; gala dhari’—catching the necks; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; karena—does; rodane—crying; mrgera—of the deer; pulaka
ange —jubilation; asru—tears; nayane—in the eyes.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then clasped the necks of the deer and began to cry. There was
jubilation manifest in the bodies of the deer, and tears were in their eyes.
TEXT 208
বৃক্ষডালে শুক-শারী দিল দরশন |
তাহা দেখি' প্রভুর কিছু শুনিতে হৈল মন ॥ ২০৮ ॥
vrksa-dale suka-sari dila darasana
taha dekhi’ prabhura kichu Sunite haila mana
SYNONYMS
vrksa-dale—on a branch of a tree; suka-sari—male and female parrots; dila—
gave; darasana—appearance; taha dekhi’—seeing that; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kichu—something; sunite—to hear; haila—there was; mana—
mind.


--- Page 119 ---
116 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
When a male and female parrot appeared on the branches of a tree, the Lord
saw them and wanted to hear them speak.
TEXT 209
শুক-শারিকা প্রভুর হাতে উড়ি” পড়ে।
প্রভুকে खन] কৃষ্ণের গুণ-শ্লোক পড়ে ॥ ২০৯ ॥
Suka-sarika prabhura hate udi’ pade
prabhuke sunana krsnera guna-sloka pade
SYNONYMS
Suka-sarika—the parrots, male and female; prabhura—of Si Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hate—on the hand; udi’—flying; pade—fall; prabhuke —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sunana—causing to hear; krsnera—of Lord Krsna; guna-
Sloka pade—chanted verses about the transcendental qualities.
TRANSLATION
Both parrots flew onto the hand of the Lord and began to chant the tran-
scendental qualities of Krsna, and the Lord listened to them.
TEXT 210
সৌন্দর্যং ললনালিধৈযযদলনং नौन। बरभांखड्िनौ
বীর্যৎ কন্দুকিতাপ্রিবর্ধমমলাঃ नाटव्र-ब्रा ९ গুণাঃ |
শীলং সর্বজনানুরঞ্জনমহে। IDANRAG-
বিশ্বং বিশ্বজনীনকীতিরবতাৎ কৃষ্ণ জগন্মোহনঃ ॥২১০॥
saundaryam 1313/773//-0731/%3-0313/7731/77 lila rama-stambhini
viryam kandukitadri-varyam amalah pare-parardhar gunah
stlarh sarva-jananuraijanam aho yasyayam asmat-prabhur
visvam visva-janina-kirtir avatat krsno jagan-mohanah
SYNONYMS
saundaryam —the bodily beauty; lalana-ali—of groups of gopis; dhairya—the
patience; dalanam—subduing; [ila—pastimes; rama—the goddess of fortune;
stambhini—astounding; viryam—strength; kandukita—making like a small ball
for throwing; adri-varyam—the great mountain; amalah—without a spot; pare-
parardham —unlimited; gunah—qualities; silam—behavior; sarva-jana—all kinds


--- Page 120 ---
Text 212] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 117
of living entities; anurarijanam—satisfying; aho—oh; yasya—whose; ayam—this;
asmat-prabhuh—our Lord; visvam—the whole universe; visva-janina—for the
benefit of everyone; kirtih—whose glorification; avatat—may He maintain;
krsnah—Lord Krsna; jagat-mohanah —the attractor of the whole world.
TRANSLATION
The male parrot sang: “The glorification of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, is beneficial to everyone in the universe. His beauty is
victorious over the gopis of Vrndavana, and it subdues their patience. His
pastimes astound the goddess of fortune, and His bodily strength turns
Govardhana Hill into a small toy like a ball. His spotless qualities are un-
limited, and His behavior satisfies everyone. Lord Krsna is attractive to every-
one. Oh, may our Lord maintain the whole universe!’
PURPORT
This verse is found in the Covinda-lilamrta (13.29).
TEXT 211
শুক-মুখে শুনি তবে কৃষ্ণের বর্ণন ।
শারিক৷ পড়য়ে তবে রাধিকা-বর্ণন ॥ ২১১ ॥
Suka-mukhe Suni’ tabe krsnera varpana
sarika padaye tabe radhika-varnana
SYNONYMS
Suka-mukhe —in the mouth of the male parrot; suni’—hearing; krsnera var-
nana—a description of Lord Krsna; sariki—female parrot; padaye—recites;
tabe—then; radhika-varnana—a description of Srimati Radharani.
TRANSLATION
After hearing this description of Lord Krsna from the male parrot, the
female parrot began to recite a description of Srimati Radharani.
TEXT 212
শ্রীরাধিকায়াঃ প্রিয়তা gare!
FATS! নর্তনগানচাতুরী ।
গুণালিসম্পত কবিতা চ রাজতে
জগন্মনোমোহন-চিত্তমোহিনী ॥ ২১২ ॥


--- Page 121 ---
118 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
sri-radhikayah priyata surapata
susilata nartana-gana-caturi
gunadli-sampat kavita ca rajate
fjagan-mano-mohana-citta-mohini
SYNONYMS
$ri-radhikayah—of Srimati Radharani; priyata—affection; su-ripati—exquisite
beauty; su-silati—good behavior; nartana-gana—in chanting and dancing;
caturi—artistry; guna-ali-sampat—possession of such transcendental qualities;
kavita—poetry; ca—also; rajate—shine; jagat-manah-mohana—of Krsna, who at-
tracts the mind of the whole universe; citta-mohini—the attractor of the mind.
TRANSLATION
The female parrot said: ‘‘Srimati Radharani’s affection, Her exquisite beauty
and good behavior, Her artistic dancing and chanting and Her poetic com-
positions are all so attractive that they attract the mind of Krsna, who attracts
the mind of everyone in the universe.”
PURPORT
This verse is found in the Govinda-lilamrta (13.30).
TEXT 213
পুলঃ শুক কহে, কৃষ্ণ THACHER |
তবে আর ८न।क শুক করিল পঠন ॥ ২১৩ ॥
punah suka kahe, —krsna ‘madana-mohana’
tabe ara sloka suka karila pathana
SYNONYMS
punah—again; suka—the male parrot; kahe—says; krsna madana-mohana—
Krsna is the conqueror of the mind of Cupid; tabe—thereafter; ara—another;
Sloka—verse; suka—the male parrot; karila pathana—recited.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the male parrot said,”’Krsna is the enchanter of the mind of
Cupid.” He then began to recite another verse.
TEXT 214
বংশীধারী জগন্নারী-চিত্তহারী म শারিকে ।
বিহারী গোপনা রীভিজায়ান্মদনমোহনঃ ॥ ২১৪


--- Page 122 ---
Text 216] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 119
vamsi-dhari jagan-nari-
citta-hari sa sarike
vihari gopa-naribhir
jiydn madana-mohanah
SYNONYMS
varnsi-dhari—the carrier of the flute; jagat-nari—of all women of the universe;
citta-hari—the stealer of the hearts; sah—He; sarike—my dear sari; vihari—en-
joyer; gopa-naribhih—with the gopis; jiyat—let Him be glorified; madana—of
Cupid; mohanah—the enchanter.
TRANSLATION
The parrot then said, “My dear $ari [female parrot], Sri Krsna carries a flute
and enchants the hearts of all women throughout the universe. He is
specifically the enjoyer of beautiful gopis, and He is the enchanter of Cupid
also. Let Him be glorified!”
PURPORT
This verse is also found in the Govinda-lilamrta (13.31).
TEXT 215
পুলঃ শারী কহে ॐटक করি” পরিহাস ।
তাহা শুশি' প্রভুর হৈল বিশ্ময়-প্রেমোল্লাস ॥ ২১৫ ॥
punah sari kahe Suke kari’ parihasa
taha suni’ prabhura haila vismaya-premollasa
SYNONYMS
punah—again; sari kahe —the female parrot said; suke —unto the male parrot;
kari’ parihasa—jokingly; taha suni’—hearing that; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; haila—there was; vismaya—wonderful; prema-ullasa—awakening
of ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
Then the female parrot began to speak jokingly to suka, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was struck with wonderful ecstatic love to hear her speak.
TEXT 216
রাধ।-সঙ্গে যদ। SITS তদ। “মদনমোহনঃ”।
অন্যথ। বিশ্বমে।হোইপি স্বয়ং 'মদনমে।হিতঃ' ॥২ ১৬॥


--- Page 123 ---
120 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
radha-sange yada bhati
tada ‘madana-mohanah’
anyatha visva-moho ‘pi
svayam ‘madana-mohitah’
SYNONYMS
radha-sarige —with Srimati Radharani; yadi—when; bhati—shines; tadi—at
that time; madana-mohanah—the enchanter of the mind of Cupid; anyatha—
otherwise; visva-mohah—the enchanter of the whole universe; api—even
though; svayam—personally; madana-mohitah—enchanted by Cupid.
TRANSLATION
The parrot $ari said, “When Lord Sri Krsna is with Radharani, He is the
enchanter of Cupid; otherwise, when He is alone, He Himself is enchanted by
erotic feelings even though He enchants the whole universe.”
PURPORT
This is another verse from the Covinda-lilamrta (13.32).
TEXT 217
শুক-শারী Bf’ পুনঃ গেল বৃচক্ষভালে |
মম্তুরের নৃত্য প্রভু দেখে কুমুহলে ॥ ২১৭ ॥
Suka-sari udi’ punah 8০19 vrksa-dale
mayarera nrtya prabhu dekhe kutahale
SYNONYMS
Suka-sari—the male and female parrots; udi’—flying; punah—again; gela—
went; vrksa-dale—to the branch of a tree; maytrera—of the peacocks; nrtya—
dancing; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhe—sees; kutahale—with
curiosity.
TRANSLATION
Both parrots then flew onto a tree branch, and ऽन Caitanya Mahaprabhu
began to watch the dancing of peacocks with curiosity.
TEXT 218
ময়ূরের কণ্ঠ দেখি' अडूत्र কৃষ্ণস্থৃতি হৈল |
প্রেমাবেশে মহ শ্রভু ভুমিতে পড়িল ॥ ২১৮ ॥


--- Page 124 ---
Text 220] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 121
maydrera kantha dekhi’ prabhura krspa-smrti haila
premavese mahaprabhu bhamite padila

SYNONYMS
mayurera—of the peacocks; kantha—necks; dekhi’—seeing; prabhura—of ऽन
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna-smrti—remembrance of Lord Krsna; haila—there
was; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; mahaprabhu—Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
bhamite—on the ground; padila—fell down.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord saw the bluish necks of the peacocks, His remembrance of
Krsna immediately awakened, and He fell to the ground in ecstatic love.
TEXT 219
প্রভুরে Ife দেখি” সেই © ত্রাহ্মণ |
ভট্টাচার্য-সঙ্গে করে প্রভুর AGH ॥ ২১৯ ॥
prabhure marcchita dekhi’ sei ta brahmana
bhattacarya-sange kare prabhura santarpana
SYNONYMS
prabhure—S$ri  Caitanya Mahaprabhu; marcchita—unconscious; dekhi’—
seeing; sei ta brahmana—indeed that brahmana; bhattacarya-sarige —with Bhat-
tacarya; kare—does; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; santarpana—taking
care.
TRANSLATION
When the brahmana saw that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was unconscious, he
and Balabhadra Bhattacarya took care of Him.
TEXT 220
আস্তে-ব্যস্তে মহাপ্রভুর Feel वदिर्वीम |
জলসেক করে অঙ্গে, ICHT ASIA ॥ ২২০ ॥
aste-vyaste mahaprabhura lana bahirvasa
jala-seka kare ange, vastrera vatasa
SYNONYMS
aste-vyaste—with great haste; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
lana—taking; bahirvasa—covering cloth; jala-seka kare—sprinkle water; ange —
on the body; vastrera vatasa—fanning with the cloth.


--- Page 125 ---
122 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
They hastily sprinkled water over the Lord’s body. Then they took up His
cloth and began to fan Him with it.
TEXT 221
প্রভু-কর্ণে কষ্ণনাম কহে উচ্চ করি”।
চেতন পাঞা প্রভু যান গড়াগড়ি ॥ ২২১ ॥
prabhu-karne krsna-nama kahe ucca kari’
cetana pana prabhu ya‘na gadagadi
SYNONYMS
prabhu-karne —in the ear of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krsna-nama—the holy
name of Lord Krsna; kahe —chant; ucca kari’—loudly; cetana pafa—coming to
consciousness; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ya’na—goes; gadagadi—rol-
ling on the ground.
TRANSLATION
They then began to chant the holy name of Krsna into the Lord’s ear. When
the Lord regained consciousness, He began rolling on the ground.
TEXT 222
কণ্টক-দুগম বনে অঙ্গ ক্ষত হৈল |
ভট্টাচার্য কোলে করি” প্রভুরে FH কৈল ॥ ২২২ ॥
kantaka-durgama vane anga ksata haila
bhattacarya kole kari’ prabhure sustha kaila
SYNONYMS
kantaka-durgama—difficult to traverse because of thorns; vane —in the forest;
ariga—the body; ksata haila—became injured; bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhat-
tacarya; kole kari’—taking Him on his lap; prabhure —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
sustha kaila—pacified.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord rolled on the ground, sharp thorns injured His body. Taking
Him on his lap, Balabhadra Bhattacarya pacified Him.


--- Page 126 ---
Text 225] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 123
TEXT 223
কৃষ্ণাবেশে প্রভুর প্রেমে গরগর मन्‌ |
“বোল্‌' वाम्‌" করি” উঠি' করেন नन ॥ ২২৩ ॥
krspavese prabhura preme garagara mana
‘bol’ ‘bol’ kari’ uthi’ karena nartana
SYNONYMS
krsna-avese—in ecstatic love of Krsna; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
preme—by love; garagara—disturbed; mana—mind; bol bol—chant, chant;
kari’—saying; uthi’—standing up; karena nartana—began to dance.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mind wandered in ecstatic love of Krsna. He im-
mediately stood up and said, “Chant! Chant!” Then He Himself began to
dance.
TEXT 224
ভট্টাচার্য,সেই বিপ্র 'রুষ্ণনাম' গায় |
নাচিতে নাচিতে পথে প্রভু চলি” যায় ॥ ২২৪ ॥
bhattacarya, sei vipra ‘krspa-nama’ gaya
ndacite nacite pathe prabhu cali’ yaya
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Bhattacarya; sei vipra—that brahmana; krsna-nama gaya—chant
the holy name of Krsna; nacite nacite—dancing and dancing; pathe—on the
road; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cali’ ydya—goes forward.
TRANSLATION
Being thus ordered by the Lord, both Balabhadra Bhatticarya and the
brahmana began to chant the holy name of Krsna. Then the Lord, dancing and
dancing, proceeded along the path.
TEXT 225
প্রভুর প্রেমাবেশ দেখি” ব্রাহ্মণ - ffs ।
প্রভুর রক্ষা লাগি” বিপ্র হইল। চিন্তিত ॥ ২২৫ ॥


--- Page 127 ---
124 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
prabhura premavesa dekhi’ brahmana—vismita
prabhura raksa lagi’ vipra ha-ila cintita
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of ऽतं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-avesa—ecstatic love; dekhi’—
seeing; brahmana—the brahmana; vismita—astonished; prabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; raksa lagi’—for the protection; vipra—the brahmana; ha-
ila—became; cintita—very anxious.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana was astounded to see the symptoms of ecstatic love ex-
hibited by $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He then became anxious to give the Lord
protection.
TEXT 226
নীলাচলে ছিল৷ যৈছে প্রেমাবেশ मन ।
বৃন্দাবন যাইতে পথে হৈল শত-গুণ ॥ ২২৬ ॥
nilacale chila yaiche premavesa mana
vrndavana yaite pathe haila sata-guna
SYNONYMS
nildcale—at Jagannatha Puri; chila—was; yaiche—as; prema-avesa mana—al-
ways in a mentality of ecstatic love; vrndavana—to Vindavana; yaite—going;
pathe —on the road; haila—became; sata-gupa—one hundred times.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mind was absorbed in ecstatic love at Jagan-
natha Puri, but when He passed along the road on the way to Vrndavana, that
love increased a hundred times.
TEXT 227
সহজ্ৰগুণ প্রেম বাড়ে AYA দরশনে |
ल्म প্রেম বাড়ে, SCAR যবে ATH ॥ ২২৭ ॥
sahasra-guna prema bade mathura darasane
laksa-guna prema bade, bhramena yabe vane


--- Page 128 ---
Text 230] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 125
SYNONYMS
sahasra-gupa—one thousand times; prema—love; bade —increased;
mathura—Mathurd; darasane—upon seeing; laksa-guna—a hundred thousand
times; prema bade —love increases; bhramena—wanders; yabe—when; vane —
in the forests of Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's ecstatic love increased a thousand times when He visited
Mathura, but it increased a hundred thousand times when He wandered in the
forests of Vrndavana.
TEXTS 228-229
অন্য-দেশ প্রেম উছলে ‘FRITH ATH |
সাক্ষাৎ FACT टव সেই বৃন্দাবনে ॥ ২২৮ ॥
প্রেমে গরগর মন রাত্রি-দিবসে ।
স্মান-ভিক্ষ।দি-নির্বাহ করেন অভ্যাসে ॥ ২২৯ ॥
anya-desa prema uchale ‘vrndavana’-name
saksat bhramaye ebe sei vrndavane
preme garagara mana ratri-divase
snana-bhiksadi-nirvaha karena abhyase
SYNONYMS
anya-desa—in other countries; prema—love; uchale—increases; vrndavana-
name —by the name of Vindavana; saksat—directly; bhramaye —travels; ebe —
now; sei vrndavane—in that Vrndavana; preme—in ecstatic love; garagara—
faltering; mana—mind; ratri-divase—day and night; snana-bhiksa-adi—bathing
and accepting food; nirvaha—accomplishing; karena—does; abhyase —by habit.
TRANSLATION
When $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was elsewhere, the very name of Vrndavana
was sufficient to increase His ecstatic love. Now, when He was actually travel-
ing in the Vrndavana forest, His mind was absorbed in great ecstatic love day
and night. He ate and bathed simply out of habit.
TEXT 230
এইমত ८ थग-- যাবৎ FHA “বার” वन |
একত্র falas, সর্বত্র नां যায় বর্ণন ॥ २७० ॥


--- Page 129 ---
126 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch.17
ei-mata prema——yavat bhramila ‘bara’ vana
ekatra likhilun, sarvatra na yaya varpana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; prema—ecstatic love; yavat—so long; bhramila—He
traveled; bara vana—through the twelve forests of Vrndavana; ekatra—in one
place; likhilun—I have written; sarvatra—everywhere; na ydya varnana—cannot
be described.
TRANSLATION
Thus 1 have written a description of the ecstatic love Lord Caitanya
manifested while He walked through the twelve forests of Vrndavana. To de-
scribe it all would be impossible.
TEXT 231
বৃন্দাবনে হৈল প্রভুর যতে ক প্রেমের वि कन्न |
ক্োটি-গ্রন্থে “অনন্ত” লিখেন তাহার RE ॥ ২৩১ ॥
vrndavane haila prabhura yateka premera vikara
koti-granthe ‘ananta’ likhena tahara vistara
SYNONYMS
vrndavane—in Vindavana; haila—there were; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; yateka—as many; premera vikara—transformations of ecstasy;
koti-granthe—in millions of books; ananta—Lord Ananta; likhena—writes;
tahara—of them; vistara—elaboration.
TRANSLATION
Lord Ananta writes millions of books elaborately describing the transforma-
tions of ecstatic love experienced by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Vrndavana.
TEXT 232
তবু লিখিবারে নারে তার এক কণ।
উদ্দেশ করিতে করি Wat gaa ॥ ২৩২ ॥
tabu likhibare nare tara eka kana
uddesa karite kari dig-darasana


--- Page 130 ---
Text 234] The Lord Travels to Vrndavana 127
SYNONYMS
tabu—yet; likhibare—to write; nare—is not able; tara—of that; eka—one;
kana—fragment; uddesa—indication; karite—to make; kari—I| perform; dik-
darasana—pointing out the direction.
TRANSLATION
Since Lord Ananta Himself cannot describe even a fragment of these
pastimes, | am simply pointing out the direction.
TEXT 233
জগৎ ভাসিল চেৈতন্ত্বলীলার পাথারে |
যার যত শক্তি: তত পাথারে সাঁতারে ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
jagat bhasila caitanya-lilara pathare
ydnra yata Sakti tata pathare santare
SYNONYMS
jagat—the whole world; bhasila—floated; caitanya-lilira—of the pastimes of
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pathare —in the inundation; yanra—of whom; yata—as
much; Sakti—power; tata—that much; pathare—in the inundation; saritare —
swims.
TRANSLATION
The whole world became merged in the inundation of the pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One can swim in that water to the extent that he has
the strength.
TEXT 234
জ্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
চৈতন্কচরিতামৃত কহে কৃষ্ণনাস ॥ ২৩৪ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade —at the lotus feet; ydra—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritimrta; kahe—describes; krsnadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami.


--- Page 131 ---
128 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of $ri Rapa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, 1, Krsnadasa, narrate $ri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
lila, Seventeenth Chapter, describing the Lord's traveling to Vrndavana.


--- Page 132 ---
CHAPTER 18
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
Visit to Sri Vrndavana

The following summary of the Eighteenth Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. In the village of Arit-grama, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu discovered the transcendental lakes known as Radha-kunda and
Syama-kunda. He then saw the Deity Harideva at Govardhana Village. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu had no desire to climb Govardhana Hill because the hill is
worshiped as Krsna. The Gopala Deity could understand the mind of जा Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; therefore on the plea of being attacked by Muslims, Gopala
transferred Himself to the village of Ganthuli-grama. ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu
then went to Ganthuli-grama to see Lord Gopala. Some years later, Lord Gopala
also went to Mathura to the temple of Viththaleévara and stayed there for one
month just to give an audience to Srila Rapa Gosvami.

After visiting Nandiévara, Pavana-sarovara, Sesasayi, Khela-tirtha, Bhandiravana,
Bhadravana, Lohavana and Mahavana, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Gokula
and then finally returned to Mathura. Seeing a great crowd in Mathura, He moved
His residence near Akrara-ghata, and from there He went every day to Vindavana
to see Kaliya-hrada, Dvadasaditya-ghata, Kesi-ghata, Rasa-sthali, Cira-ghata and
Amli-tala. At Kaliya Lake, many people mistook a fisherman for Krsna. When some
respectable people came to see ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they expressed their
opinion that when one takes sannydsa, he becomes Narayana. Their mistake was
corrected by the Lord. In this way, their Krsna consciousness was awakened, and
they could understand that a sannyasi is simply a living entity and not the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

When $i Caitanya Mahaprabhu took His bath at Akrara-ghata, He submerged
Himself in the water for a long time. Balabhadra Bhattacarya decided to take Sr
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Prayaga after visiting the holy place known as Soro-
ksetra. While stopping near a village on the way to Prayaga, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu fainted in ecstatic love. Some Pathana soldiers who were passing
through saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and falsely concluded that the Lord's
associates, Balabhadra Bhattacarya and others, had killed the Lord with a poison
named dhutura and were taking His wealth. Thus the soldiers arrested them.
However, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regained His senses, His associates
were released. He talked with a person who was supposed to be a holy man in
the party. From the Koran, 6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu established devotional ser-
vice to Krsna. Thus the leader of the soldiers, named Vijali Khan, surrendered to $ri

129


--- Page 133 ---
130 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he and his party became devotees of Lord Krsna. The
same village today is known as the village of Pathana Vaisnavas. After bathing in
the Ganges at Soro, ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived at Prayaga at the confluence
of three rivers —the Ganges, Yamuna and Sarasvati.
TEXT 1
বৃন্দাবনে স্ছ্রিচরান্লন্দয়ন্‌ স্বাবলোকটনৈঃ |
আত্ম।নঞ্চ नटन কাছ্‌গৌরাঙ্গঃ পরিতোহইভ্রমৎ ॥১॥
vrndavane sthira-caran
nandayan svavalokanaih
atmanam ca tad-alokad
gaurangah parito ‘bhramat
SYNONYMS
vrndavane —in Vrndavana; sthira-caran—to the living entities, both moving
and not moving; nandayan—giving pleasure; sva-avalokanaih —by His personal
glances; atmanam—to Himself; ca—also; tat-alokat—by seeing them;
gaurangah —Sr1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; paritah —all around; abhramat—traveled.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahiprabhu traveled all over Vrndavana and pleased all living
entities, moving and nonmoving, with His glances. The Lord took much per-
sonal pleasure in seeing everyone. In this way Lord Gauranga traveled in
Vrndavana.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় Col Taper कञ्च নিত্যানন্দ |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্ত বৃন্দ ॥ २ ॥
jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
Jjayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya—all glories; gauracandra—to Lord Gauracandra (Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu); jaya—all glories; nityananda—to Lord Nityananda Prabhu; jaya—
all glories; advaita-candra—to $ri Advaita Gosani; jaya—all glories; gaura-bhakta-
vrnda—to the devotees of Lord Caitanya.


--- Page 134 ---
Text 4] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 131
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Gauracandra! All glories to Nityananda Prabhu! All glo-
ries to Advaita Prabhu! And all glories to the devotees of Lord Caitanya
headed by Srivasa Thakura!
TEXT 3
এই মত মহাপ্রভু নাচিতে নাচিতে।
“আরিট্‌-গ্রামে আসি' “বাহু” হৈল আচন্মিতে ॥ ৩ ॥
ei-mata mahaprabhu nacite nacite
‘arit’-grame asi’ ‘bahya’ haila acambite
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; mahdprabhu —5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nacite nacite —
dancing and dancing; arit-grame—in the village known as Arit-grama; asi’—com-
ing; bahya—sense perception; haila—there was; dcambite —suddenly.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu danced in ecstasy, but when He arrived at Arit-
grama, His sense perception was awakened.
PURPORT
Arit-grama is also called Arista-grama. 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu understood
that in that village, Aristasura was killed by ऽ Krsna. While there, He inquired
about Radha-kunda, but no one could tell Him where it was. The brahmana ac-
companying Him could also not ascertain its whereabouts. ऽ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu could then understand that the holy places known as Radha-kunda
and Syama-kunda were at that time lost to everyone's vision. He therefore dis-
covered Radha-kunda and Syama-kunda, which were two reservoirs of water in
two paddy fields. Although there was very little water, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was omniscient and could understand that formerly these two ponds were called
Sri Radha-kunda and $yama-kunda. In this way Radha-kunda and Syama-kund:
were discovered.
TEXT 4
আরিটে রাধাকুণ্ড-বার্তা পুছে লোক-স্থানে।
কেহ নাহি কহে, সঙ্গের ব্রাহ্মণ না৷ জানে ॥ ৪ ॥
arite radha-kunda-varta puche loka-sthane
keha nahi kahe, sangera brahmana na jane


--- Page 135 ---
132 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
arite —in the village known as Arit-grama; radha-kunda-varta—news of Radha-
kunda; puche—inquires; loka-sthane—from the local people; keha—anyone;
nahi—not; kahe—could say; sarigera—the companion; brahmana—brahmana;
na jane—does not know.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked the local people, “Where is Radha-kun-
५०२.“ No one could inform Him, and the brahmana accompanying Him did not
know either.
TEXT 5
তীর্থ লুপ্ত” জানি” প্রভু Ades रवम्‌ |
তুই ধাল্যক্ষেত্রে অল্পজলে देकल। স্নান ॥ ९ ॥
(17003 ‘lupta’ jani’ prabhu sarvajna bhagavan
dui dhanya-ksetre alpa-jale kaila snana
SYNONYMS
tirtha—holy place; lupta—lost; jani’—knowing; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sarva-jia—omniscient; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; dui—two; dhanya-ksetre—in paddy fields; alpa-jale—in not very deep
water; kaila snana—took a bath.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then understood that the holy place called Radha-kunda was no
longer visible. However, being the omniscient Supreme Personality of God-
head, He discovered Radha-kunda and Syama-kunda in two paddy fields.
There was only a little water, but He took His bath there.
TEXT 6
দেখি” जव গ্রাম্য-লোকের বিস্ময় হৈল মন |
প্রেমে প্রভু করে রাধাকুণ্ডের वन ॥ ৬ ॥
dekhi’ saba gramya-lokera vismaya haila mana
preme prabhu kare radha-kundera stavana
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; saba gramya-lokera—of all the people of the village; vismaya
haila—became astonished; mana—the minds; preme —in ecstatic love; prabhu—


--- Page 136 ---
Text 8] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 133
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare—does; radha-kupndera—of Radha-kunda;
stavana—prayers.
TRANSLATION
When the people of the village saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taking His
bath in those two ponds in the middle of the paddy fields, they were very
astonished. The Lord then offered His prayers to Sri Radha-kunda.
TEXT 7
जव (भोभो হৈতে রাধা কৃষ্ণের প্রেয়সী |
তৈছে রাধাকুণ প্রিয় “প্রিয়ার সরসী” ॥ ৭ ॥
saba gopi haite 13003 krsnera preyasi
taiche radha-kunda priya ‘priyara sarasi’
SYNONYMS
saba—all; gopi—the gopis; haite—from; radha—Radharani; krsnera—of Lord
Krsna; preyasi—most beloved; taiche—similarly; radha-kunda—Radha-kunda;
priya—very dear; priydra sarasi—the lake of the most beloved Radharani.
TRANSLATION
“Of all the gopis, Radharani is the dearmost. Similarly, the lake known as
Radha-kunda is very dear to the Lord because it is very dear to Srimati
Radharani.
TEXT 8
যথা রাধ। প্রিয়। विटसशख्छांः কুণ্ডং প্রিয়ং তথা ।
সর্বগোপীষু সৈবৈকা বিষ্ণোরত্যস্তবল্লভ। ॥ ৮ ॥
yatha radha priya visnos
tasyah kundam priyar tatha
sarva-gopisu saivaika
visnor atyanta-vallabha
SYNONYMS
yatha—as; radha—Srimati Radharani; priya—beloved; visnoh—of Lord Krsna;
tasyah—Her; kundam—Ilake; priyam—very dear; tatha—similarly; sarva-gopisu—


--- Page 137 ---
134 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
among all the gopis; sa—She; eva—certainly; eka—alone; visnoh—of Lord Krsna;
atyanta—very much; vallabha—dear.
TRANSLATION
‘*§rimati Radharani is most dear to Lord Krsna, and Her lake known as
Radha-kunda is also very dear to Him. Of all the gopis, Srimati Radharani is
certainly the most beloved.’
PURPORT
This is a verse from the Padma Purana.
TEXT 9
যেই कूट নিত্য কৃষ্ণ রাধিকার সঙ্গে ।
জলে জলকেলি করে, তীরে রাস-রঙ্জে ॥ > ॥
yei kunde nitya krsna radhikara sarge
jale jala-keli kare, tire rasa-range
SYNONYMS
yei kunde—in which lake; nitya—daily; krsna—Lord Krsna; radhikara sarige —
accompanied by Srimati Radharani; jale—in the water; jala-keli—sporting in the
water; kare—performs; tire—on the bank; rasa-range —His rasa dance.
TRANSLATION
“In that lake, Lord Krsna and Srimati Radharani used to sport daily in the
water and have a rasa dance on the bank.
TEXT 10
সেই कूट যেই একবার করে FIA |
ভারে রাধা-সম “প্রেম” কৃষ্ণ করে দান ॥ ১০ ॥
sei kunde yei eka-bara kare snana
tanre radha-sama ‘prema’ krsna kare dana
SYNONYMS
sei kunde—in that lake; yei—anyone who; eka-bara—once; kare snana—
takes a bath; tanre—unto him; radha-sama—like Srimati Radharani; prema—
ecstatic love; krspna—Lord Krsna; kare dana—gives as charity.


--- Page 138 ---
Text 12] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 135
TRANSLATION
“Indeed, Lord Krsna gives ecstatic love like that of Srimati Radharani to
whoever bathes in that lake even once in his life.
TEXT 11
FLAT “মাধুরী” যেন রাধার “মধুরিমা”।
কুণ্ডের 'মহিম।”- যেন রাধার “মহিমা” ॥ ১১ ॥
kundera ‘madhuri’—yena radhara ‘madhurima’
kundera ‘mahima’——yena radhara ‘mahima’
SYNONYMS
kundera—of the lake; madhuri—sweetness; yena—as if; radhara—of Srimati
Radharani; madhurima—sweetness; kundera—of the lake; mahima—glories;
yena—as if; radhara—of Srimati Radharani; mahima—glories.
TRANSLATION
“The attraction of Radha-kunda is as sweet as that of Srimati Radharani.
Similarly, the glories of the kunda [lake] are as glorious as Srimati Radharani.
TEXT 12
শ্রীরাধেব হরেস্তদীয়সরসী (अरारः ट्च छदेन
যন্যাং শীযূত-মাধববেন্দুরনিশং Aen তয়া ক্রীড়তি |
প্রেমাস্মিন্‌ বত রাধিকেব লভতে যস্যাং AF স্সানকৃৎ
তঙ্যা বৈ মহিমা তথা মধুরিমা কেনাস্ক वर्गाः ক্ষিতৌ ॥১২॥
sri-radheva hares tadiya-sarasi presthadbhutaih svair gunair
yasyam sri-yuta-madhavendur anisam pritya taya kridati
premasmin bata radhikeva labhate yasyarn sakrt snana-krt
tasya vai mahima tatha madhurima kenastu varnyah ksitau
SYNONYMS
$ri-radha—Srimati Radharani; iva—like; hareh —of Krsna; tadiya—Her; sarasi—
lake; prestha—very dear; adbhutaih—by wonderful; svaih—own; gunaih—tran-
scendental qualities; yasyam—in which; $ri-yuta—all-opulent; madhava—Sri
Krsna; induh—like the moon; anisam —incessantly; pritya—with great affection;
taya—in association with Srimati Radharani; kridati—performs pastimes; prema—


--- Page 139 ---
136 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
love; asmin—for Lord Krsna; bata—certainly; radhika iva—exactly like Srimatt
Radharani; labhate —obtains; yasyam—in which; sakrt—once; snana-krt—one
who takes a bath; tasyah—of the lake; vai—certainly; mahima—glories; tatha—
as well as; madhurima—sweetness; kena—by whom; astu—can be; varpyah—
described; ksitau—on this earth.
TRANSLATION
"^ ‘Because of its wonderful transcendental qualities, Ridha-kunda is as dear
to Krsna as Srimati Radharani. It was in that lake that the all-opulent Lord Sri
Krsna performed His pastimes with Srimati Radharani with great pleasure and
transcendental bliss. Whoever bathes just once in Radha-kunda attains
Srimati Radharani’s loving attraction for Sri Krsna. Who within this world can
describe the glories and sweetness of Sri Ridha-kunda?’ ८“
PURPORT
This verse is found in the Govinda-lilamrta (7.102).
TEXT 13
এইমত Bf कटर প্রেমাবিষ্ট Taw ।
তীরে নৃত্য করে কুণ্ডলীল৷ AGHA ॥ ১৩ ॥
ei-mata stuti kare premavista hana
tire nrtya kare kunda-lila sanariya
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; stuti kare—offers prayers; prema-avista—overwhelmed
by ecstatic love; hafia—becoming; tire—on the bank; nrtya kare —dances; kun-
da-lila—pastimes of Radha-kunda; sanariya—remembering.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus offered prayers to Radha-kunda. Over-
whelmed by ecstatic love, He danced on the bank, remembering the pastimes
Lord Krsna performed on the bank of Radha-kunda.
TEXT 14
কুণ্ডের মৃত্তিকা লঞ৷ তিলক করিল ।
ভট্টাচার্য-ত্বারা মৃত্তিকা সঙ্গে করি' লৈল ॥ ১৪ ॥
kundera mrttika lana tilaka karila
bhattacarya-dvara mrttika sange kari’ laila


--- Page 140 ---
Text 16] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 137
SYNONYMS
kundera—of the lake; mrttika—earth; lana—taking; tilaka karila—formed
tilaka; bhattacarya-dvara—with the help of Balabhadra Bhattacarya; mrttika—
earth; sarige—along; kari’—making; laila—took.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then marked His body with tilaka made from the
mud of Radha-kunda, and with the help of Balabhadra Bhattacarya, He col-
lected some of the mud and took it with Him.
TEXT 15
তবে চলি” wien প্রভু “স্থমনঃ-সরেো।বর*।
তাহ “গোবধন' দেখি” হইলা বিহ্বল ॥ ১৫ ॥
tabe cali’ aila prabhu ‘sumanah-sarovara’
tahan ‘govardhana’ dekhi’ ha-ila vihvala
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter;  cali’—traveling; = aili—came; prabhu—S$ri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sumanah-sarovara—to the lake known as Sumanabh; tahan—there;
govardhana—Govardhana Hill; dekhi’—seeing; ha-ila vihvala—became over-
whelmed.
TRANSLATION
From Radha-kunda, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Sumanah Lake. When
He saw Govardhana Hill from there, He was overwhelmed by joy.
TEXT 16
(भो वर्धन দেখি” यद्‌ टेन দণ্ডবছ |
“এক শিলা” আলিঙ্গিয়৷ ङ्टेन। উন্মত্ত ॥ ১৬ ॥
govardhana dekhi’ prabhu ha-ila dandavat
‘eka sila’ alingiya ha-ila unmatta
SYNONYMS
govardhana  dekhi’—seeing  Govardhana Hill;  prabhu—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ha-ila dandavat—offered obeisances like a straight rod; eka Sila—
one piece of stone; alingiya—embracing; ha-ildi—became; unmatta—maddened.


--- Page 141 ---
138 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
When the Lord saw Govardhana Hill, He immediately offered obeisances,
falling down on the ground like a rod. He embraced one piece of rock from
Govardhana Hill and became mad.
TEXT 17
প্রেমে ष्ठ एनि' खेन গোবধন-গ্রাম।
“হুরিদেব' দেখি” তাহ হুইল। প্রণাম ॥ ১৭ ॥
preme matta cali’ aila govardhana-grama
‘harideva’ dekhi’ tahan ha-ila pranama
SYNONYMS
preme—in ecstatic love; matta—maddened; cali‘—proceeding; aila—came;
govardhana-grama—to the village known as Govardhana; hari-deva—the Deity
named Harideva installed there; dekhi’—seeing; tahan—there; ha-ila pranama—
offered obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Mad with ecstatic love, the Lord came to the village known as Govardhana.
It was there that He saw the Deity Harideva and offered His obeisances unto
Him.
TEXT 18
“মথুরা”-পল্মের পশ্চিমণলে যার IAA |
“হুরিদেব” নারায়ণ আদি পরকাশ ॥ ১৮ ॥
‘mathurd’-padmera pascima-dale yanra vasa
‘harideva’ nardyana——adi parakasa
SYNONYMS
mathura-padmera—of the lotus flower of Mathura; pascima-dale—on the
western petal; yanra—whose; vasa—residence; hari-deva—Lord Harideva;
narayana—incarnation of Narayana; adi—original; parakasa—manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Harideva is an incarnation of Narayana, and His residence is on the western
petal of the lotus of Mathura.


--- Page 142 ---
Text 21] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vendavana 139
TEXT 19
হরিদেব-আগে নাচে প্রেমে मख ₹<9 |
जव লোক দেখিতে আইল আশ্চর্য শুনিয়া ॥ >> ॥
harideva-age nace preme matta hana
saba loka dekhite aila ascarya suniya
SYNONYMS
hari-deva-age—in front of Harideva; nace —dances; preme—in ecstatic love;
matta hana—becoming maddened; saba loka—all the people; dekhite—to see;
aila—came; ascarya—wonderful; suniya—hearing.
TRANSLATION
Mad with ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to dance before the
Harideva Deity. Hearing of the Lord's wonderful activities, all the people
came to see Him.
TEXT 20
প্রভু-প্রেম-সৌন্দর্য দেখি” লোকে চমৎকার |
হরিদেবের ভূত্য প্রভুর করিল সৎকার ॥ ২০ ॥
prabhu-prema-saundarya dekhi’ loke camatkara
haridevera bhrtya prabhura karila satkara
SYNONYMS
prabhu—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-saundarya—ecstatic love and
beauty; dekhi’—seeing; loke —people; camatkara—astonished; hari-devera—of
Lord Harideva; bhrtya—servants; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karila
satkara—offered a good reception.
TRANSLATION
The people were astonished when they saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
ecstatic love and personal beauty. The priests who served the Harideva Deity
offered the Lord a good reception.
TEXT 21
ভট্টাচার্য ‘@RFCY’ नो क योर) टेकल |
TREC प्रान করি' প্রভু ভিক্ষা কৈল ॥ ২১ ॥


--- Page 143 ---
140 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
bhattacarya ‘brahma-kunde’ paka yana kaila
brahma-kunde snana kari’ prabhu bhiksa kaila
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; brahma-kunde—at the lake called
Brahma-kunda; paka—cooking; yana—going there; kaila—performed; brahma-
kunde —at Brahma-kunda; 57379 kari’—taking a bath; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhiksa kaila—accepted lunch.
TRANSLATION
At Brahma-kunda, Bhattacarya cooked food, and the Lord, after taking His
bath at Brahma-kunda, accepted His lunch.
TEXT 22
সে-রাত্রি রহিল! হরিদেবের মন্দিরে ।
রাত্রে মহাপ্রভু করে মনেতে বিচারে ॥ ২২ ॥
se-ratri rahila haridevera mandire
13076 mahaprabhu kare manete vicare
SYNONYMS
se-ratri—that night; rahila—remained; hari-devera—of Harideva; mandire —in
the temple; ratre—at night; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kare —
does; manete—in the mind; vicare —consideration.
TRANSLATION
That night the Lord stayed at the temple of Harideva, and during the night
He began to reflect.
TEXT 23
“গোবর্ধন-উপরে আমি কভু न চড়িব।
গোপাল-রায়ের দরশন কেমনে পাইব rel
‘govardhana-upare ami kabhu na cadiba
gopala-rayera darasana kemane paiba?’
SYNONYMS
govardhana-upare—upon the hill known as Covardhana; ami—I; kabhu—at
any time; na—not; cadiba—shall climb; gopala-rayera—of Lord Gopaila;
darasana—visit; kemane—how; paiba—I shall get.


--- Page 144 ---
Text 25] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 141
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thought, “Since | shall not at any time climb
Govardhana Hill, how shall I be able to see Gopala २३१०२.
TEXT 24
এত মনে করি' প্রভু মৌন করি' अङिन्‌।।
জানিয়৷ গোপাল কিছু ভঙ্গী উঠাইল৷ ॥ ২৪ ॥
eta mane kari’ prabhu mauna kari’ rahila
janiya gopala kichu bhangi uthaila
SYNONYMS
eta—so much; mane kari’—considering within the mind; prabhu—S$i Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; mauna—silent; kari’—becoming; rahila—remained; janiya—know-
ing; gopala—the Deity Gopala; kichu—some; bharigi—tricks; uthaila—raised.
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way, the Lord remained silent, and Lord Gopala, knowing
His contemplation, played a trick.
TEXT 25
অনারুরুক্ষবে শৈলং স্বস্মৈ ভক্তাভিমানিনে।
অবরুহ গিরেঃ কৃষ্ণ গোরায় স্বমদর্শরঙৎ ॥ ২৫ ॥
anaruruksave sailarn
svasmai bhaktabhimanine
avaruhya gireh krsno
gaurdya svam adarsayat
SYNONYMS
anaruruksave—who was unwilling to climb up; sailam—the mountain;
svasmai—unto Himself; bhakta-abhimanine—considering Himself a devotee of
Lord Krsna; avaruhya—getting down; gireh—from the hill; krspah—Lord Krsna;
gaurdya—unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; svam—Himself; adarsayat—showed.
TRANSLATION
Coming down from Govardhana Hill, Lord Gopala granted an interview to
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who was unwilling to climb the hill, thinking
Himself a devotee of Lord Krsna.


--- Page 145 ---
142 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 18
TEXT 26
“অন্পকুট-নামে গ্রামে গোপালের স্ছিতি ।
রাজপুত-লোকের সেই গ্রামে বসতি ॥ ২৬ ॥
‘annakata’-name grame gopalera sthiti
raja-puta-lokera sei grame vasati
SYNONYMS
annakdta-name —by the name Annakata; grame—in the village; gopalera—of
Copala; sthiti—residence; rdja-puta-lokera—of people from Rajasthan; sei
grame —in that village; vasati—habitation.
TRANSLATION
Gopala stayed in a village called Annakiita-grama on Govardhana Hill. The
villagers who lived in that village were mainly from Rajasthan.
PURPORT
The village named Annakita-grama is referred to in Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth
Wave):
gopa-gopi bhuijayena kautuka apara
ei hetu ‘aniyora’ nama se ihara
annakdta-sthana ei dekha Srinivasa
e-sthana darsane haya [00103 abhilasa
“It is here that all the gopis and the gopas enjoyed wonderful pastimes with Sri
Krsna. Therefore this place is also called Aniyora. The Annakata ceremony was
celebrated here. O Srinivasa, whoever sees this place has all his desires fulfilled.” It
is also stated:
kundera nikata dekha nivida-kanana
ethai ‘gopala’ chila hana sanigopana
“Look at the dense forest near the kunda. It was there that Gopala was con-
cealed.” Also, the Stavavali (8.75) by Raghunatha dasa Gosvamr states:
vrajendra-varyarpita-bhogam uccair
dhrtva brhat-kayam agharir utkah
varepa radham chalayan vibhunkte
yatranna-katarn tad aham prapadye


--- Page 146 ---
Text 29] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 143
TEXT 27
একজন আসি' রাত্রে গ্রামীকে afew |
“তোমার গ্রাম মারিতে তুরুক-ধারী সাজিল ॥ ২৭ ॥
eka-jana asi’ ratre gramike balila
‘tomara grama marite turuka-dhari sajila
SYNONYMS
eka-jana—one person; asi’—coming; ratre—at night; gramike—to the inhabi-
tants of the village; balila—said; tomara—your; grama—uvillage; marite—to at-
tack; turuka-dhari—Turkish Mohammedan soldiers; sajila—are prepared.
TRANSLATION
One person who came to the village informed the inhabitants, ‘The Turkish
soldiers are now preparing to attack your village.
TEXT 28
আজি রাত্র্যে পলাহ, না রহিহ একজন ।
ঠাকুর नय ভাগ”, আসিবে কালি सवन ॥” २४. ॥
2/1 ratrye palaha, na rahiha eka-jana
thakura lana bhaga’, asibe kali yavana’
SYNONYMS
2/1 ratrye —this night; paladha—go away; na rahiha—do not remain; eka-jana—
one person; thakura—the Deity; lana—taking; bhaga’—go away; asibe—will
come; kali—tomorrow; yavana—the Mohammedan soldiers.
TRANSLATION
‘Flee this village tonight, and do not allow one person to remain. Take the
Deity with you and leave, for the Mohammedan soldiers will come tomor-
row.”
TEXT 29
শুনিয়া গ্রামের লোক চিন্তিত হইল ।
প্রথমে গোপাল नयन গীঠুলি-গ্রামে খুইল ॥ ২৯ ॥
Suniya gramera loka cintita ha-ila
prathame gopala 127 ganthuli-grame khuila


--- Page 147 ---
144 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
suniya—hearing; gramera loka—all the people in the village; cintita ha-ila—be-
came very anxious; prathame—first; gopala lana—taking Gopala; ganthuli-
grame—in the village known as Ganthuli; khuila—kept Him hidden.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, all the villagers became very anxious. They first took Gopala
and moved Him to a village known as Ganthuli.
TEXT 30
বিপ্রগৃহে গোপালের fags সেবন।
গ্রাম উজাড় হৈল, পলাইল जर्वजन ॥ ৩০ ॥
vipra-grhe gopalera nibhrte sevana
grama ujada haila, palaila sarva-jana
SYNONYMS
vipra-grhe —in the house of a brahmana; gopalera—of Lord Gopala; nibhrte —
very secretly; sevana—worship; grama—the village; ujada haila—became
deserted; paldila—fled; sarva-jana—all the people.
TRANSLATION
The Gopala Deity was kept in the house of a brahmana, and His worship was
conducted secretly. Everyone fled, and thus the village of Annakita was
deserted.
TEXT 31
এঁছে ম্লেচ্ছভয়ে গোপাল ভাগে বারে-বারে।
মন্দির ছাড়ি' কুঞ্জে রহে, কিবা গ্রামান্তরে ॥ ৩১ ॥
aiche mleccha-bhaye gopala bhage bare-bare
mandira chadi’ kurije rahe, kiba gramantare
SYNONYMS
aiche—in that way; mleccha-bhaye —because of fear of the Mohammedans;
gopala—the Deity of Gopala Raya; bhage—runs away; bare-bare —again and
again; mandira chadi’—giving up the temple; kufje—in the bush; rahe —remains;
kiba—or; grama-antare—in a different village.


--- Page 148 ---
Text 331 The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 145
TRANSLATION
Due to fear of the Mohammedans, the Gopala Deity was moved from one
place to another again and again. Thus giving up His temple, Lord Gopala
would sometimes live in a bush and sometimes in one village after another.
TEXT 32
প্রাতঃকালে প্রভু 'মানসগঞ্গা য় করি” আন।
গোবর্ধন-পরিক্রমায় कञ्चि প্রয়াণ ॥ ৩২ ॥
pratah-kale prabhu ‘manasa-garga’ya kari’ snana
govardhana-parikramaya karila prayana
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; manasa-
gangdya—in the lake named Manasa-ganga; kari’—performing; snana—bathing;
govardhana—Govardhana Hill; parikramaya—in circumambulating; karila—did;
prayana—starting.
TRANSLATION
In the morning, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took His bath in a lake called
Manasa-ganga. He then circumambulated Govardhana Hill.
TEXT 33
গোবধন দেখি” প্রভু (व्यमा विष्टे zee! |
নাচিতে নাচিতে চলিলা প্লোক পড়িয়। ॥ ৩৩ ॥
govardhana dekhi’ prabhu premavista hana
nacite nacite calila loka padiya
SYNONYMS
govardhana  dekhi’—seeing Govardhana Hill; prabhu—Sr1  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; prema-avista haia—becoming ecstatic in love; nacite nacite—
dancing and dancing; calili—departed; sloka padiya—reciting the following
verse.
TRANSLATION
Just by seeing Govardhana Hill, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became ecstatic
with love of Krsna. While dancing and dancing, He recited the following
verse.


--- Page 149 ---
146 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 34
ङ्ख ग्रमणित्रयन। হরিদাসবযো
যদ্রামকষ্ণচরণস্পরশপ্রমোদঃ ।
মানং SLA সহ-গোগণয়োল্ডয়োর্ধৎ
পানীয়-সুযবস-কন্দর-কন্দ LAL ॥ ०8 ॥
hantayam adrir abala hari-dasa-varyo
yad rama-krsna-carana-sparasa-pramodah
manarh tanoti saha-go-ganayos tayor yat
paniya-sayavasa-kandara-kanda-malaih
SYNONYMS
hanta—oh; ayam—this; adrih—hill; abalah—O friends; hari-dasa-varyah—the
best among the servants of the Lord; yat—because; rama-krsna-carana—of the
lotus feet of Lord Krsna and Balarama; sparasa—by the touch; pramodah—
jubilant; manam—respects; tanoti—offers; saha—with; go-ganayoh—cows,
calves and cowherd boys; tayoh—to Them (rf Krsna and Balarama); yat—be-
cause; paniya—drinking water; sidyavasa—very soft grass; kandara—caves; kan-
da-malaih —and by roots.
TRANSLATION
“01 all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the best! O My friends, this
hill supplies Krsna and Balarama, as well as Their calves, cows and cowherd
friends, with all kinds of necessities—water for drinking, very soft grass,
caves, fruits, flowers and vegetables. In this way the hill offers respect to the
Lord. Being touched by the lotus feet of Krsna and Balarama, Govardhana Hill
appears very jubilant.
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.21.18). It was spoken by the
gopis when Lord Krsna and Balarama entered the forest in the autumn. The gopi:
spoke among themselves and glorified Krsna and Balarama for Their pastimes.
TEXT 35
“গোবিন্দকুণ্ডাদি” Sted প্রভু cae we ।
তাই। Weel _-গোপাল গেল গাঁঠুলি গ্রাম ॥ ७८ ॥
‘govinda-kundadi’ (7006 prabhu kaila snana
tahan Sunila—gopala gela ganthuli grama


--- Page 150 ---
Text 371 The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 147
SYNONYMS
govinda-kunda-adi—Covinda-kunda and others; tirthe—in the holy places;
prabhu—S$r1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kaild snana—performed bathing; tahan—
there; sunili—heard; gopala—the Copila Deity; gela—has gone; ganthuli—
Ganthuli; grama—to the village.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then took His bath in a lake called Govinda-
kunda, and while He was there, He heard that the Deity Gopala had already
gone to Ganthuli-grama.
TEXT 36
সেই গ্রামে গিয়। কৈল গোপাল-দরশন।
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভু করে কীর্তন-নর্তন ॥ ৩৬ |
sei grame giya kaila gopala-darasana
premavese prabhu kare kirtana-nartana
SYNONYMS
sei grame—to that village; giya—going; kaila—performed; gopala-darasana—
seeing Lord Copila; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kare—performs; kirtana-nartana—chanting and dancing.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then went to the village of Ganthuli-grama and
saw the Lord Gopala Deity. Overwhelmed by ecstatic love, He began to chant
and dance.
TEXT 37
গোপালের সৌন্দর্য দেখি” প্রভুর আবেশ |
এই (शाक পড়ি' নাচে, হৈল দিন-শেষ ॥ ৩৭ ॥
gopalera saundarya dekhi’ prabhura 3৮০১৪
ei sloka padi’ nace, haila dina-sesa
SYNONYMS
gopalera—of Gopala; saundarya—beauty; dekhi’—seeing; prabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; avesa—ecstasy; ei sloka padi’—reciting the following
verse; nice—dances; haila—there was; dina-sesa—the end of the day.


--- Page 151 ---
148 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION

As soon as the Lord saw the beauty of the Gopila Deity, He was immediately
overwhelmed by ecstatic love, and He recited the following verse. He then
chanted and danced until the day ended.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives the following information about
Govinda-kunda. There is a village named Aniyora on Govardhana Hill, a little dis-
tance from the village of Paitha. Govinda-kunda is situated near here, and there
are two temples to Govinda and Baladeva there. According to some, Queen Pad-
mavati excavated this lake. In the Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave), the following
statement is found:

ei sri-govinda-kunda-mahima aneka
etha indra kaila govindera abhiseka
“GCovinda-kunda is exalted for its many spiritual activities. It was here that Indra
was defeated by Lord Krsna, and Indra offered his prayers and bathed Lord Govin-
da.” In the book Stavavali (Vraja-vilasa-stava, 74) the following verse is found:
nicaih praudha-bhayat svayarn surapatih padau vidhrtyeha yaih
svar-ganga-salilais cakara surabhi-dvarabhisekotsavam
govindasya navari gavam adhipata rajye sphutam kautukat
tair yat pradurabhat sada sphuratu tad govinda-kundari drsoh
In the Mathura-khanda it is also stated:
yatrabhisikto bhagavan
maghona yadu-vairina
govinda-kundam taj-jatam
snana-matrena moksadam

“Simply by bathing in Govinda-kunda, one is awarded liberation. This lake was
produced when Bhagavan 67 Krsna was bathed by Lord Indra.”

Ganthuli-grama is situated near the two villages Bilachu and Gopala-pura. Ac-
cording to hearsay, Radha and Krsna first met here. In the Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth
Wave), it is stated: sakhi dunha vastre ganthi dila sangopane. It is also stated:
phaguya laiya keha ganthi khuli’ dila. For this reason the village is known as
Ganthuli.

TEXT 38
वांगांमतनांकछ ভুজদণ্ড: ন পাতু বঃ ৷
ক্রীড়াকম্দুকতাং যেন নীতে৷ গোবধনে। গিরিঃ ॥ ৩৮ ॥


--- Page 152 ---
Text 40] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 149
vamas tamarasaksasya
bhuja-dandah sa patu vah
krida-kandukatarn yena
nito govardhano girih
SYNONYMS
vamah—the left; tamarasa-aksasya—of Krsna, who has eyes like lotus petals;
bhuja-dandah —arm; sah —that; patu—Ilet it protect; vah—all of you; krida-kan-
dukatam—being like a toy; yena—by which; nitah—attained; govardhanah—
named Govardhana; girih—the hill.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, // ‘May the left arm of Sri Krsna, whose eyes
are like the petals of a lotus flower, always protect you. With His left arm He
raised Govardhana Hill as if it were a toy.” ^“
PURPORT
This verse is found in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.1.62).
TEXT 39
এইমত তিনদিন গোপালে cafe |
চতুর্থ-দিবসে গোপাল স্বমন্দিরে গেলা ॥ ৩৯ ॥
ei-mata tina-dina gopale dekhila
caturtha-divase gopala svamandire gela
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; tina-dina—for three days; gopale—Gopala; dekhila—
saw; caturtha-divase—on the fourth day; gopala—the Deity Gopala; sva-man-
dire—in His own temple; gela—returned.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the Gopala Deity for three days. On the
fourth day, the Deity returned to His own temple.
TEXT 40
গোপাল সঙ্গে চলি” আইলা নৃত্য-গীত করি |
আননম্দ-কোলাহলে লোক বলে “হরি” =F ॥ ৪০ ॥
8০/03/৭ sange cali’ aila nrtya-gita kari
ananda-kolahale loka bale ‘hari’ ‘hari’


--- Page 153 ---
150 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
gopala sarige—with Copala; cali’—walking; aila—came; nrtya-gita kari—
chanting and dancing; 4ananda-kolahale—in great jubilation; loka—people;
bale —say; hari hari—Hari, Hari.
TRANSLATION
Caitanya Mahaprabhu walked with the Deity of Gopala, and He chanted and
danced. A large and jubilant crowd of people also chanted the transcendental
name of Krsna, ‘‘Hari! (गा!
TEXT 41
গোপাল মন্দিরে গেলা, প্রভু রহিল৷ oes |
প্রভুর বাঞ্ছ পূর্ণ সব করিল গোপালে ॥ ৪১ ॥
gopala mandire gela, prabhu rahila tale
prabhura varicha parpa saba karila gopale
SYNONYMS
gopala—the Deity Gopala; mandire gela—returned to His temple; prabhu—S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 12011 tale—remain at the bottom; prabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vancha—desires; parpa—satisfied; saba—all; karila—
made; gopale —the Deity Gopala.
TRANSLATION
The Deity Gopala then returned to His own temple, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu remained at the bottom of the hill. Thus all the desires of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu were satisfied by the Deity Gopala.
TEXT 42
এইমত গোপালের করুণ স্বভাব।
(षषे ভক্ত জনমের দেখিতে TH “रो व्‌" ॥ ৪২ ॥
ei-mata gopalera karuna svabhava
yei bhakta janera dekhite haya ‘bhava’
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; gopalera—of the Deity Gopala; karuna sva-bhava—kind
behavior; yei—which; bhakta janera—of persons who are devotees; dekhite —to
see; haya—there is; bhava—ecstatic love.


--- Page 154 ---
Text 44] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 151
TRANSLATION
This is the way of Lord Gopala’s kind behavior to His devotees. Seeing this,
the devotees were overwhelmed by ecstatic love.
TEXT 43
দেখিতে উৎকণ্ঠা হয়, न চড়ে গোবধনে।
কোন ছলে গোপাল আসি” উত্তরে আপনে ॥ ৪৩ ॥
dekhite utkantha haya, na cade govardhane
kona chale gopala asi’ utare apane
SYNONYMS
dekhite—to see; utkantha haya—there was great anxiety; na cagde—does not
go up; govardhane—on the hill known as Govardhana; kona chale—by some
trick; gopala—the Deity Gopala; dsi’—coming; utare —descends; apane—per-
sonally.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very anxious to see Gopila, but He did not
want to climb Govardhana Hill. Therefore by some trick the Deity Gopala per-
sonally descended.
TEXT 44
TG TLR রহে, কভু ACT গ্রামান্তরে |
সেই ভক্ত, তাই আসি” দেখয়ে ভাহারে ॥ 88 ॥
kabhu (८८451€ rahe, kabhu rahe gramantare
sei bhakta, tahan asi’ dekhaye tanhare
SYNONYMS
kabhu—sometimes; kufije—in the bushes; rahe—remains; kabhu—some-
times; rahe—He stays; grama-antare—in a different village; sei bhakta—that
devotee; tahan asi’—coming there; dekhaye tanhare —sees Him.
TRANSLATION
In this way, giving some excuse, Gopala sometimes remains in the bushes of
the forest, and sometimes He stays in a village. One who is a devotee comes to
see the Deity.


--- Page 155 ---
152 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 45
পর্বতে न চড়ে তুই-_রূপ-সনাতন |
এইকূপে কা-সবারে দিয়াছেন দরশন ॥ ৪৫ ॥
parvate na cade dui—rapa-sanatana
ei-rape tan-sabare diyachena darasana
SYNONYMS
parvate—on the hill; na cade—do not ascend; dui—two; ripa-sanatana—Rapa
Cosvami and Sanatana Gosvami; ei-rape —in this way; tan-sabare—unto them;
diyachena—has given; darasana—interview.
TRANSLATION
The two brothers Ripa and Sanatana did not climb the hill. To them also
Lord Gopila granted an interview.
TEXT 46
বৃদ্ধকালে রূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞি না পারে যাইতে |
atl হৈল গোপালের সৌন্দর্য দেখিতে ॥ ৪৬ ॥
vrddha-kale rapa-gosani na pare yaite
varicha haila gopalera saundarya dekhite
SYNONYMS
vrddha-kale—in ripe old age; ripa-gosani—Rapa Gosvami; na pare—is not
able; yaite—to go; vancha haila—there was a desire; gopalera—of Copala; saun-
darya dekhite—to see the beauty.
TRANSLATION
In ripe old age, Srila Ripa Gosvami could not go there, but he had a desire
to see the beauty of Gopala.
TEXT 47
ম্লেচ্ছভয়ে আইলা গোপাল মধুরা-নগরে |
একমাস রহিল বিঠঠলেশ্বর-ঘরে ॥ ৪৭ ॥
mleccha-bhaye aila gopala mathura-nagare
eka-masa rahila viththalesvara-ghare


--- Page 156 ---
Text 48] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 153
SYNONYMS
mleccha-bhaye—because of fear of the Muslims; aili—came; gopala—the
Deity Gopala; mathura-nagare—to the city of Mathura; eka-masa—one month;
rahila—stayed; viththalesvara-ghare—in the temple of Viththale$vara.
TRANSLATION
Due to fear of the Mohammedans, Gopala went to Mathura, where He
remained in the temple of Viththalesvara for one full month.
PURPORT
When the two brothers Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami went to
Vrndavana, they decided to live there. Following Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s ex-
ample, they did not climb the hill because they considered it nondifferent from
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On some pretext, the Gopala Deity
granted Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu an audience beneath the hill, and Gopala
similarly favored Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami. During his ripe old
age, when Rapa Gosvami could not go to Govardhana Hill because of invalidity,
Gopala kindly went to Mathura and remained at the temple of Viththalesvara for
one month. It was then that Srila Rapa Gosvami could see Gopala’s beauty to his
heart's content.
TEXT 48
তবে Fo (भोजाय সব নিজগণ मय) ।
একমাস দরশন বকৈল। মধ্রায় রহিয়। ॥ ৪৮ ॥
tabe rapa gosani saba nija-gana lana
eka-masa darasana kaila mathuraya rahiya
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereupon; rapa gosani—Srila Rapa Gosvami; saba—all; nija-gana
lana —taking his associates with him; eka-masa—for one month; darasana kaila—
saw the Deity; mathuraya rahiya—staying at the city of Mathura.
TRANSLATION
Srila Rapa Gosvami and his associates stayed in Mathura for one month and
saw the Deity Gopala.
PURPORT
The following description of the temple of Viththalesvara is given in Bhakti-rat-
nakara (Fifth Wave):


--- Page 157 ---
154 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
viththalera seva krsna-caitanya-vigraha
tahara darsane haila parama agraha
$ri-viththalanatha—bhatta-vallabha-tanaya
karila yateka priti kahile na haya
gatholi-grame gopala aila ‘chala’ kari’
tanre dekhi’ nrtya-gite magna gaurahari
$ri-dasa-gosvami adi paramarsa kari’
sri-viththalesvare kaila seva-adhikari
pita sri-vallabha-bhatta tanra adarsane
kata-dina mathuraya chilena nirjane
Sri Vallabha Bhatta had two sons. The elder, Copinatha, was born in 1432 Sakab-
da Era, and the younger, Viththalanatha, was born in 1437 and died in 1507.
Viththala had seven sons: Giridhara, Govinda, Balakrsna, Gokulesa, Raghunatha,
Yadunatha and Ghanadyama. Viththala completed many of his father’s unfinished
books, including his commentary on Vedanta-satra, the Subodhini commentary
on Srimad-Bhagavatam, Vidvan-mandana, Srngara-rasa-mandana and Nyasadesa-
vivarapa. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Vrndavana before the birth of
Viththala. Srila Rapa Gosvami was very old at the time (00812 stayed at the house
of Viththalanatha.
TEXT 49
সঙ্গে গোপাল-ভট্ট, দাস-রঘুনাথ |
রখঘুনাথ-ভট্টগোসাঞ্চি, আর লোকনাথ ॥ ৪৯ ॥
sange gopala-bhatta, dasa-raghunatha
raghunatha-bhatta-gosani, ara lokanatha
SYNONYMS
sange—with Rapa Cosvami; gopala-bhatta—GCopala Bhatta;  dasa-
raghunatha—Raghunatha dasa Gosvami; raghunatha-bhatta-gosani—Raghunatha
Bhatta Gosvami; dra—and; lokanatha—Lokanatha dasa Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
When Riipa Gosvami stayed at Mathura, he was accompanied by Gopala
Bhatta Gosvami, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami and
Lokanatha dasa Gosvami.


--- Page 158 ---
Text 511 The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 155
PURPORT
Sri Lokanatha Gosvami was a personal associate of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and a great devotee of the Lord. He was a resident of a village named Talakhadi in
the district of Ya$ohara in Bengal. Previously he lived in Kacnapada. His father's
name was Padmanabha, and his only younger brother was Pragalbha. Following
the orders of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Lokanatha went to Vindavana to live.
He established a temple named Gokulananda. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura
selected Lokanatha dasa Gosvami to be his spiritual master, and he was his only
disciple. Because Lokanatha dasa Gosvami did not want his name mentioned in
Caitanya-caritamrta, we do not often see it in this celebrated book. On the E.B.R.
Railroad, the Yasohara station is located in Bangladesh. From the railway station
one has to go by bus to the village of Sonakhali and from there to Khejura. From
there one has to walk, or, during the rainy season, go by boat to the village of
Talakhadi. In this village there are still descendants of Lokanatha Gosvami's
younger brother.
TEXT 50
ভুগর্ভ-গোসাঞ্ি, আর জীজীব-গোসাঞ্ি |
জীযাদব-আচার্য, আর গোবিন্দ (नजा ॥ ৫০ ॥
bhuagarbha-gosani, ara $ri-jiva-gosani
$ri-yadava-acarya, ara govinda gosani
SYNONYMS
bhagarbha-gosani—Bhagarbha Gosafi; 4ara—and; $ri-jiva-gosani—Sri ५/2
Gosvami; $ri-yadava-acarya—S$ri Yadava Acarya; dra—and; govinda gosani—
Govinda Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Bhiagarbha Gosvami, Sri Jiva Gosvami, Sri Yadava Acarya and Govinda
Gosvami also accompanied Srila Riipa Gosvami.
TEXT 51
জীউদ্ধব-দাস, আর মাধব - দুইজন |
জ্রগোপাল-দাস, আর দাস-নারায়ণ ॥ ৫১ ॥
$ri-uddhava-dasa, ara madhava—dui-jana
$ri-gopala-dasa, ara dasa-narayana


--- Page 159 ---
156 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
$ri-uddhava-dasa—S$ri Uddhava dasa; ara—and; madhava—Madbhava; dui-
jana—two persons; sri-gopala-dasa—Sri Gopala dasa; ara—and; dasa-narayana—
Narayana dasa.
TRANSLATION
He was also accompanied by Sri Uddhava dasa, Madhava, Sri Gopala dasa
and Narayana dasa.
TEXT 52
“গোবিন্দ ভক্ত, আর বাণী-কৃষ্ণণাস |
পুণ্ডরীকাক্ষক, ঈশান, আর লঘু-হুরিদাস ॥ ৫২ ॥
‘govinda’ bhakta, ara vani-krsnadasa
pundarikaksa, isana, ara laghu-haridasa
SYNONYMS
govinda—QCovinda; bhakta—a great devotee; dra—and; vani-krsnadasa—Vvant
Krsnadasa;  pundarikaksa—Pundarikaksa; isana—Isana; dra—and; laghu-
haridasa—Laghu Haridasa.
TRANSLATION
The great devotee Govinda, Vani Krsnadasa, Pundarikaksa, 15313 and Laghu
Haridasa also accompanied him.
PURPORT
Laghu Haridasa should not be confused with Junior Haridasa, who committed
suicide at Prayaga. Generally a devotee is called Haridasa, and consequently there
are many Haridasas. The chief was Thakura Haridasa. There was also a Madhyama
Haridasa.
In Bhakti-ratnakara (Sixth Wave), there is a list of many of the chief devotees
who accompanied Srila Ripa Gosvami.
gosvami gopala-bhatta ati dayamaya
bhagarbha, sri-lokanatha—gunera alaya
$ri-madhava, $ri-paramananda-bhattacarya
sri-madhu-pandita——yanra caritra ascarya


--- Page 160 ---
Text 54] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 157
premi krsnadasa krspadasa brahmacari
yadava acarya, nardyana krpavan
sri-pundarikak sa-gosani, govinda, isana
sri-govinda vani-krsnadasa aty-udara
$ri-uddhava——madhye-madhye gaude gati yanra
dvija-haridasa krspadasa kaviraja
sri-gopala-dasa yanra alaukika kaya
sri-gopala, madhavadi yateka vaisnava
“The following Vaisnavas were present with Srila Rapa Gosvami: the merciful
Copala Bhatta Gosvami; Bhagarbha Gosvami; Sri Lokanatha dasa Gosvami, a
reservoir of good qualities; Sr Madhava; Sri Paramananda Bhattacarya; Sri Madhu
Pandita, whose characteristics are all wonderful; Premi Krsnadasa; Krsnadasa
Brahmacari; Yadava Acarya; the merciful Narayana; 7 Pundarikaksa Gosvami;
Covinda; Tana; Sri Govinda; the magnanimous Vani Krsnadasa; Sn Uddhava, who
occasionally visited Bengal; Dvija Haridasa; Krsnadasa Kaviraja; Sri Gopala dasa,
whose body is completely spiritual; Sri Gopala; Madhava; and many others.”
TEXT 53
এই সব মুখ্যভক্ত Ap নিজ-সঙ্জে ৷
জ্রীগোপাল দরশন टेकन। বহু-রঙে ॥ ৫৩ ॥
ei saba mukhya-bhakta lana nija-sange
Sri-gopala darasana kaila bahu-range
SYNONYMS
ei saba—all these; mukhya-bhakta—chief devotees; laa nija-sarige—taking
with him personally; $ri-gopala darasana—uvisiting Lord Copala; kaila bahu-
range —performed in great jubilation.
TRANSLATION
It was with great jubilation that Rapa Gosvami visited Lord Gopala accom-
panied by all these devotees.
TEXT 54
একমাস AR গোপাল গেল৷ নিজ-স্থানে |
শস্রীরূপ-গোস।ঞি আইলা লীবৰৃন্দাবনে ॥ ৫৪ ॥


--- Page 161 ---
158 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
eka-masa rahi’ gopala gela nija-sthane
$ri-rapa-gosani aila sri-vrndavane
SYNONYMS
eka-masa rahi’—staying for one month; gopala—the Deity Gopala; gela—
went; nija-sthane—to His own place; $ri-rapa-gosani—Sri Ripa Gosvami; aila—
came back; $ri-vrndavane —to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
After staying at Mathura for one month, the Deity Gopala returned to His
own place, and Sri 003 Gosvami returned to Vrndavana.
TEXT 55
প্রস্তাবে TE গে।পাল-ক্বপার আখ্যান ।
তবে মহাপ্রভু গেল৷ “জীকাম্যবন” ॥ ৫৫ ॥
prastave kahilun gopala-krpara akhyana
tabe mahaprabhu gela ‘sri-kamyavana’
SYNONYMS
prastave—in the course of the story; kahilun—I have stated; gopala-krpara—of
the mercy of Copala; akhyana—description; tabe—after this; mahaprabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; geld—went; sri-kamya-vana—to 511 Kamyavana.
TRANSLATION
In the course of this story, | have given a description of Lord Gopala’s
mercy. After seeing the Gopala Deity, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Sri
Kamyavana.
PURPORT
Kamyavana is mentioned in the Adi-varaha Purana:
caturtham kamyaka-vanam
vananarn vanam uttamam
tatra gatva naro devi
mama loke mahiyate
In the Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave) it is also said:
ei kamyavane krsna-lila manohara
karibe darsana sthana kunda bahutara
kamyavane yata tirtha lekha nahi tara


--- Page 162 ---
Text 58] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 159
TEXT 56
প্রভুর গমন-রীতি পুর্বে যে লিখিল ।
সেইমত বৃন্দাবনে छावर (मथिन्‌ ॥ ৫৬ ॥
prabhura gamana-riti parve ye likhila
sei-mata vrndavane tavat dekhila
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gamana-riti—method of touring;
00016 —formerly; ye—which; likhila—I have written; sei-mata—similarly;
vrndavane —at Vrindavana; tavat dekhila—saw all the places.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s touring Vrndavana has been previously de-
scribed. In the same ecstatic way, He traveled all over Vrndavana.
TEXT 57
তাই লীলাস্থলী দেখি” গেলা AI’ |
au দেখি” প্রেমে হইল। fame ॥ ৫৭ ॥
tahan lila-sthali dekhi’ gela ‘nandisvara’
‘nandisvara’ dekhi’ preme ha-ila vihvala
SYNONYMS
taharnn—at Kamyavana; lila-sthali—all the places of pastimes; dekhi’—visiting;
gela nandisvara—went to Nandi$vara; nandisvara dekhi’—while seeing
Nandi$vara; preme ha-ila vihvala—became overwhelmed by ecstatic love.
TRANSLATION
After visiting the places of Krsna’'s pastimes at Kamyavana, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu went to Nandi$vara. While there, He was overwhelmed with
ecstatic love.
PURPORT
Nandiévara is the house of Maharaja Nanda.
TEXT 58
পাবনাদি” সব Foo FA করিয়া ।
লোকে রে शून, পর্বত-উপরে साग ॥ ৫৮ ॥


--- Page 163 ---
160 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
‘pavanadi’ saba kunsleina kariya
lokere puchila, parvata-upare yana
SYNONYMS
pavana-adi—Pavana and others; saba kunde —in every lake; snana kariya—tak-
ing a bath; lokere puchila—inquired from persons there; parvata-upare yana—
going up a hill.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bathed in all the celebrated lakes, beginning with
Lake Pavana. Thereafter He climbed a hill and spoke to the people.
PURPORT
The Pavana-sarovara is described in the Mathura-mahatmya:
pavane sarasi snatva
krspari nandisvare girau
drstva nandam yasodam ca
sarvabhistam avapnuyat
TEXT 59
fog দেবমূতি হুয় পর্বত-উপরে ?
লোক কহে,-মুত্তি হয় গোফার ভিতরে ॥ ৫৯ ॥
kichu deva-marti haya parvata-upare?
loka kahe, — marti haya gophara bhitare
SYNONYMS
kichu—any; deva-marti—deities; haya—are there; parvata-upare —on the top
of the hill; loka kahe—people said; marti haya—there are deities; gophara
bhitare —within a cave.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked, ‘Are there any deities on top of this hill?”
The local people replied, “There are deities on this hill, but they are located
within a cave.


--- Page 164 ---
Text 62] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 161
TEXT 60
দুইদিকে মাতা-পিতা পুষ্ট কলেবর |
মধ্যে এক “শিশু” হয় ত্রিভঙ্গ-স্ন্দর ॥ vo ॥
dui-dike mata-pita pusta kalevara
madhye eka ‘Sisu” haya tribhanga-sundara
SYNONYMS
dui-dike—on two sides; mata-pita—father and mother; pusta kalevara—very
well-built body; madhye—between them; eka—one; Sisu—child; haya—there
is; tri-bhanga—curved in three places; sundara—very beautiful.
TRANSLATION
“There is a father and mother with well-built bodies, and between them is a
very beautiful child who is curved in three places.”
TEXT 61
শুনি মহাপ্রভু মনে আনন্দ नोः) |
‘few মুতি wie সেই (शोक উত্াড়িয়। ॥ ৬১ ॥
Suni’ mahaprabhu mane ananda pana
‘tina’ marti dekhila sei gopha ughadiya
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mane —within the
mind; ananda pana—getting great pleasure; tina marti—the three deities;
dekhila—saw; sei gopha ughadiya—by excavating the cave.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became very happy. After excavat-
ing the cave, He saw the three deities.
TEXT 62
ত্রজেন্দ্র-ব্রজেশ্বরীর কৈল চরণ वन्न |
প্রেমাবেশে কৃষ্ণের কৈল সর্ব-স্পর্শন ॥ ৬২ ॥


--- Page 165 ---
162 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
vrajendra-vrajesvarira kaila carapa vandana
premavese krsnera kaila sarvanga-sparsana
SYNONYMS
vraja-indra—of the King of Vraja, Nanda Maharaja; vraja-isvarira—and of the
Queen of Vraja, mother Yasoda; kaila—did; carana vandana—worshiping the
lotus feet; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; krspera—of Lord Krsna; kaila—did;
sarva-anga-sparsana—touching the whole body.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offered His respects to Nanda Maharaja and
mother Yasoda, and with great ecstatic love He touched the body of Lord
Krsna.
TEXT 63
সব দিন প্রেমাবেশে নৃত্য-গীত কৈলা।
তাহ হৈতে মহাপ্রভু “খদির-বন” আইল ॥ vo ॥
saba dina premavese nrtya-gita kaila
tahan haite mahaprabhu ‘khadira-vana’ aila
SYNONYMS
saba dina—all the days; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; nrtya-gita kaila—
danced and chanted; tahan haite—from there; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; khadira-vana aila—came to the place known as Khadiravana.
TRANSLATION
Every day the Lord chanted and danced in ecstatic love. Finally He went to
Khadiravana.
PURPORT
Khadiravana is described in the Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave):
dekhaha khadira-vana vidita jagate
visnu-loka-prapti etha gamana-matrete
“Behold the forest named Khadiravana, renowned throughout the universe. If one
comes to Khadiravana, he can immediately be elevated to Visnuloka.”
TEXT 64
नोलाच्छन দেখি” 1&1 গেল৷ “'শেষশায়ী” |
oem’ দেখি” এই শ্লোক পড়েন গোসাঞ্জিৎ ॥ ৬৪ ॥


--- Page 166 ---
Text 65] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 163
lila-sthala dekhi’ tahan gela ‘sesasayi’
‘laksmi’” dekhi’ ei sloka padena gosani
SYNONYMS
lila-sthala dekhi’—seeing the places of pastimes; tahan—there; gela—
departed; sesa-sayi—for seeing SesasayT; laksmi—the goddess of fortune;
dekhi’—seeing; ei—this; sloka—verse; padena—recites; gosani—5Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
After seeing the places of Lord Krsna’s pastimes, Sri Caitanya went to
Sesasayi, where He saw Laksmi and recited the following verse.
TEXT 65
যত্তে হুজাতচরণাম্কুরুহুং স্তনেযু
Stet: শন প্রিয় দধিমহি কর্কণশেষু ।
তেনাটবীমটসি তদ্্যথতে न কিংস্বিৎ
কুপাদিভিভ্রমিতি ধীর্ভবদ।য়ূষাং नः 1 ve
yat te sujata-caranamburuham stanesu
bhitah sanaih priya dadhimahi karkasesu
tenatavim atasi tad vyathate na kim svit
karpadibhir bhramati dhir bhavad-ayusarm nah
SYNONYMS
yat—which; te—Your; sujata—very fine; carana-ambu-ruham—lotus feet;
stanesu—on the breasts; bhitah—being afraid; sanaih—gently; priya—O dear
one; dadhimahi—we place; karkasesu—rough; tena—with them; atavim—the
path; atasi—You roam; tat—they; vyathate —are distressed; na—not; kim svit—
we wonder; kdrpa-adibhih—by small stones and so on; bhramati—flutters;
dhih—the mind; bhavat-ayusam—of those of whom Your Lordship is the very
life; nah—of us.
TRANSLATION
0 dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we place them gently on
our breasts, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our


--- Page 167 ---
164 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet might be
wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the forest path.”

PURPORT
This is a verse from $rimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.19) spoken by the gopis when
Krsna left them in the midst of the rasa-lila.
TEXT 66
তবে “খেলা-তীর্থ্ট দেখি” "कोशो त्वन" खादेन |
যমুনা পার হুঞ। “ভদ্র-বন” গেলা ॥ ৬৬ ॥
tabe ‘khela-tirtha’ dekhi’ ‘bhandiravana’ ila
yamuna para haha ‘bhadra-vana’ gela
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; khela-tirtha—Khela-tirtha; dekhi’—seeing; bhandiravana—
Bhandiravana; aila—came to; yamuna para hana—crossing the River Yamuna;
bhadra-vana—to Bhadravana; gela—went.
TRANSLATION
Afterwards, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw Khela-tirtha and then went to
Bhandiravana. Crossing the Yamuna River, He went to Bhadravana.
PURPORT
In the Bhakti-ratnakara it is said that Sri Krsna and Balarama used to play at
Khela-tirtha with the cowherd boys during the entire day. Mother Yasoda had to
call Them to take Their baths and eat Their lunch.
TEXT 67
জিবন” (कयि, পুনঃ গেল৷ (८नाङ््‌-वन' |
“মহাবন' fatal देकल्‌। জন্মস্থান-দরশন ॥ ৬৭ ॥
&17\/3112“ dekhi’ punah gela ‘loha-vana’
‘mahavana’ giya kaila janma-sthana-darasana
SYNONYMS
$ri-vana—Srivana; dekhi’—seeing; punah—again; gela—went; loha-vana—to

Lohavana; maha-vana—to Mahavana; giya—going; kaila—performed; janma-

sthana—birth site; darasana—seeing.


--- Page 168 ---
Text 68] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 165
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then visited Srivana and Lohavana. He then went
to Mahavana and saw Gokula, the place of Lord Krsna’s early childhood
pastimes.
PURPORT
Of Srivana (also called Bilvavana), the Bhakti-ratnakara states, devata-pdajita
bilvavana sobhamaya: “The beautiful forest of Bilvavana is worshiped by all the
demigods.”
About Lohavana, Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave) states:
lohavane krsnera adbhuta go-carana
etha loha-janghasure vadhe bhagavan
At Lohavana, Lord Krsna used to tend cows. The demon named Lohajangha was
killed at this place.”
Mahavana is described as follows in Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave):
dekha nanda-yasoda-alaya mahavane
ei dekha sri-krspa-candrera janma sthala
sri-gokula, mahavana—dui ‘eka’ haya
“Behold the house of Nanda and Yasoda in Mahavana. See the birthplace of Lord
Krsna. Mahavana and the birthplace of Lord Krsna, Gokula, are one and the same.”
TEXT 68
যমলাজুনভঙ্গাদি দেখিল সেই স্থল |
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভুর মন হৈল টলমল ॥ ৬৮ ॥
yamalarjuna-bhangadi dekhila sei sthala
premavese prabhura mana haila talamala
SYNONYMS
yamala-arjuna-bhanga—the place where the twin arjuna trees were broken;
adi—beginning with; dekhila —saw; sei sthala—that place; prema-avese—in
great ecstasy; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mana—mind; haila—be-
came; talamala—agitated.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the place where the twin arjuna trees were broken by Sri
Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was moved to great ecstatic love.


--- Page 169 ---
166 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 69
গোকুল'” দেখিয়! আইল। “মথুর'-নগরে |
“জন্মস্থান” দেখি' রহে সেই বিপ্র-বরে ॥ ৬৯ ॥
‘gokula’ dekhiya aila ‘mathura’-nagare
‘janma-sthana’ dekhi’ rahe sei vipra-ghare
SYNONYMS
gokula dekhiya—seeing Gokula; aila—came; mathura-nagare—in the city of
Mathura; janma-sthana—the birthplace of Lord Krsna; dekhi’—seeing; rahe—
stays; sei vipra-ghare—in the house of the Sanodiya brahmana.
TRANSLATION
After seeing Gokula, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to Mathura, where
He saw the birthplace of the Lord. While there, He stayed at the house of the
Sanodiya brahmana.
TEXT 70
লোকের সংঘট্ট দেখি wal ছাড়িয়!।
একাস্ত্েে 'অত্র্র-তীর্থে' রহিল। আসিয়া ॥ ৭০ ॥
lokera sarighatta dekhi mathura chadiya
ekante ‘akrara-tirthe’ rahila asiya
SYNONYMS
lokera—of people; sanghatta—crowd; dekhi—seeing; mathura—the city of
Mathura; chadiya—leaving; ekante —in a solitary place; akrara-tirthe—at Akrara-
tirtha; rahila—stayed; dsiya—coming.
TRANSLATION
Seeing a great crowd assemble at Mathura, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left
and went to Akrara-tirtha. He remained there in a solitary place.
PURPORT
Akrara-tirtha is also mentioned in the Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave):
dekha, srinivdsa, ei akrara gramete
sri-krsna-caitanya-prabhu chilena nibhrte
“Srinivasa, look at this village of Akrara. $rf Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed there in a
solitary place.”


--- Page 170 ---
Text 72] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 167
TEXT 71
আর किन আইলা প্রভু দেখিতে “বৃন্দাবন” |
“কালীয়-হ্রুদে” FIA কৈল। আর IHR ॥ ৭১ ॥
ara dina 3//3 prabhu dekhite ‘vrndavana’
‘kaliya-hrade’ snana kaila ara praskandana
SYNONYMS
dra dina—the next day; aili—came; prabhu—S$r Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dekhite—to see; vrndavana—Vrndavana; kaliya-hrade —in the Kaliya Lake; snana
kaila—took a bath; ara—and; praskandana—at Praskandana.
TRANSLATION
The next day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Vrndavana and took His
bath at the Kaliya Lake and Praskandana.
PURPORT
Kaliya-hrada is mentioned in Bhakti-ratnakara (Fifth Wave):
e kaliya-tirtha papa vinasaya
kaliya-tirtha-sthane bahu-karya-siddhi haya
“When one takes a bath in Kaliya-hrada, he is freed from all sinful activities. One
can also be successful in business by bathing in Kaliya-hrada.”
TEXT 72
“দ্বাদশ-আদিত?” হৈতে “কেশীতীথে' আইলা |
রাস-স্থলী দেখি” প্রেমে মুচ্ছিত হইল! ॥ ৭২ ॥
‘dvadasa-aditya’ haite ‘kesi-tirthe’ 3//3
rasa-sthali dekhi’ preme mircchita ha-ila
SYNONYMS
dvadasa-aditya haite—from Dvadasaditya; kesi-tirthe dila—came to Kesi-tirtha;
rasa-sthali dekhi’—visiting the place of the rasa dance; preme—in ecstatic love;
marcchita ha-ila—became unconscious.
TRANSLATION
After seeing the holy place called Praskandana, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
went to Dvadasaditya. From there He went to Kesi-tirtha, and when He saw


--- Page 171 ---
168 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
the place where the rasa dance had taken place, He immediately lost con-
sciousness due to ecstatic love.
TEXT 73
চেভন পাঞ। পুনঃ গড়াগড়ি যায়।
হাসে, কান্দে, নাচে, পড়ে, উচ্চৈঃস্বরে গায় ॥ ৭৩ ॥
cetana pana punah gadagadi yaya
hase, kande, nace, pade, uccaih-svare gaya
SYNONYMS
cetana pana—getting His senses back; punah —again; gadagadi yaya—rolls on
the ground; hase —laughs; kande—cries; nace—dances; pade —falls down; uc-
caih-svare gaya—sings very loudly.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord regained His senses, He began to roll on the ground. He
would sometimes laugh, cry, dance and fall down. He would also chant very
loudly.
TEXT 74
এই রঙ্গে সেইদিন তথা (नोडािना। |
मक्ष काटल wg আসি” ভিক্ষা নির্বাহিল। ॥ ৭৪ ॥
ei-range sei-dina (3003 gonaila
sandhya-kale akrare asi’ bhiksa nirvahila
SYNONYMS
ei-ranige —in this amusement; sei-dina—that day; tatha gondila—passed the
day there; sandhya-kale—in the evening; akrare dsi’—returning to Akrara-tirtha;
bhiksa nirvahila—took His meal.
TRANSLATION
Being thus transcendentally amused, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed that
day happily at Kesi-tirtha. In the evening He returned to Akrirra-tirtha, where
He took His meal.
TEXT 75
প্রাতে বৃদ্দাবনে কৈল৷ 'চীরঘাটে” Fi |
তেঁতুলী-তলাতে আসি” করিলা বিশ্রাম ॥ १९ ॥


--- Page 172 ---
Text 77] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 169
prate vrndavane kaila ‘cira-ghate’ snana
tentuli-talate asi’ karila visrama
SYNONYMS
prate—in the morning; vrndavane—in Vrndavana; kaila—performed; cira-
ghate snana—bathing at Cira-ghata; tentuli-talate—underneath the Tentull tree;
asi’—coming; karila visrama—took rest.
TRANSLATION
The next morning Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to Vyndavana and
took His bath at Cira-ghata. He then went to Tentuli-tala, where He took rest.
TEXT 76
কৃষ্ণলীলা-কালের সেই JF পুরাতন |
তার তলে পিঁড়ি-বান্ধা পরম-চিন্কণ ॥ ৭৬ ॥
krsna-lila-kalera sei vrksa puratana
tara tale pindi-bandha parama-cikkana
SYNONYMS
krsna-lila-kalera—of the time of Lord Krsna's presence; sei vrksa—that
tamarind tree; puratana—very old; tara tale—underneath that tree; pindi-
bandha—a platform; parama-cikkana —very shiny.
TRANSLATION
The tamarind tree named Tentuli-tala was very old, having been there since
the time of Lord Krsna’s pastimes. Beneath the tree was a very shiny platform.
TEXT 77
নিকটে যমুনা বহে শীতল সমীর ।
বৃন্দাবন-শোভা দেখে যমুনার नोन्न ॥ ৭৭ ॥
nikate yamuna vahe sitala samira
vrndavana-sobha dekhe yamunara nira
SYNONYMS
nikate—near the Tentuli-tald, or Amli-tala; yamunia—the Yamuna; vahe—
flows; sitala samira—very cool breeze; vrndavana-sobha—the beauty of
Vindavana; dekhe—sees; yamunara—of the River Yamuna; nira—water.


--- Page 173 ---
170 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Since the River Yamuna flowed near Tentuli-tala, a very cool breeze blew
there. While there, the Lord saw the beauty of Vrndavana and the water of the
River Yamuna.
TEXT 78
তেঁতুল-তলে বসি” করে নাম-সংকীর্তন |
মধ্যাহু করি” আসি” করে ELT ভোজন ॥ ৭৮ ॥
tentula-tale vasi’ kare nama-sankirtana
madhyahna kari’ asi’ kare ‘akrare’ bhojana
SYNONYMS
tentula-tale—underneath the tamarind tree; vasi’—sitting down; kare —does;
nama-sankirtana—chanting the holy name of the Lord; madhyahna kari’—at
noon; asi’—coming back; kare—performs; akrare—at Akrara-tirtha; bhojana—
taking lunch.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to sit beneath the old tamarind tree and
chant the holy name of the Lord. At noon He would return to Akrara-tirtha to
take lunch.
TEXT 79
অক্রুরের লোক আইসে প্রভুরে দেখিতে |
লোক-ভিড়ে স্বচ্ছন্দে নারে “কীর্তন” করিতে ॥ ৭৯ ॥
akrarera loka aise prabhure dekhite
loka-bhide svacchande nare ‘kirtana’ karite
SYNONYMS
akrarera loka—the people at Akrara-tirtha; dise—came; prabhure —S$r
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhite—to see; loka-bhide —because of such a crowd of
people; svacchande —without disturbance; nare —was not able; kirtana karite —
to perform kirtana.
TRANSLATION
All the people who lived near Akriira-tirtha came to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and due to the large crowds, the Lord could not peacefully
chant the holy name.


--- Page 174 ---
Text 82] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 171
TEXT 80
FRI আসি' প্রভু বসিয়। একান্ত ।
নামসংকার্তন করে NGI@->1 ॥ ৮০ ॥
vrndavane asi’ prabhu vasiya ekanta
nama-sankirtana kare madhyahna-paryanta
SYNONYMS
vrndavane asi’—coming to Vindavana; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
vasiya—sitting; ekanta—in a solitary place; nama-sankirtana kare —performs
chanting of the holy name; madhyahna-paryanta —until noon.
TRANSLATION
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would go to Vrndavana and sit in a soli-
tary place. It was there that He chanted the holy name until noon.
TEXT 81
তৃতীয়-প্রহরে লোক পায় लत्रमेन |
সবারে উপদেশ করে “নামসংকীর্তন” ॥ ৮১ ॥
trtiya-prahare loka paya darasana
sabare upadesa kare ‘nama-sankirtana’
SYNONYMS
trtiya-prahare—in the afternoon; loka—people; paya darasana—get an inter-
view; sabdre—unto everyone; upadesa kare—instructs; nama-sankirtana—
chanting of the holy name of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
In the afternoon, people were able to speak to Him. The Lord told everyone
of the importance of chanting the holy name.
TEXT 82
হেনকালে আইল বৈষ্ণব FWA नोय |
রাজপুত-জাতি, গৃহস্থ, যমুনা-পারে গ্রাম ॥ ৮২ ॥
hena-kale aila vaisnava ‘krsnadasa’ nama
rajaputa-jati, —grhastha, yamuna-pare grama


--- Page 175 ---
172 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
hena-kale —at this time; aila—came; vaispava—a devotee; krspadasa nama—
of the name Krsnadasa; rajaputa-jati—belonging to the ksatriya class; grhastha—
householder; yamuna-pare grama—his residence on the other side of the
Yamuna.
TRANSLATION
During this time, a Vaispava named Krsnadasa came to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He was a householder belonging to the ksatriya caste, and his
house was located on the other side of the Yamuna.
TEXT 83
“কেশী” छरोन করি” সেই “কালীয়দহ” যাইতে ।
আম্লি-তলায় গোসাঞ্িরে দেখে আচন্বিতে ॥৮৩॥
1691" snana kari’ sei ‘kaliya-daha’ yaite
amli-talaya gosanire dekhe acambite
SYNONYMS
kesi snana kari’—after taking his bath at the place known as Keéi-tirtha; sei—
that person; kaliya-daha yaite—going to the Kaliya-daha; amli-talaya—at the
place known as Amli-tala; gosanire—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhe —sees;
acambite—suddenly.
TRANSLATION
After bathing at Kesi-tirtha, Krsnadasa went toward Kaliya-daha and sud-
denly saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sitting at Amli-tala [Tentuli-talal.
TEXT 84
প্রভুর রূপ-প্রেম (कथि, হইল চমৎকার |
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভুরে করেন নমস্কার ॥ ৮৪ ॥
prabhura rapa-prema dekhi’ ha-ila camatkara
premavese prabhure karena namaskara
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu; rapa-prema—personal beauty and
ecstatic love; dekhi’—seeing; ha-ila camatkara—became astonished; prema-
avese—in ecstatic love; prabhure—to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karena
namaskara—offers obeisances.


--- Page 176 ---
Text 86] The Lord's Visit to ऽन Vrndavana 173
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the Lord’s personal beauty and ecstatic love, Krsnadasa was
very astonished. Out of ecstatic love, he offered his respectful obeisances
unto the Lord.
TEXT 85
প্রভু কহে,-_ কে তুমি, FE তোমার ঘর ?
কৃষ্ণনাস কহে,- मू গৃহস্থ गोमन्न ॥ ৮৫ ॥
prabhu kahe, —ke tumi, kahan tomara ghara?
krsnadasa kahe, —mui grhastha pamara
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—the Lord inquired; ke tumi—who are you; kahan—where;
tomara—your; ghara—residence; krsnadasa kahe —Krsnadasa replied; mui—I;
grhastha—householder; pamara—most fallen.
TRANSLATION
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Krsnadasa, ‘Who are you? Where is your
home?” Krsnadasa replied, “| am a most fallen householder.
TEXT 86
রাজপুত-জাতি মুর, ও-পারে মোর चन्न ।
মোর ইচ্ছা হয় - ङ বৈষ্ণব-কিন্কর' ॥ ৮৬ ॥
rajaputa-jati muni, o-pare mora ghara
mora 10003 haya— ‘hana vaisnava-kinkara’
SYNONYMS
rajaputa-jati—belong to the Rajaputa caste; (7८51-1; o-pare—on the other
side of the Yamuna; mora ghara—my residence; mora iccha haya—1 wish; hana—
to become; vaispava-kinkara—the servant of a Vaisnava.
TRANSLATION
‘I belong to the Rajaputa caste, and my home is just on the other side of the
River Yamuna. However, | wish to be the servant of a Vaisnava.


--- Page 177 ---
174 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 87
কিন্তু আজি এক गूयिः “স্বপ্ন” (जिर |
সেই স্বপ্ন পরতেক তোমা আসি” পাই দু ॥ ৮৭ ॥
kintu &ji eka muni ‘svapna’ dekhinu
sei svapna parateka toma asi’ painu
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; gji—today; eka—one; muni—I; svapna—dream; dekhinu—saw;
sei svapna—that dream; parateka—according to; toma—VYou; dsi’—coming;
painu—I have gotten.
TRANSLATION
‘Today 1 have had a dream, and according to that dream 1 have come here
and found You.”
TEXT 88
প্রভু তারে Foil কৈল৷ আলিঙ্গন कत्रि 1
প্রেমে মস্ত হৈল সেই নাচে, বলে "হরি ॥ ৮৮ ॥
prabhu tanre krpa kaila alingana kari
preme matta haila sei nace, bale ‘hari’
SYNONYMS
prabhu—>5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarre—unto him; krpa kaili—bestowed
His mercy; alingana kari—embracing; preme—in ecstatic love; matta haila—be-
came mad; sei—that Krsnadasa; nace—dances; bale—chants; hari—the holy
name of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
§ Caitanya Mahaprabhu then bestowed upon Krsnadasa His causeless
mercy by embracing him. Krsnadasa became mad with ecstatic love and
began to dance and chant the holy name of Hari.
TEXT 89
ঙভু-সঙ্গে মধ্যাহেহ खन्न তীর্থে আইলা ।
প্রভুর অবশিষ্টপাত্র-প্রসাদ পাইলা ॥ ৮৯ ॥


--- Page 178 ---
Text 91] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 175
prabhu-sange madhyahne akrara tirthe aila
prabhura avasista-patra-prasada paila
SYNONYMS
prabhu-sarige —with the Lord; madhyahne —in the afternoon; akrdra tirthe —to
Akrira-tirtha; aila—came; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; avasista-patra-
prasada—remnants of food; paila—got.
TRANSLATION
Krsnadasa returned to Akrara-tirtha with the Lord, and remnants of the
Lord’s food were given to him.
TEXT 90
প্রাতে व्यदध्‌-मटक SET জঙ্গপাত্র লঞা |
প্রভু-সঙ্গে রহে গৃহ-শ্ত্রী-পুজ্র ছাড়িয়া ॥ ৯০ ॥
[01306 prabhu-sange aila jala-patra lana
prabhu-sange rahe grha-stri-putra chadiya
SYNONYMS
prate—in the morning; prabhu-sarge—with 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ila—
came; jala-patra lana—carrying a waterpot; prabhu-sarge rahe —remains with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; grha—home; stri—wife; putra—children; chadiya—leav-
ing aside.
TRANSLATION
The next morning, Krsnadisa went with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to
Vrndavana and carried His waterpot. Krsnadasa thus left his wife, home and
children in order to remain with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 91
বৃ্দাবনে পুনঃ “কৃষ্ণ প্রকট হইল |
যাহ তাই। লোক সব কহিতে লাগিল ॥ >> ॥
vrndavane punah ‘krsna’ prakata ha-ila
yahan tahan loka saba kahite lagila


--- Page 179 ---
176 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
vrndavane—at Vrndavana; punah—again; krsna—Lord Sri Krsna; prakata ha-
ila—became manifested; yahan tahan—everywhere; loka—people; saba—all;
kahite lagila—began to speak.
TRANSLATION
Everywhere the Lord went, all the people said, “Krsna has again manifest at
Vrndavana.”
TEXT 92
একদিন অক্রু,রেতে লোক প্রাতঃকালে |
বৃন্দাবন হৈতে আইসে করি” কোলাহলে ॥ ৯২ ॥
eka-dina akrarete loka pratah-kale
vrndavana haite aise kari’ kolahale
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—one day; akrarete—at Akrira-tirtha; loka—people; pratah-kale—in
the morning; vrndavana haite—from Vrndavana; dise—came; kari’—making;
kolahale —tumult.
TRANSLATION
One morning many people came to Akrira-tirtha. As they came from
Vrndavana, they made a tumultuous sound.
TEXT 93
প্রভু দেখি' করিল লোক চরণ aw ।
প্রভু কহে, कां] হৈতে করিল। আগমন ? ৯৩ ॥
prabhu dekhi’ karila loka carana vandana
prabhu kahe,—kahan haite karila agamana?
SYNONYMS
prabhu dekhi’—seeing Lord $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karila —offered; loka—
people; carana vandana—respect unto His lotus feet; prabhu kahe —Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said; kahan haite—from where; karila agamana—have you come.


--- Page 180 ---
Text 95] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 177
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the people offered respects at
His lotus feet. The Lord then asked them, “Where are you all coming from?"
TEXT 94
লোকে কহে,- কৃষ্ণ প্রকট কালীয়দহের জলে |
কালীয়-শিরে নৃত্য করে, ফণা-রত্ন বলে ॥ ৯৪ ॥
loke kahe, —krsna prakata kaliya-dahera jale!
kaliya-sire nrtya kare, phana-ratna jvale
SYNONYMS
loke kahe—all the people replied; krsna prakata—Krsna is again manifest;
kaliya-dahera jale—in the water of Lake Kaliya; kaliya-sire—on the head of the
serpent Kaliya; nrtya kare —dances; phana-ratna jvale —the jewels on the hoods
blaze.
TRANSLATION
The people replied, “Krsna has again manifest Himself on the waters of the
Kaliya Lake. He dances on the hoods of the serpent Kaliya, and the jewels on
those hoods are blazing.
TEXT 95
সাক্ষাৎ দেখিল লোক--_নাহিক ew
শুনি” হাজি” কহে প্রভু, সব “সত্য” হয় ॥ ৯৫ ॥
saksat dekhila loka—— nahika sarhsaya
Suni’ hasi’ kahe prabhu,—saba ‘satya’ haya
SYNONYMS
saksat—directly; dekhila loka—all the people saw; nahika samsaya—there is
no doubt; $uni‘—hearing; hasi‘—laughing; kahe prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said; saba satya haya—all that you have said is correct.
TRANSLATION
‘Everyone has seen Lord Krsna Himself. There is no doubt about it.” Hear-
ing this, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to laugh. He then said, ‘Everything is
correct.”


--- Page 181 ---
178 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 96
এইমত তিন-রাত্রি লোকের ata |
সবে আসি” কহে,- কৃষ্ণ ARG, দরশন ॥ ৯৬ ॥
ei-mata tina-ratri lokera gamana
sabe asi’ kahe, —krsna pailun darasana
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; tina-ratri—three nights; lokera gamana—people went;
sabe —all; asi’—coming; kahe—say; (1503 pailun darasana—we have seen Lord
Krsna directly.
TRANSLATION
For three successive nights people went to Kaliya-daha to see Krsna, and
everyone returned saying, “Now we have seen Krsna Himself.”
TEXT 97
প্রভু-আগে কহে লোক,- প্রীকৃষ্ণ দেখিল |
“সরস্বতী” এই वाटकः “সত্য” কহাইল ॥ ৯৭ ॥
prabhu-age kahe loka, —sri-krsna dekhila
‘sarasvati’ ei vakye ‘satya’ kahaila
SYNONYMS
prabhu-age—in front of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahe loka—all the people
began to say; Sri-krspa dekhila—that they have seen Lord Krsna; sarasvati—the
goddess of learning; ei vakye—this statement; satya—true; kahaila—caused the
people to speak.
TRANSLATION
Everyone came before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and said, “Now we have
directly seen Lord Krsna.” Thus by the mercy of the goddess of learning they
were made to speak the truth.
TEXT 98
মহাপ্রভু দেখি” সত্য” কৃষ্ণ-দরশন |
নিজাজ্ঞানে সত্য ছাড়ি” 'অসত্যে সত্য-ভ্রম” ॥ ৯৮ ॥


--- Page 182 ---
Text 99] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 179
mahaprabhu dekhi’ ‘satya’ krsna-darasana
nijajnane satya chadi’ ‘asatye satya-bhrama’
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu dekhi’—by seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; satya—truly; krsna-
darasana—seeing Krsna; nija-ajiane—by their personal lack of knowledge; satya
chadi’—giving up the real truth; asatye—untruth; satya-bhrama—mistaking for
the truth.
TRANSLATION
When the people saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they actually saw Krsna,
but because they were following their own imperfect knowledge, they ac-
cepted the wrong thing as Krsna.
TEXT 99
ভট্টাচার্য তবে কহে প্রভুর চরণে |
“আজ্ঞা দেহ যাই” করি কৃষ্ণ দরশনে !” >> ॥
bhattacarya (966 kahe prabhura carane
‘ajna deha’, yai’ kari krsna darasane!’
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; tabe—at that time; kahe—says;
prabhura carane—at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 5/7 deha’'—
please give permission; yai’—going; kari krsna darasane—I shall see Lord Krsna
directly.
TRANSLATION
At that time Balabhadra Bhatticarya placed a request at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He said, ‘/Please give me permission to go see Lord
Krsna directly.”
PURPORT
The puzzled people who visited $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu were actually seeing
Lord Krsna, but they were mistaken in thinking that Lord Krsna had come to Kaliya
Lake. They all said that they had seen Krsna directly performing His pastimes on
the hood of the serpent Kaliya and that the jewels on Kaliya's hoods were blazing
brilliantly. Because they were speculating with their imperfect knowledge, they
saw ১11 Caitanya Mahaprabhu as an ordinary human being and a 0০907739175 light


--- Page 183 ---
180 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
in the lake as Krsna. One must see things as they are through the mercy of a
spiritual master; otherwise if one tries to see Krsna directly, he may mistake an
ordinary man for Krsna or Krsna for an ordinary man. Everyone has to see Krsna ac-
cording to the verdict of Vedic literatures presented by the self-realized spiritual
master. A sincere person is able to see Krsna through the transparent via medium
of ऽतं Gurudeva, the spiritual master. Unless one is enlightened by the knowledge
given by the spiritual master, he cannot see things as they are, even though he
remains constantly with the spiritual master. This incident at Kaliya-daha is very
instructive for those eager to advance in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 100
তবে কারে কহে প্রভু চাপড় মারিয়া।
“area বাক্যে মুর্খ? হৈল। পণ্ডিত ges ॥ ১০০ ॥
tabe tarnre kahe prabhu capada mariya
“muarkhera vakye ‘markha’ haila pandita hana
SYNONYMS
„ tabe—thereafter; tanre—unto Balabhadra Bhattacarya; kahe—says; prabhu—
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; capada mariya—slapping; mdarkhera vakye—by the
words of some rascals and fools; markha haili—you became a fool; pandita
hana—being a learned scholar.
TRANSLATION
When Balabhadra Bhatticarya asked to see Krsna at Kaliya-daha, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu mercifully slapped him, saying, “You are a learned
scholar, but you have become a fool influenced by the statements of other
fools.
PURPORT
Maya is so strong that even a person like Balabhadra Bhattacarya, who was con-
stantly staying with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, was influenced by the words of
fools. He wanted to see Krsna directly by going to Kaliya-daha, but ऽन Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, being the original spiritual master, would not allow His servant to
fall into such foolishness. He therefore chastised him, slapping him just to bring
him to a real sense of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 101
কৃষ্ণ কেনে দরশন দিবে কলিকালে ?
নিজ-ভ্রমে FEE করে কোলাহলে ॥ ১০১ ॥


--- Page 184 ---
Text 102] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 181
krspa kene darasana dibe kali-kale?
nija-bhrame markha-loka kare kolahale
SYNONYMS
krspa—Lord Krsna; kene—why; darasana—interview; dibe—would give; kali-
kale—in this age of Kali; nija-bhrame—by their own mistake; markha-loka—
foolish persons; kare kolahale—make a chaotic tumult.
TRANSLATION
“Why will Krsna appear in the age of Kali? Foolish people who are mistaken
are simply causing agitation and making a tumult.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s first statement (krsna kene darasana dibe kali-kale)
refers to the scriptures. According to scripture, Krsna appears in Dvapara-yuga,
but He never appears as Himself in Kali-yuga. Rather, He appears in Kali-yuga in a
covered form. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.32): krspa-varparh
tvisakrsparn sangopangastra-parsadam. Krsna appears in the age of Kali in the garb
of a devotee, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who always associates with His internal
soldiers —Sri Advaita Prabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu, Srivasa Prabhu and
Gadadhara Prabhu. Although Balabhadra Bhattacarya was personally serving Lord
Krsna in His role as a devotee (Caitanya Mahaprabhu), he mistook Lord Krsna for
an ordinary man and an ordinary man for Lord Krsna because he did not follow the
rules set down by $astra and guru.
TEXT 102
८ १ 3) जिः
'বাতুল' না হইও,; ঘরে রহত বসিয়া |
‘FR দরশন করিহ কালি রাত্র্যে যাঞ ॥ ১০২ ॥
‘vatula’ na ha-io, ghare rahata vasiya
‘krsna’ darasana kariha kali ratrye yana”
SYNONYMS
vatula—mad; na ha-io—do not become; ghare—at home; rahata—keep;
vasiya—sitting; krspa—Lord Krsna; darasana—seeing; kariha—you may do;
kali—tomorrow; ratrye —at night; yana—going.
TRANSLATION
“Do not become mad. Simply sit down here, and tomorrow night you will
go see Krsna.”


--- Page 185 ---
182 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 103
প্রাতঃকালে ভব্য-লোক প্রভু-স্থানে আইলা |
“কৃষ্ণ দেখি” আইল। ?”- প্রভু ভাহারে পুছিলা ॥১০৩ ॥
pratah-kale bhavya-loka prabhu-sthane aila
‘krsna dekhi’ aila?’——prabhu tanhare puchila
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale —the next morning; bhavya-loka—respectable gentlemen; prabhu-
sthane—at the place of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; aila—came; krsna dekhi’—
seeing Lord Krsna; dila—have you come; prabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tanhare puchila—inquired from them.
TRANSLATION
The next morning some respectable gentlemen came to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and the Lord asked them, ‘‘Have you seen Krsna?’’
TEXT 104
লোক कटक, রাত্র্যে কৈবর্ত্য নৌকাতে চড়িয়া।
কালীয়দহছে FD মারে, দেউটা च्वि ॥ ১০৪ ॥
loka kahe, —ratrye kaivartya naukate cadiya
kaliya-dahe matsya mare, deuti jvaliya
SYNONYMS
loka kahe —the sensible respectable persons said; ratrye —at night; kaivartya—
a fisherman; naukate—on a boat; cadiya—getting up; kaliya-dahe —in the lake of
Kaliya; matsya mare—catches fish; deuti jvaliya—lighting a torch.
TRANSLATION
These respectable gentlemen replied, “At night in the Kaliya Lake a fisher-
man lighting a torch in his boat catches many fish.
TEXT 105
দুর হৈতে তাহা দেখি” লোকের হয় “ভ্রম” ।
“কালীয়ের শরীরে কৃষ্ণ করিছে aS | ১০৫ ॥


--- Page 186 ---
Text 107] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 183
dara haite taha dekhi’ lokera haya ‘bhrama’
‘kaliyera sarire krspa kariche nartana’!
SYNONYMS
0013 haite—from a distant place; taha dekhi’—seeing that; lokera—of people
in general; haya—there is; bhrama—mistake; kaliyera—of the snake Kaliya;
sarire—on the body; krsna—Lord Krsna; kariche nartana—is dancing.
TRANSLATION
‘From a distance, people mistakenly think that they are seeing Krsna danc-
ing on the body of the Kaliya serpent.
TEXT 106
নৌকাতে কালীয়-জ্ঞান, দীপে AFSC |
জালিয়ারে মুঢ়-লোক "कुस করি” মানে | ১০৬ ॥
naukate kaliya-jiana, 0106 ratna-jiane!
jaliyare madha-loka ‘krsna’ kari’ mane!
SYNONYMS
naukate—on the boat; kaliya-jiiana—knowledge as the Kaliya snake; dipe—on
the torch; ratna-jiane —consideration as jewels; jaliyare —the fisherman; madha-
loka—foolish men; krsna kari’ mane —accept as Krsna.
TRANSLATION
‘These fools think that the boat is the Kaliya serpent and the torchlight the
jewels on his hoods. People also mistake the fisherman to be Krsna.
TEXT 107
বৃন্দাবনে “কৃষ্ণ: আইলা,-__সেহ “সত্য” TF |
FLL CAA লোক,- ইহা “মিথ্যা” নয় ॥ ১০৭ ॥
vrndavane ‘krsna’ aila, —sei ‘satya’ haya
krsnere dekhila loka, —iha ‘mithya’ naya
SYNONYMS
vrndavane —to Vrndavana; krspna—Lord Krsna; aila—has come back; sei —that;
satya haya—is true; krsnere—Krsna; dekhila—saw; loka—the people; iha mithya
naya—this is not false.


--- Page 187 ---
184 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
“Actually Lord Krsna has again returned to Vrndavana. That also is a truth,
and people have seen Him.
TEXT 108
কিন্তু কাহেঁ। Fe দেখে, কাহে। ভ্রম” মানে।
স্থাণুংপুরুষে যৈছে বিপরীত-জ্ঞানে ॥ ১০৮. ॥
kintu kahon ‘krspa’ dekhe, (८2/10/) ‘bhrama’ mane
sthanu-puruse yaiche viparita-jiane
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; kahorn—where; krspa—Krsna; dekhe—one sees; kahon—where;
bhrama mane —mistakes; sthanu-puruse—the dry tree and a person; yaiche —as;
viparita-jidane —by understanding one to be the other.
TRANSLATION
‘‘But where they are seeing Krsna is their mistake. It is like considering adry
tree to be a person.”
PURPORT
The word sthanu means “a dry tree without leaves.” From a distance one may
mistake such a tree for a person. This is called sthanu-purusa. Although Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was living in Vrndavana, the inhabitants considered Him an
ordinary human being, and they mistook the fisherman to be Krsna. Every human
being is prone to make such mistakes. 517 Caitanya Mahaprabhu was mistaken for
an ordinary sannyasi, the fisherman was mistaken for Krsna, and the torchlight was
mistaken for bright jewels on Kaliya’s hoods.
TEXT 109
প্রভু कटक, TIE পাইল। “রুষ্ণ দরশন ?
লোক কহে, সন্ন্যাসী তুমি জঙ্গম-নারায়ণ ॥ ১০৯ ॥
prabhu kahe, — 'kahan paila ‘krspa darasana?’
loka kahe, — ‘sannyasi tumi jangama-narayana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu further inquired; kahan paila—where
have you gotten; krsna darasana—sight of Krsna; loka kahe —the respectable per-


--- Page 188 ---
Text 110] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 185
sons replied; sannyasi tumi—You are a sannyasi; jargama-narayana—moving
Narayana.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then asked them, “Where have vou seen Krsna
directly?” The people replied, ‘You are a sannyasi, a renunciant; therefore
You are a moving Narayana [jangama-narayanal.”’

PURPORT

This is the viewpoint of Mayavada philosophy. Mayavada philosophy supports
the impersonalist view that Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has
no form. One can imagine impersonal Brahman in any form—as Visnu, Lord Siva,
Vivasvan, Ganesa or Devi Durga. According to the Mayavada philosophy, when
one becomes a sannyasi, he is to be considered a moving Narayana. Mayavada
philosophy holds that the real Narayana does not move because, being imper-
sonal, He has no legs. Thus according to Mayavada philosophy, whoever be-
comes a sannyasi declares himself Narayana. Foolish people accept such ordinary
human beings as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called vivarta-vada.

In this regard, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that jarigama-
narayana means that the impersonal Brahman takes a shape and moves here and
there in the form of a Mayavadisannyasi. The Mayavada philosophy confirms this.
Danda-grahana-matrena naro narayano bhavet: “Simply by accepting the danda
of the order of sannyasa, one is immediately transformed into Narayana.”
Therefore Mayavadi sannyasis address themselves by saying, 007) namo narayan-
aya. In this way one Narayana worships another Narayana.

Actually an ordinary human being cannot become Narayana. Even the chief
Mayavadi sannyasi, 511 Sankaracarya, says, nardyanah paro ‘vyaktat: “Narayana is
not a creation of this material world. Narayana is above the material creation.”
Due to their poor fund of knowledge, Mayavadi sannyasis think that Narayana,
the Absolute Truth, takes birth as a human being and that when He realizes this,
He becomes Narayana again. They never consider why Narayana, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, accepts an inferior position as a human being and then
again becomes Narayana when He is perfect. Why should Narayana be imper-
fect? Why should He appear as a human being? ऽत Caitanya Mahaprabhu very
nicely explained these points while at Vrndavana.

TEXT 110
বৃন্দাবনে হইল তুমি কৃষ্ণ-অবতার |
তোমা দেখি” সর্বলোক হুইল নিস্তার ॥ ১১০ ॥
vrndavane ha-ila tumi krsna-avatara
toma dekhi’ sarva-loka ha-ila nistara


--- Page 189 ---
186 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
vrndavane —at Vrndavana; ha-ila—became; tumi—You; krsna-avatara—incar-
nation of Krsna; toma dekhi’—by seeing You; sarva-loka—all people; ha-ila
nistara—become liberated.
TRANSLATION
The people then said, You have appeared in Vrndavana as an incarnation of
Krsna. Just by seeing You, everyone is now liberated.”
TEXT 111
প্রভু কহে,- “বিষ “বিষ্ণু, ইহা না কহিবা!
জীবাধমে ‘FRI-SAT न] করিবা ! >>> ॥
prabhu kahe, — ৮5001 ৮5007 iha na kahiba!
jivadhame ‘krsna’-jiana kabhu na kariba!
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; visnu visnu—O Visnu, Visnu;
iha—this; na kahiba—do not speak; jiva-adhame —fallen conditioned souls;
krsna-jiana—accepting as Lord Krsna; kabhu—ever; na kariba—do not do.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately exclaimed, ““Visnu! Visnu! Do not
call Me the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A jiva cannot become Krsna at
any time. Do not even say such a thing!
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately stated that a living being, however ex-
alted he may be, should never be compared to the Supreme Personality of God-
head. All of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s preaching protests the monistic philoso-
phy of the Mayavada school. The central point of Krsna consciousness is that the
jiva, the living entity, can never be accepted as Krsna or Visnu. This viewpoint is
elaborated in the following verses.
TEXT 112
AMA — চিৎকণ জীব, কিরণ-কণ-সম।
বটড়েশ্বরযপূর্খ কুষ্ণ হয় THEN ১১২ ॥


--- Page 190 ---
Text 113] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 187
sannyasi——cit-kana jiva, kirana-kana-sama
sad-aisvarya-parna krsna haya saryopama

SYNONYMS
sannyasi—a person in the renounced order of life; cit-kana jiva—a small frag-
mental living being; kirana—of sunshine; kana—small particle; sama—like; sat-
aisvarya-parna—full in six opulences; krspna—Lord Krsna; haya—is; sarya-
upama—compared to the sun.
TRANSLATION
‘‘A sannyasi in the renounced order is certainly part and parcel of the com-
plete whole, just as a shining molecular particle of sunshine is part and parcel
of the sun itself. Krsna is like the sun, full of six opulences, but the living en-
tity is only a fragment of the complete whole.
TEXT 113
জীব, ঈশ্বর-তত্ব- কভু নহে (जमः |
Ew ARI যৈছে স্ফুলিঙ্গের Tel ॥ ১১৩ ॥
jiva, i$vara-tattva——kabhu nahe ‘sama’
jvalad-agni-rasi yaiche sphulingera ‘kana’
SYNONYMS
jiva—a living being; isvara-tattva—and the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kabhu—at any time; nahe—not; sama—equal; jvalat-agni-rasi—large flame;
yaiche—as; sphulingera—of a spark; kana—fragmental portion.
TRANSLATION
“A living entity and the Absolute Personality of Godhead are never to be
considered equal, just as a fragmental spark can never be considered the
original flame.
PURPORT
Mayavadi sannyasis consider themselves Brahman, and they superficially speak
of themselves as Narayana. The monistic disciples of the Mayavada school

(known as smarta-brahmanas) are generally householder brahmanas who accept

the Mayavadi sannyasis as Narayana incarnate; therefore they offer their obei-

sances to them. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately protested this
unauthorized system, specifically mentioning that a sannyasi (cit-kana jiva) is


--- Page 191 ---
188 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
nothing but a fragmental portion of the Supreme. In other words, he is nothing
more than an ordinary living being. He is never Narayana, just as a molecular por-
tion of sunshine is never the sun itself. The living entity is nothing but a fragmental
part of the Absolute Truth; therefore at no stage of perfection can a living entity
become the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This Mayavada viewpoint is always
condemned by the Vaisnava school. अ7 Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself protested
this philosophy. When the Mayavadis accept sannyasa and consider themselves
Narayana, they become so puffed up that they do not even enter the temple of
Narayana to offer respects, for they falsely think themselves Narayana Himself. Al-
though Mayavadi sannyasis may offer respects to other sannyasis and address
them as Narayana, they do not go to a Narayana temple and offer respects. These
Mayavadi sannyasis are always condemned and are described as demons. The
Vedas clearly state that living entities are subordinate parts and parcels of the
supreme. Eko bahtnari yo vidadhati kaman: the Supreme Being, Krsna, maintains
all living entities.
TEXT 114
स्ना निछ। সংবিদাশ্লিষ্ট: সচ্চিদানন্দ ঈশ্বরঃ ৷
স্বাবিদ্য-সংবৃতে জীবঃ সংক্লেশনিকরাকরঃ: ॥ ১১৪ ॥
hladinya sarvid-aslistah
sac-cid-ananda isvarah
svavidya-samvrto jivah
sanklesa-nikarakarah
SYNONYMS

hladinya—by the hladini potency; sarvit—by the samvit potency; aslistah—
surrounded; sat-cit-anandah—always transcendentally blissful; isvarah—the
supreme controller; sva—own; avidya—by ignorance; samvrtah—surrounded;
jivah—the living entity; sanklesa—of the threefold miseries; nikara—of the
multitude; akarah—the mine.

TRANSLATION

^“ ‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, is always
full of transcendental bliss and is accompanied by the potencies known as
hladini and samvit. The conditioned soul, however, is always covered by ig-
norance and embarrassed by the threefold miseries of life. Thus he is a
treasure-house of all kinds of tribulations.’

PURPORT

This quotation of Visnusvami is cited in Sridhara Svami's Bhavartha-dipika com

mentary on Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.7.6).


--- Page 192 ---
Text 115] The [01015 Visit to Sri Vrndavana 189
TEXT 115
যেই Ip TCT - जीव ঈশ্বর হয় AX ।
সেইত “ने। सशो হয়, দণ্ডে তারে যম ॥ ১১৫ ॥
yei midha kahe,—jiva isvara haya ‘sama’
seita ‘pasandi’ haya, dande tare yama
SYNONYMS
yei midha—any foolish person who; kahe—says; jiva—the living entity;
iSvara—the supreme controller; haya—are; sama—equal; seita—he; pasandi
haya—is a first-class atheist; dande —punishes; tare—him; yama—the superin-
tendent of death, Yamaraja.
TRANSLATION
‘A foolish person who says that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
same as the living entity is an atheist, and he becomes subject to punishment
by the superintendent of death, Yamaraja.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that the word pasandi refers to one
who considers the living entity under the control of the illusory energy to be
equal with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental to all ma-
terial qualities. Another kind of pasandiis one who does not believe in the spirit
soul, the superior potency of the Lord, and therefore does not distinguish be-
tween spirit and matter. While describing one of the offenses against chanting the
holy names, an offense called sruti-sastra-nindana (blaspheming the Vedic
literature), Jiva Gosvami states in his Bhakti-sandarbha: yatha pasanda-margena
dattatreyarsabha-devopasakanarn pasandinam. Worshipers of impersonalists like
Dattatreya are also pasandis. Concerning the offense of aharn-mama-buddhi, or
dehatma-buddhi (considering the body to be the self), Jiva Gosvami states: deva-
dravipadi-nimittaka-'pasanda’-sabdena ca dasaparadha eva laksyante, pasan-
damayatvat tesam. “Those who are overly absorbed in the conception of the
body and the bodily necessities are also called pasandis.” Elsewhere in Bhakti-san-
darbha it is stated:
uddisya devata eva
juhoti ca dadati ca
sa pasanditi vijieyah
svatantro vapi karmasu
“A pasandi is one who considers the demigods and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to be one; therefore a pasandi worships any kind of demigod as the


--- Page 193 ---
190 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
Supreme Personality of Godhead.” One who disobeys the orders of the spiritual
master is also considered a pasandi. The word pasandi has been described in
many places in Srimad-Bhagavatam, including 4.2.28, 30, 32; 5.6.9 and 12.2.13,
43.

On the whole, a pasandiis a nondevotee who does not accept the Vedic con-
clusions. In the Hari-bhakti-vilasa (1.117) there is a verse quoted from Padma
Purana describing the pasandi. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu quotes this verse as the
following text.

TEXT 116
IF নারায়ণং দেবং EE TRAIT দিদৈবতৈঃ 1
সমত্বেনৈব বীক্ষেত A IAG) ভবেদ্ঞবম্‌ ॥ ১১৬ ॥
yas tu nardyanam devari
brahma-rudradi-daivataih
samatvenaiva vikseta
sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam
SYNONYMS

yah—any person who; tu—however; narayanam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the master of such demigods as Brahma and Siva; devam—the Lord;
brahma—Lord Brahma; rudra—Lord Siva; adi—and others; daivataih—with such
demigods; samatvena—on an equal level; eva—certainly; vikseta—observes;
sah—such a person; pasandi—pasandi; bhavet—must be; dhruvam—certainly.

TRANSLATION
“ ‘A person who considers demigods like Brahma and Siva to be on an equal
level with Narayana is to be considered an offender and a pasandi.’ ^^
TEXT 117
লোক কহে,- তোমাতে TF নহে “জীব”-মতি।
কৃষ্ণের সদৃশ তোমার আকৃতি-প্রকৃতি ॥ ১১৭ ॥
loka kahe, — tomate kabhu nahe ‘jiva’-mati
krsnera sadrsa tomara akrti-prakrti
SYNONYMS

loka kahe —the people said; tomate—unto You; kabhu—at any time; nahe—
there is not; jiva-mati—considering an ordinary living being; krsnera sadrsa—like
Lord Krsna; tomara—Your; akrti—bodily features; prakrti—characteristics.


--- Page 194 ---
Text 119] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 191
TRANSLATION
After Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained the difference between an ordi-
nary living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the people said,
‘No one considers You an ordinary human being. You are like Krsna in every
respect, in both bodily features and characteristics.
TEXT 118
भ्खांकृट তোমারে দেখি “ত্রজেন্দ্র-সন্দন” |
দেহকান্তি পীতাদ্বর কৈল আচ্ছাদন ॥ ১১৮ ॥
‘akrtye’ tomare dekhi ‘vrajendra-nandana’
deha-kanti pitambara kaila acchadana
SYNONYMS
akrtye—by bodily features; tomdare—You; dekhi—we see; vrajendra-nan-
dana—directly the son of Maharaja Nanda; deha-kanti—the luster of the body;
pita-ambara—golden covering; kaila acchadana—covered.
TRANSLATION
‘By Your bodily features we can see that You are none other than the son of
Nanda Maharaja, although the golden luster of Your body has covered Your
original complexion.
TEXT 119
FAR LH ACH, তবু না FFA |
ঈশ্বর-স্বভাব' তোমার ঢাকা নাহি যায় ॥ ১১৯ ॥
mrga-mada vastre bandhe, tabu na lukaya
‘I$vara-svabhava’ tomara taka nahi yaya
SYNONYMS
mrga-mada—deer musk; vastre—in cloth; bandhe—wraps; tabu—still; na—
not; lukaya—is concealed; isvara-svabhava—characteristics as the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; tomadra—of You; taka nahi yaya—are not concealed.
TRANSLATION
‘As the aroma of deer musk cannot be concealed by wrapping it in a cloth,
Your characteristics as the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be con-
cealed by any means.


--- Page 195 ---
192 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 120
অলোকিক “প্রকৃতি” তোমার- বুদ্ধি-অগোচর |
তোমা দেখি” কৃষ্ণপ্রেমে জগৎ পাগল ॥ ১২০ ॥
alaukika ‘prakrti’ tomara—buddhi-agocara
toma dekhi’ krspa-preme jagat pagala
SYNONYMS
alaukika—uncommon;  prakrti—characteristics; tomara—Your; buddhi-
agocara—beyond our imagination; toma dekhi’—by seeing You; krsna-preme —in
ecstatic love for Krsna; jagat—the whole world; pagala—mad.
TRANSLATION
‘Indeed, Your characteristics are uncommon and beyond the imagination
of an ordinary living being. Simply by seeing You, the entire universe be-
comes mad with ecstatic love for Krsna.
TEXTS 121-122
স্ত্ী-বাল-বৃদ্ধ, আর शन्‌", (यवनः |
(षदे তোমার একবার পায় দরশন ॥ ১২১ ॥
কৃষ্ণনাম লয়, নাচে হঞ। TAG |
আচার্থ হইল সেই, তারিল জগত ॥ ১২২ ॥
stri-bala-vrddha, ara ‘candala’, ‘yavana’
yei tomdra eka-bara paya darasana
krsna-nama laya, nace hana unmatta
acarya ha-ila sei, tarila jagata
SYNONYMS
stri—women; bala—children; vrddha—old men; adra—and; candala—the
lowest of men; yavana—persons who eat meat; yei—anyone who; tomara—
Your; eka-bara—once; paya darasana—gets the sight; krsna-nama—the holy
name of Krsna; laya—chants; ndce—dances; hana unmatta—like a madman;
acarya ha-ila—becomes a spiritual master; sei—that man; tarila jagata—delivers
the whole world.


--- Page 196 ---
Text 124] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 193
TRANSLATION
‘If even women, children, old men, meat-eaters or members of the lowest
caste can see You even once, they immediately chant the holy name of Krsna,
dance like madmen and become spiritual masters capable of delivering the
whole world.
TEXT 123
দর্শনের কার্য আচুক, যে তোমার “নাম” टन |
সেই কৃষ্ণপ্রেমে মত্ত, তারে ত্রিভুবনে ॥ ১২৩ ॥
darsanera karya achuka, ye tomara ‘nama’ sune
sei krsna-preme matta, tare tribhuvane
SYNONYMS
darsanera karya achuka—aside from seeing You; ye—anyone who; tomara—
Your; nama—holy name; sune—hears; sei—that man; krspa-preme —in ecstatic
love of Krsna; matta—maddened; tare—delivers; tri-bhuvane—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
‘Apart from seeing You, whoever listens to Your holy name is made mad
with ecstatic love for Krsna and is able to deliver the three worlds.
TEXT 124
তোমার নাম শুনি হয় শ্বপচ “পাবন”।
অলোকিক শক্তি তোমার না যায় কথন ॥ ১২৪ ॥
10/773/3 nama suni’ haya &\/३/2८व ‘pavana’
alaukika Sakti tomara na yaya kathana
SYNONYMS
tomara—Your; nama—holy name; suni’—hearing; haya—become; svapaca—
dog-eaters, the lowest of men; pavana—saintly persons; alaukika—uncommon;
Sakti—potency; tomara—Your; na—not; yaya kathana—can be described.
TRANSLATION
“Simply by hearing Your holy name, dog-eaters become holy saints. Your
uncommon potencies cannot be described in words.


--- Page 197 ---
194 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 125
যন্নামধ্য়-শ্রবণাইকীর্তনাদ্‌
যংপ্রহবণাদ্যহস্মরণাদপি FBR ।
শ্বাদে/হপি Aw: সবনায় কল্পতে
কুতঃ পুনস্ডে ভগবন্ন, AAAI ১২৫ ॥
yan-namadheya-sravananukirtanad
yat-prahvanad yat-smaranad api kvacit
svado ‘pi sadyah savandya kalpate
kutah punas te bhagavan nu darsanat
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; namadheya—of the name; sravana—from hearing;
anukirtanat—and thereafter from chanting; yat—to whom; prahvanat—from
offering respects; yat—of whom; smaranat—from simply remembering; api—
also; kvacit—sometimes; sva-adah —a dog-eater; api—even; sadyah—im-
mediately; savanaya—for performing Vedic sacrifices; kalpate —becomes eligible;
kutah—what to speak; punah—again; te—of You; bhagavan—O Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; nu—certainly; darsanat—from seeing.
TRANSLATION
‘To say nothing of the spiritual advancement of persons who see the
Supreme Person face to face, even a person born in a family of dog-eaters be-
comes immediately eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices if he once utters the
holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or chants about Him, hears
about His pastimes, offers Him obeisances or even remembers Him.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.6). According to this verse, it
doesn’t matter what position a person holds. One may be the lowest of the low —
a candala, or dog-eater—but if he takes to chanting and hearing the holy name of
the Lord, he is immediately eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices. This is especially
true in this age of Kali.
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
(Brhan-naradiya Purana, 38.126)


--- Page 198 ---
Text 126] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 195
A person born in a brahmana family cannot perform Vedic sacrifices until he is
properly purified and has attained his sacred thread. However, according to this
verse, it is understood that even a lowborn person can immediately perform
sacrifices if he sincerely chants and hears the holy name of the Lord. Sometimes
envious people ask how Europeans and Americans in this Krsna consciousness
movement can become brahmanas and perform sacrifices. They do not know that
the Europeans and Americans have already been purified by chanting the holy
name of the Lord—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This is the proof. Svado ‘pi sadyah savanaya
kalpate. One may be born in a family of dog-eaters, but he can perform sacrifices
simply by chanting the maha-mantra.

Those who find fault in the Western Vaisnavas should consider this statement
from Srimad-Bhagavatam and the commentary on this verse by Srila Jiva Gosvami.
In this regard, Srila Jiva Gosvami has stated that to become a brahmana, one has to
wait for purification and undergo the sacred thread ceremony, but a chanter of
the holy name does not have to wait for the sacred thread ceremony. We do not
allow devotees to perform sacrifices until they are properly initiated in the sacred
thread ceremony. Yet according to this verse, an offenseless chanter of the holy
name is already fit to perform a fire ceremony, even though he is not doubly ini-
tiated by the sacred thread ceremony. This is the verdict given by Lord Kapiladeva
in His instructions to His mother, Devahiti. It was Lord Kapiladeva who instructed
Devahati in pure Sankhya philosophy.

TEXT 126
এইত” মহিমা তোমার SHH Te |
“ঘরূপ”-লক্ষণে তুমি CHEAT ॥ ১২৬ ॥
eita’ mahima——tomara ‘tatastha’-laksana
‘svarapa’-laksane tumi——‘vrajendra-nandana’
SYNONYMS

eita’—all these; mahima—glories; tomdra—Your; tatastha-laksana—marginal
characteristics; sva-rapa—original; laksane—by characteristics; tumi—You; vra-
jendra-nandana—the son of Maharaja Nanda.

TRANSLATION

‘These glories of Yours are only marginal. Originally You are the son of
Maharaja Nanda.”

PURPORT

The original characteristics of a substance are called svardpa, and the subse-
quent corollaries are called tatastha-laksana, or marginal characteristics. The glo-


--- Page 199 ---
196 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
ries of the Lord's marginal characteristics prove Him to be the original Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the son of Maharaja Nanda. As soon as one understands
this, one accepts $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Lord Sri Krsna.
TEXT 127
সেই जव লোকে প্রভু প্রসাদ করিল।
কৃষ্ণপ্রেমে মত্ত লোক নিজ-ঘরে গেল ॥ ১২৭ ॥
sei saba loke prabhu prasada karila
krsna-preme matta loka nija-ghare gela
SYNONYMS
sei saba loke—unto all those persons; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
prasada karila—bestowed His causeless mercy; krsna-preme—in ecstatic love of
Krsna; matta—maddened; loka—persons; nija-ghare gela—returned to their own
homes.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then bestowed His causeless mercy upon all the
people there, and everyone became ecstatic with love of God. Finally they all
returned to their homes.
TEXT 128
এইমত কতদিন “অক্রু,রে” রহিলা।
কৃষ্ণ-নাম-প্রেম দিয়। লোক নিস্তারিল। ॥ ১২৮ ॥
ei-mata kata-dina ‘akrare’ rahila
krsna-nama-prema diya loka nistarila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; kata-dina—for some days; akrtre rahila—stayed at
Akrara-tirtha; krspa-nama—the holy name of Krsna; prema—ecstatic love; diya—
distributing; loka—everyone; nistarila—delivered.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained for some days in Akrira-tirtha. He
delivered everyone there simply by distributing the holy name of Krsna and
ecstatic love for the Lord.


--- Page 200 ---
Text 131] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 197
TEXT 129
RHF শিষ্য সেইত ত্রাহ্মণ |
মধুব্লার ঘরে-ঘরে করান নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১২৯ ॥
madhava-purira Sisya seita brahmana
mathurara ghare-ghare kara’na nimantrana
SYNONYMS
madhava-purira—of = Madhavendra Puri;  Sisya—disciple;  seita—that;
brahmana—brahmana; mathurara—of Mathura City; ghare-ghare—home to
home; kard’na—causes to make; nimantrana—invitation.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana disciple of Madhavendra Puri went from house to house in
Mathura and inspired other brahmanas to invite Caitanya Mahaprabhu to their
homes.
TEXT 130
AYIA TS লোক लवन সঙ্জন |
ভট্টাচার্য-স্থানে আসি” করে নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১৩০ ॥
mathurara yata loka brahmana sajjana
bhattacarya-sthane asi’ kare nimantrana
SYNONYMS
mathurara—of Mathura; yata—all; loka—people; brahmana sat-jana—gentle-
men and brahmanas; bhattacarya-sthane —unto Balabhadra Bhattacarya; asi’'—
coming; kare nimantrana—offer invitations.
TRANSLATION
Thus all the respectable people of Mathura, headed by the brahmanas,
came to Balabhadra Bhattacarya and extended invitations to the Lord.
TEXT 131
একদিন “দশ” “বিশ' আইসে নিমন্ত্রণ |
ভট্টাচার্য একের মাত্র করেন গ্রহণ ॥ ১৩১ ॥
eka-dina ‘dasa’ ‘bisa’ aise nimantrana
bhattacarya ekera matra karena grahana


--- Page 201 ---
198 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—in one day; dasa bisa—ten to twenty; dise—come; nimantrana—
the invitations; bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; ekera—of one of them;
matra—only; karena grahana—accepts.
TRANSLATION
In one day, ten to twenty invitations were received, but Balabhadra Bhat-
tacarya would accept only one of them.
TEXT 132
অবসর না পায় লোক নিমন্ত্রণ foes ।
সেই विदय সাথে লোক निमह्छन নিতে ॥ ১৩২ ॥
avasara na paya loka nimantrapa dite
sei vipre sadhe loka nimantrana nite
SYNONYMS
avasara na paya—do not get the opportunity; loka—people; nimantrana dite —
to offer invitations; sei vipre—unto that brahmana; sadhe—request; loka—
people; nimantrana nite—to accept the invitation.
TRANSLATION
Since everyone did not get an opportunity to offer invitations to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally, they requested the Sanodiya brahmana to
ask the Lord to accept their invitations.
TEXT 133
কান্যকুজ-দাক্ষিণাত্যের calves ত্রাহ্মণ |
WY করি, করে মহাপ্রভুর নিমন্ত্রণ ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
kanyakubja-daksinatyera vaidika brahmana
dainya kari, kare mahaprabhura nimantrana
SYNONYMS
kanyakubja—brahmanas from Kanyakubja; daksinatyera—certain brahmanas
from South India; vaidika—followers of the Vedic religion; brahmana—
brahmanas; dainya kari—with great humility; kare—do; mahaprabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nimantrana—invitation.


--- Page 202 ---
Text 135] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 199
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas from different places, such as Kanyakubja and South India,
who were all strict followers of the Vedic religion, offered invitations to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu with great humility.
TEXT 134
প্রাতঃকালে অক্রু,রে আসি” রন্ধন করিয়। ৷
প্রভুরে fowl দেন শালগ্রামে जब्र ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
pratah-kale akrare asi’ randhana kariya
prabhure bhiksa dena salagrame samarpiya
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; akrire —to Akrara-tirtha; asi’—coming; randhana
kariya—cooking; prabhure—unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhiksa dena —offer
lunch; salagrame samarpiya—after offering to the salagrama-sila.
TRANSLATION
In the morning they would come to Akrira-tirtha and cook food. After
offering it to the salagrama-$ila, they offered it to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
PURPORT
There are brahmanas known as parica-gauda-brahmanas who come from five
places in northern India, and there are brahmanas known as parica-daksinatya-
brahmanas who come from five places in southern India. In northern India the
places are Kanyakubja, Sarasvata, Cauda, Maithila and Utkala. In southern India
the places are Andhra, Karnata, Curjara, Dravida and Maharastra. The brahmanas
from these places are considered to be very strict followers of the Vedic prin-
ciples, and they are accepted as pure brahmanas. They strictly observe Vedic prin-
ciples and are not polluted by tantric misdeeds. All of these brahmanas respect-
fully invited Caitanya Mahaprabhu for lunch.
TEXT 135
একদিন সেই অন্রু,ব্র-ঘাটের উপরে ।
বসি” মহাপ্রভু কিছু করেন বিচারে ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
eka-dina sei akrara-ghatera upare
vasi’ mahaprabhu kichu karena vicare


--- Page 203 ---
200 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
eka-dina—once upon a time; sei—that; akrara-ghatera—of the त पावे bathing
ghat; upare—on the bank; vasi’—sitting; mahaprabhu—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kichu—some; karena—does; vicare —consideration.
TRANSLATION
One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat at the bathing ghat of Akriira-tirtha
and thought the following thoughts.
PURPORT
Akrara-tirtha is located on the road between Vindavana and Mathura. When
Krsna and Balarama were being taken to Mathura by Akrira, the Lord rested at this
place and took His bath in the Yamuna. When Krsna and Balarama took Their
baths, Akrira saw the entire world of Vaikuntha within the water. The inhabitants
of Vrndavana also saw the Vaikuntha planets within the water.
TEXT 136
এই ঘাটে অত্রুব্ন বৈকুণ্ঠ দেখিল |
ত্রজবালী লোক गोदना कः দর্শন কৈল ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
ei ghate akrara vaikuntha dekhila
vrajavasi loka ‘goloka’ darsana kaila
SYNONYMS
ei ghate—in this bathing place; akrdra—Akrara; vaikuntha dekhila—saw the
spiritual world; vrajavasi loka—the inhabitants of Vrndavana; goloka darsana
kaila—saw Goloka.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thought, “40 this bathing place, Akrira saw
Vaikuntha, the spiritual world, and all the inhabitants of Vraja saw Goloka
Vrndavana.””
TEXT 137
এত বলি” ঝাপ দিলা জলের উপরে |
ভুবিয়া রহিল। প্রভু জলের ভিতরে ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
eta bali’ jhanpa dila jalera upare
dubiya rahila prabhu jalera bhitare


--- Page 204 ---
Text 139] The [01015 Visit to Sri Vrndavana 201
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; jhanpa dila—jumped; jalera upare—above the water;
dubiya—sinking; rahila—remained; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jalera
bhitare —within the water.
TRANSLATION
While considering how Akriira remained within the water, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu immediately jumped in and stayed under water for some time.
TEXT 138
(नभिः কৃষ্ণনাস Sif ফুকার क्रिल ।
ভট্টাচার্য गख सोगि' প্রভুরে উঠাইল ॥ ১৩৮ ॥
dekhi’ krspadasa kandi’ phukara karila
bhattacarya sighra asi’ prabhure uthaila
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; krsnadasa—Krsnadasa; kandi’—crying; phu-kara karila—called
loudly; bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; sighra—hastily; asi’—coming;
prabhure uthaila—raised ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
When Krsnadasa saw that Caitanya Mahaprabhu was drowning, he cried
and shouted very loudly. Balabhadra Bhattacarya immediately came and
pulled the Lord out.
TEXT 139
তবে ভট্টাচার্য সেই ত্রাহ্মণে লঞ৷।
যুক্তি করিল৷ fag নিতে afam ॥ ১৩৯ ॥
tabe bhattacarya sei brahmane lafia
yukti karila kichu nibhrte vasiya
SYNONYMS
tabe—thereafter; bhattacarya—Bhattacarya; sei brahmape—the Sanodiya
brahmana; laia—taking; yukti karila—consulted; kichu—something; nibhrte
vasiya—sitting in a solitary place.


--- Page 205 ---
202 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
After this, Balabhadra Bhatticarya took the Sanodiya brahmana to a
secluded place and consulted with him.
TEXT 140
আজি আমি আছিলাঙ च्छ देल প্রভুরে।
বৃন্দাবনে ডুবেন যদি, কে উঠাবে ভারে ? ১৪০ ॥
aji ami achilana uthailun prabhure
vrndavane dubena yadi, ke uthabe tanre?
SYNONYMS
aji—today; ami—I; achilana—was present; uthailun—raised; prabhure —S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vrndavane —in Vindavana; dubena yadi—if He drowns;
ke uthabe tanre —who will raise Him.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya said, ‘‘Since | was present today, it was possible for
me to pull the Lord up. However, if He starts to drown at Vrndavana, who will
help Him?
TEXT 141
লোকের সংঘট্ট, আর निमल्लदनेत्र SIA |
নিরস্তর আবেশ প্রভুর न। দেখিয়ে ভাল ॥ ১৪১ ॥
lokera sanghatta, ara nimantranera janjala
nirantara avesa prabhura na dekhiye bhala
SYNONYMS
lokera sanghatta—crowds of people; ara—and; nimantranera jafjala—the dis-
turbance of invitations; nirantara—always; dvesa—ecstatic love; prabhura—of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na dekhiye bhala—! do not see any good in this.
TRANSLATION
‘Now there is a crowd of people here, and these invitations are causing
much disturbance. In addition, the Lord is always ecstatic and emotional. | do
not find the situation here very good.


--- Page 206 ---
Text 144] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 203
TEXT 142
বৃন্দাবন হৈতে যদি শ্রভুরে কাড়িয়ে |
তবে মঙ্গল হয়, এই ভাল যুক্তি হয়ে ॥ ১৪২ ॥
vrndavana haite yadi prabhure kadiye
tabe marigala haya, —ei bhala yukti haye
SYNONYMS
vrndavana haite—from Vindavana; yadi—if; prabhure—S$ri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kadiye—! take away; tabe—then; margala haya—there is
auspiciousness; ei—this; bhala—good; yukti—plan; haye—is.
TRANSLATION
“It would be good if we could get Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu out of
Vrndavana. That is my final conclusion.”
TEXT 143
বিপ্র কহে,- প্রয়াগে প্রভু লঞা TE |
গজাতীর-পথে যাই, তবে छथ পাই ॥ ১৪৩ ॥
vipra kahe, —prayage prabhu lana yai
ganga-tira-pathe yai, tabe sukha pai
SYNONYMS
vipra kahe—the brahmana said; prayage—to Prayaga; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; lana —taking; yai—let us go; gariga-tira-pathe—on the bank of the
Ganges; yai—let us go; tabe—then; sukha pai—we shall get pleasure.
TRANSLATION
The Sanodiya brahmana said, ˆ.€ us take Him to Prayaga and go along the
banks of the Ganges. It will be very pleasurable to go that way.
TEXT 144
“সোরোক্ষেত্রে, আগে যাঞা করি' storia |
সেই পথে প্রভু লঞ।৷ করিয়ে পয়ান ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
‘soro-ksetre, age yana kari’ gariga-snana
sei pathe prabhu 1205 kariye payana


--- Page 207 ---
204 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
soro-ksetre —to the holy place named Soro-ksetra; age—first, beyond; yana—
going; kari’ ganga-snana—having taken bath in the Ganges; sei pathe —that way;
prabhu lana—taking Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kariye payana—let us go.
TRANSLATION
“‘After going to the holy place named Soro-ksetra, and taking bath in the
Ganges, let us take Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that way and go.
TEXT 145
মাঘ-মাস লাগিল, এবে যদি যাইয়ে ।
মকরে প্রয়াগ-স্লান কত দিন পাইয়ে ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
magha-masa lagila, ebe yadi yaiye
makare prayaga-snana kata dina paiye
SYNONYMS
magha-masa lagila—the month of Magha has begun; ebe—now; yadi—if;
ydiye —we go; makare —during the Makara-sankranti; prayaga-snana—bathing at
Prayaga; kata dina—for a few days; paiye—we shall get.
TRANSLATION
(८1१ is now the beginning of the month of Magha. If we go to Prayaga at this
time, we shall have an opportunity to bathe for a few days during Makara-
sankranti.”
PURPORT
Bathing during the month of Magha at Magha-mela still takes place. This has
been a very old mela (assembly) from time immemorial. It is said that the Lord in
the form of Mohini took a bucket of nectar and kept it at Prayaga. Consequently
Magha-mela has been observed, and there is an assembly of holy men there every
year. Every twelfth year there is a Kumbha-mel3, a great festival, and all the holy
men from all over India assemble there. The brahmana wanted to take advantage
of the Magha-mela and bathe there.
Bathing at the confluence of the Canges and Yamuna near the fort at
Allahabad, Prayaga, is mentioned in revealed scriptures:
maghe masi gamisyanti
garnga-yamuna-sangamam


--- Page 208 ---
Text 147] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 205
gavari sata-sahasrasya
samyag dattarn ca yat-phalam
prayage magha-mase vai
tryahar snatasya tat-phalam
“If one goes to Prayaga and bathes at the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna
in the month of Magha, he attains the result of giving hundreds and thousands of
cows in charity. Simply by bathing for three days there, he attains the results of
such a pious activity.” Because of this, the Sanodiya brahmana was very eager to
go to Prayaga and bathe. Generally karmis (fruitive laborers) take advantage of
bathing there during the month of Magha, thinking that they will be rewarded in
the future. Those who are situated in devotional service do not very strictly follow
this karma-kandiya process.
TEXT 146
আপনার দুঃখ কিছু করি” নিবেদন |
“মকর-পঁচসি প্রয়াগে” করিহ সূচন ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
apanara duhkha kichu kari’ nivedana
‘makara-paricasi prayage’ kariha stcana
SYNONYMS
apanara—personal;  duhkha—unhappiness;  kichu—some;  kari’—doing;
nivedana—submission; makara-paricasi—the full-moon day in the month of
Magha; prayage—to Prayaga; kariha sicana—kindly inform.
TRANSLATION
The Sanodiya brihmana continued, “Kindly submit to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu the unhappiness you are feeling within yourself. Then propose
that we all go to Prayaga on the full-moon day of the month of Magha.
TEXT 147
গঙ্গাতীর-পথে FY জানাইহ ভারে |
ভট্টাচার্য আসি” তবে কহিল প্রভুরে ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
ganga-tira-pathe sukha janaiha tanre
bhattacarya asi’ tabe kahila prabhure


--- Page 209 ---
206 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
gariga-tira—on the bank of the Ganges; pathe—on the path; sukha—happi-
ness; janaiha—kindly let know; tanre —S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhattacarya—
Balabhadra Bhattdcarya; asi‘—coming; tabe—thereafter; kahila prabhure—in-
formed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
“Tell the Lord of the happiness you will feel in traveling via the banks of the
Ganges.” Balabhadra Bhattacarya therefore submitted this prayer to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 148
“সহিতে না পারি আমি লোকের গড়বড়ি।
নিমন্ত্রণ লাগি” লোক করে ছড়াহুড়ি ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
“sahite na pari ami lokera gadabadi
nimantrana lagi’ loka kare hudahudi
SYNONYMS
sahite na pari—cannot tolerate; ami—I; lokera—of people; gadabadi—distur-
bance; nimantrana—invitations; lagi’—for; loka—people; kare —do; hudahudi—
hurrying.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya told the Lord, “| can no longer tolerate the distur-
bance of the crowd. People are coming one after another to offer invitations.
TEXT 149
প্রাতঃকালে আইসে লোক, তোমারে ना পায়।
তোমারে না পাঞা লোক মোর মাথা খায় ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
pratah-kale aise loka, tomare na paya
tomare na pana loka mora matha khaya
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; aise—come; loka—people; tomare—You; na
pdya—cannot see; tomare na pana—not getting You; loka—people; mora matha
khaya—tax my brain.


--- Page 210 ---
Text 151] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 207
TRANSLATION
‘‘Early in the morning people come here, and not seeing You present, they
simply tax my brain.
TEXT 150
তবে सश হয় যবে গঙ্গাপথে যাইয়ে ।
এবে যদি যাই, FLA’ ARIF পাইয়ে ॥ ১৫০ ॥
tabe sukha haya yabe ganga-pathe yaiye
ebe yadi yai, ‘makare’ ganga-snana paiye
SYNONYMS
tabe—then; sukha haya—it will be great happiness for me; yabe—when;
ganga-pathe —on the path of the Ganges; yaiye—we go; ebe yadi yai—if we go
just now; makare—during Makara-sankranti; gariga-snana paiye—we can take
bath in the Ganges.
TRANSLATION
“I will be very happy if we all leave and take the path by the banks of the
Ganges. Then we can have the opportunity to bathe in the Ganges in Prayaga
during Makara-sankranti.
PURPORT
There are two great occasions for bathing in the Ganges during Magha-mela.
One is on the day of the dark moon, and the other is on the day of the full moon
during the month of Magha.
TEXT 151
উদ্বিগ্ন হইল প্রাণ, সহিতে ন৷ नोत्रि।
প্রভুর যে আজ্ঞা হয়, সেই শিরে ধরি ॥” ১৫১ ॥
udvigna ha-ila prana, sahite na pari
prabhura ye 177 haya, sei sire dhari”
SYNONYMS
udvigna—agitated; ha-ila—has become; prana—my mind; sahite—to bear; na
pari—| am unable; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ye—what; ajna—
order; haya—there is; sei sire dhari—| accept that.


--- Page 211 ---
208 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
“My mind has become very agitated, and 1 cannot bear this anxiety. May
everything rest on the permission of Your Lordship. I will accept whatever You
want to do.”
TEXT 152
यष्टिं বৃন্দাবন-ত্যাগে নাহি প্রভুর मन |
खूर-टेष्छ] পুরিতে কহে TFT বচন ॥ ১৫২ ॥
yadyapi vrndavana-tyage nahi prabhura mana
bhakta-iccha parite kahe madhura vacana
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; vrndavana-tyage—to leave Vindavana; nahi prabhura
mana—was not the desire of the Lord; bhakta—of the devotee; iccha—desire;
parite—to fulfill; kahe—says; madhura vacana—sweet words.
TRANSLATION
Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had no desire to leave Vrndavana, He
began to speak sweet words just to fulfill the desire of His devotee.
TEXT 153
“তুমি আমায় আনি” দেখাইল। gota ।
এই "शनः আমি নারিব করিতে শোধন ॥ ১৫৩ ॥
“tumi amaya ani’ dekhaila vrndavana
ei ‘rna’ ami nariba karite sodhana
SYNONYMS
tumi—you; amaya—Me; ani’—bringing; dekhaili—showed; vrndavana—the
holy place named Vindavana; ei rna—this debt; ami nariba—I shall not be able;
karite sodhana—to repay.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “You have brought Me here to show Me
Vrndavana. | am very much indebted to you, and I shall not be able to repay
this debt.


--- Page 212 ---
Text 156] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 209
TEXT 154
যে তোমার ইচ্ছা, আমি সেইত করিব।
सादं] লঞ। যাহ তুমি, তাই ই যাইব ॥” ১৫৪ ॥
ye tomdra 10088, ami seita kariba
yahan lana yaha tumi, tahani yaiba”
SYNONYMS
ye tomara iccha—whatever You like; ami—I; seita kariba—must act accord-
ingly; yahan—wherever; lana yaha—take; tumi—you; tahani yaiba—I shall go
there.
TRANSLATION
‘Whatever you desire, | must do. Wherever you take Me, | shall go.”
TEXT 155
প্রাতঃকালে মহাপ্রভু পাতঃস্লান কৈল।
“বৃন্দাবন ছাড়িব” জানি” প্রেমাবেশ হৈল ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
pratah-kale mahaprabhu pratah-snana kaila
‘vrndavana chadiba’ jani’ premavesa haila
SYNONYMS
pratah-kale—in the morning; mahaprabhu —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pratah-
snana kaila—took His morning bath; vrndavana chadiba—I shall have to leave
Vrndavana; jani’—knowing; prema-avesa haila—became ecstatic in love.
TRANSLATION
The next morning, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got up early. After taking His
bath, He became ecstatic with love, knowing that He now had to leave
Vrndavana.
TEXT 156
বাহু বিকার নাহি, প্রেমাবিষ্ট मन ।
ভট্টাচার্য কহে, চল, যাই মহাবন ॥ ১৫৬ |
bahya vikara nahi, premavista mana
bhattacarya (८2/0९, —cala, yai mahavana


--- Page 213 ---
210 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
bahya—external; vikara—symptoms; nahi—there were not; prema-avista
mana—the mind was full of ecstatic love; bhattacarya kahe —Bhattacarya said;
cala—let us go; yai mahavana—let us go to Mahavana.
TRANSLATION
Although the Lord did not exhibit any external symptoms, His mind was
filled with ecstatic love. At that time, Balabhadra Bhatticarya said, “Let us go
to Mahavana [Gokulal.”"
TEXT 157
এত বলি” মহাপ্রভুরে নৌকায় दज |
পার করি' ভট্টাচার্য চলিলা नयं ॥ ১৫৭ ॥
eta bali’ mahaprabhure naukaya vasana
para kari’ bhattacarya calila lana
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; mahaprabhure—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; naukaya—on
a boat; vasana—making sit down; para kari’—crossing the river; bhattacarya—
Balabhadra Bhattacarya; calilai—went; laia—taking.
TRANSLATION
Saying this, Balabhadra Bhatticarya made Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sit
aboard a boat. After they crossed the river, he took the Lord with him.
TEXT 158
প্রেমী FFT, আর সেইত ব্রাহ্মণ |
গঙ্গাতীর-পথে যাইবার বিজ্ঞ দুইজন ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
premi krspadasa, ara seita brahmana
ganga-tira-pathe yaibara vijia dui-jana
SYNONYMS
premi krspadasa—the devotee Rajaputa Krsnadasa; ara—and; 59219
brahmana—that Sanodiya brahmana; ganga-tira-pathe —on the path by the bank
of the Ganges; yaibara—to go; vijiia—experienced; dui-jana—two persons.


--- Page 214 ---
Text 161] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 211
TRANSLATION
Both Rajaputa Krsnadasa and the Sanodiya brahmana knew the path along
the Ganges bank very well.
TEXT 159
যাইতে এক বৃক্ষতলে প্রভু जव। FAH |
वजिन।, সবার পথ-শ্রান্তি দেখিয়। ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
yaite eka vrksa-tale prabhu saba lana
vasila, sabara patha-sranti dekhiya
SYNONYMS
yaite—while passing; eka—one; vrksa-tale—underneath a tree; prabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; saba laia—taking all of them; vasila—sat down; sabara—
of all of them; patha-sranti—fatigue because of walking; dekhiya—understand-
ing.
TRANSLATION
While walking, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, understanding that the others
were fatigued, took them all beneath a tree and sat down.
TEXT 160
সেই বৃক্ষ-নিকটে চরে বছ গাভীগণ |
তাহা দেখি” মহাপ্রভুর উল্লসিত মন ॥ ১৬০ ॥
sei vrksa-nikate care bahu gabhi-gana
taha dekhi’ mahaprabhura ullasita mana
SYNONYMS
sei—that; vrksa-nikate—near the tree; care—were grazing; bahu—many;
gabhi-gana—cows; taha—that; dekhi’—seeing; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ullasita mana—the mind became very pleased.
TRANSLATION
There were many cows grazing near that tree, and the Lord was very
pleased to see them.
TEXT 161
আচন্বিতে এক (नोनं বংশী বাজাইল |
खनिः মহাপ্রভুর মহা-প্রেমাবেশ হৈল ॥ ১৬১ ॥


--- Page 215 ---
212 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
acambite eka gopa varnsi bajaila
Suni’ mahaprabhura maha-premavesa haila
SYNONYMS
dcambite—suddenly; eka gopa—one cowherd boy; vamsi—flute; bajaila—
blew; suni’—hearing; mahaprabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; maha-prema-
avesa—absorption in great ecstatic love; haila—there was.
TRANSLATION
Suddenly a cowherd boy blew on his flute, and immediately the Lord was
struck with ecstatic love.
TEXT 162
অচেতন হঞ। প্রভু ভুমিতে नेडिल्‌। |
মুখে ফেনা পড়ে, নাসায় শ্বাস রুদ্ধ CLE ॥ ১৬২ ॥
acetana hana prabhu bhamite padila
mukhe phena pade, nasaya svasa ruddha haila
SYNONYMS
acetana—unconscious; hafia—becoming; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
bhamite padila—fell on the ground; mukhe —at the mouth; phena pade —there
was foam; nasdaya—in the nostrils; svasa—breath; ruddha haila—stopped.
TRANSLATION
Filled with ecstatic love, the Lord fell unconscious to the ground. He
foamed about the mouth, and His breathing stopped.
TEXT 163
হেলকালে ङ्‌] আশোয়ার দশ SAR |
ম্লেচ্ছ-পাঠান (वाङ्‌ হৈতে উত্তরিল। ॥ ১৬৩ ॥
hena-kale tahan asoyara dasa aila
mleccha-pathana ghoda haite uttarila
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—just at this time; tahan—there; asoyara—soldiers; dasa—ten;
aila—came; mleccha—Mohammedans; pathana—the race of Pathanas; ghoda—
horses; haite—from; uttarila—got down.


--- Page 216 ---
Text 166] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 213
TRANSLATION
While the Lord was unconscious, ten cavalry soldiers belonging to the
Mohammedan Pathana military order rode up and dismounted.
TEXT 164
প্রভুরে দেখিয়া ম্লেচ্ছ করয়ে বিচার ।
এই ষতি-পাশ ছিল স্বর্ণ অপার ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
prabhure dekhiya mleccha karaye vicara
ei yati-pasa chila suvarpa apara
SYNONYMS
prabhure—Sri  Caitanya Mahaprabhu;  dekhiyi—seeing; mleccha—the
Mohammedans; karaye vicara—considered; ei yati-pasa—within the possession
of this sannyasi; chila—there was; suvarna apara—a large quantity of gold.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the Lord unconscious, the soldiers thought, “This sannyasi must
have possessed a large quantity of gold.
TEXT 165
এই চারি বাটোয়ার ধুতুর৷ Anew |
মারি” ডার্িয়াছে, যতির সব ধন লঞ! ॥ ১৬৫ ॥
ei cari batoyara dhutura khaoyana
mari’ dariyache, yatira saba dhana lara
SYNONYMS
ei—these; cari—four; batoyara—rogues; dhutura—dhutura; khaoyana—mak-
ing Him eat; mari’ dariyache—killed; yatira—of the sannyasi; saba—all; dhana—
wealth; lana—taking away.
TRANSLATION
“These four rogues here must have taken away that sannyasi’s riches after
killing Him by making Him take the poison dhutura.”
TEXT 166
তবে সেই পাঠান চারি-জনেরে वौसिल ।
কাটিতে চাহে, গৌড়িয়। সব কাপিতে লাগিল ॥১৬৬॥


--- Page 217 ---
214 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
tabe sei pathana cari-janere bandhila
katite cahe, gaudiya saba kanpite lagila
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; sei pathana—the Pathana soldiers; cari-janere —the four persons;
bandhila—arrested; katite cahe—wanted to kill them; gaudiya—the Bengalis;
saba—all; kanpite lagila—began to tremble.
TRANSLATION
Thinking this, the Pathana soldiers arrested the four persons and decided to
kill them. Because of this, the two Bengalis began to tremble.
PURPORT
The four persons were Balabhadra Bhattacarya, his assistant brahmana, Rajaputa
Krsnadasa and the Sanodiya brahmana devotee of Madhavendra Puri.
TEXT 167
FFA - রাজপুত, নির্ভয় সে বড় |
সেই বির - নির্ভয়, সে- মুখে বড় দড় ॥ ১৬৭ ॥
krspnadasa——rajaputa, nirbhaya se 2903
sei vipra——nirbhaya, se——mukhe bada dada
SYNONYMS
krspadasa—Krsnadasa; rajaputa—belonging to the Rajaputa race; nirbhaya—
fearless; se—he; bada—very; sei vipra—the Sanodiya brahmana; nirbhaya—also
fearless; se —he; mukhe—in the mouth; bada dada—very brave.
TRANSLATION
The devotee Krsnadasa, who belonged to the Rajaputa race, was very fear-
less. The Sanodiya brahmana was also fearless, and he spoke very bravely.
TEXT 168
fel कटङ,- পাঠান, তোমার পাওসার দোহাই |
চল তুমি আমি সিক্দার-পাশ যাই ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
vipra kahe, —pathana, tomara patsara dohai
cala tumi ami sikdara-pasa yai


--- Page 218 ---
Text 170] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 215
SYNONYMS
vipra kahe —the brahmana said; pathana—you Pathana soldiers; tomara—your;
patsara—king; dohai—under the protection of; cala—let us go; tumi—you;
ami —we; sikdara-pasa—to the commander; yai—let us go.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana said, “You Pathana soldiers are all under the protection of
your king. Let us go to your commander and get his decision.
TEXT 169
এই যতি - আমার গুরু, আমি- মাথুর ত্রাহ্মণ |
পাছৎসার আগে আছে মোর “শত জন” ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
ei yati——amadra guru, ami——mathura brahmana
patsara age ache mora ‘sata jana’
SYNONYMS
ei yati—this sannyasi;; amara guru—my spiritual master; ami—I; mathura
brahmapa—a brahmana from Mathura; patsara age—in the service of the
Mohammedan king; ache—there are; mora—my; sata jana—one hundred per-
50175.
TRANSLATION
“This sannyasi is my spiritual master, and | am from Mathura. | am a
brahmana, and | know many people who are in the service of the Moham-
medan king.
TEXT 170
এই যতি ব্যাধিতে কভু হয়েন মূর্ছিত |
অবঁহি চেতন পাইবে, হইবে AMES ॥ ১৭০ ॥
ei yati vyadhite kabhu hayena marcchita
abanhi cetana paibe, ha-ibe samvita
SYNONYMS
ei yati—this sannyast; vyadhite—under the influence of disease; kabhu—
sometimes; hayena midrcchita—becomes unconscious; abanhi—very soon;
cetana—consciousness; paibe —will get back; ha-ibe samvita—will come to His
proper senses.


--- Page 219 ---
216 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
“This sannyasi sometimes falls unconscious due to the influence of a dis-
ease. Please sit down here, and you will see that He will very soon regain con-
sciousness and His normal condition.
TEXT 171
ক্ষণেক ইহ देवज, বাদ্ধি' রাখহ সবারে ।
ইহাকে পুছিয়, তবে মারিহ সবারে ॥ ১৭১ ॥
ksaneka ihan vaisa, bandhi’ rakhaha sabare
inhake puchiya, tabe mariha sabare
SYNONYMS
ksaneka—for some time; ihan vaisa—sit down here; bandhi’—arresting;
rakhaha—keep; sabare—all of us; inhake puchiya—after questioning Him; tabe—
then; mariha sabare —you can kill all of us.
TRANSLATION
“Sit down here for a while and keep us all under arrest. When the sannyasi
regains his senses, you can question Him. Then, if you like, you can kill us
all.”
TEXT 172
পাঠান কহে,-_তুমি পশ্চিম] মাথুর দুইজন |
fear ঠক্‌ এই কাপে দুইজন ॥ ১৭২ ॥
pathana kahe, —tumi pascima mathura dui-jana
‘gaudiya’ thak ei kanpe dui-jana
SYNONYMS
pathana kahe—the soldiers said; tumi—you; pascimda—western Indians;
mathura—belonging to the district of Mathura; dui-jana—two of you; gaudiya—
Bengalis; thak—rogues; ei—these; kanpe—are trembling; dui-jana—two per-
sons.
TRANSLATION
The Pathana soldiers said, “You are all rogues. Two of you belong to the
district of Mathura, and the other two, who are trembling, belong to Bengal.”


--- Page 220 ---
Text 175] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 217
TEXT 173
কৃষ্ণনাস कट, — আমার ঘর এই গ্রামে |
তুইশত GFT আছে, শতেক কামানে ॥ ১৭৩ ॥
krspadasa 13006, —amara ghara ei grame
dui-sata turki ache, sateka kamane
SYNONYMS
krspadasa kahe —Rajaputa Krsnadasa said; amara ghara—my home; ei grame —
in this village; dui-sata turki—two hundred Turks; dche —I have; sateka kamane—
one hundred cannons.
TRANSLATION
Rajaputa Krsnadasa said, “| have my home here, and | also have about two
hundred Turkish soldiers and about one hundred cannons.
TEXT 174
এখনি আসিবে जय, আমি যদি ফুকারি ৷
খোড়া-পিড় লুট” লবে তোমা-সবা মারি” ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
ekhani asibe saba, ami yadi phukari
ghoda-pida luti’ labe toma-saba mari’
SYNONYMS
ekhani—immediately; asibe saba—all of them will come; ami—I; yadi—if;
phu-kari—call loudly; ghoda-pida—horses and their saddles; luti’—plundering;
labe —will take; toma-saba mari’—after killing all of you.
TRANSLATION
“If 1 call loudly, they will come immediately to kill you and plunder your
horses and saddles.
TEXT 175
গৌড়িয়া-“বাটপাড়' নহে, पूनि - “वान |
তীর্থবাসী লুঠ”, আর চাহ” মারিবার ॥ ১৭৫ ॥
gaudiya——‘batapada’ nahe, tumi— ‘batapada’
tirtha-vasi lutha’, ara caha’ maribara


--- Page 221 ---
218 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
gaudiya—the Bengalis; batapada nahe—are not rogues; tumi—you;
batapada—rogues; tirtha-vasi—persons visiting places of pilgrimage; lutha’—you
plunder; dra—and; caha’—you want; maribara—to kill.
TRANSLATION
“The Bengali pilgrims are not rogues. You are rogues, for you want to kill
the pilgrims and plunder them.”
TEXT 176
শুনিয়া পাঠান মনে সঙ্ধোচ হইল |
হেনকালে মহাপ্রভু “চৈতন্য” পাইল ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
Suniya pathana mane sankoca ha-ila
hena-kale mahaprabhu ‘caitanya’ paila
SYNONYMS
Suniya—hearing; pathana—the Mohammedan soldiers; mane—in the mind;
sankoca ha-ila—there was a little hesitation; hena-kale—at this time;
mahaprabhu—5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; caitanya paila—came to his senses.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this challenge, the Pathana soldiers became hesitant. Then
suddenly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regained consciousness.
TEXT 177
कां করিয়। উঠে, বলে “হরি” “হরি”!
প্রেমাবেশে নৃত্য করে BRIE করি” ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
hunkara kariya uthe, bale ‘hari’ ‘hari’
premavese nrtya kare ardhva-bahu kari’
SYNONYMS
hun-kara kariya—resounded very loudly; uthe—stands up; bale hari hari—
chants Hari, Hari; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; nrtya kare—dances; ardhva-
bahu kari’—raising his arms upward.


--- Page 222 ---
Text 179] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 219
TRANSLATION
Coming to His senses, the Lord very loudly began chanting the holy name,
‘Hari! Hari!” The Lord raised His arms upward and began to dance in ecstatic
love.
TEXT 178
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভু যবে করেন চিৎকার |
ম্লেচ্ছের হৃদয়ে যেন লাগে শেলধার ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
premavese prabhu yabe karena citkara
mlecchera hrdaye yena lage seladhara
SYNONYMS
prema-avese—in ecstatic love; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yabe —
when; karena citkara—loudly shouts; mlecchera hrdaye—in the hearts of the
Mohammedan soldiers; yena—as if; lage —strikes; sela-dhara—a thunderbolt.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord shouted very loudly in ecstatic love, it appeared to the
Mohammedan soldiers that their hearts were struck by thunderbolts.
TEXT 179
ভয় न (अण्ड ছাড়ি” দিল চারিজন।
প্রভু न] দেখিল নিজ-গণের amet ॥ ১৭৯ ॥
bhaya pana mleccha chadi’ dila cari-jana
prabhu na dekhila nija-ganera bandhana
SYNONYMS
bhaya pana—being afraid; mleccha—the Mohammedans; chadi’ dila—
released; cari-jana—the four persons; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; na
dekhila—did not see; nija-ganera—of His personal associates; bandhana—the ar-
rest.
TRANSLATION
Seized by fear, all the Pathana soldiers immediately released the four per-
sons. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not see His personal associates ar-
rested.


--- Page 223 ---
220 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 180
ভট্টাচার্য আসি” গ্রভুরে ধরি” বসাইল |
(न्दने দেখি” মহাপ্রভুর “বাহু” হৈল ॥ ১৮০ ॥
bhattacarya asi’ prabhure dhari’ vasaila
mleccha-gana dekhi’ mahaprabhura ‘bahya’ haila
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Bhattacarya; asi‘—immediately coming near; prabhure—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dhari’—taking; vasaila—made to sit; mleccha-gana
dekhi’—seeing the Mohammedan soldiers; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bahya—external consciousness; haila—there was.
TRANSLATION
At that time, Balabhadra Bhattacarya went to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
made Him sit down. Seeing the Mohammedan soldiers, the Lord regained His
normal senses.
TEXT 181
ম্লেচ্ছগণ NF প্রভুর বন্দিল চরণ ।
প্রভু-আগে কহে, - এই $F চারিজন ॥ ১৮১ ॥
mleccha-gana asi’ prabhura vandila carana
prabhu-age kahe,—ei thak cari-jana
SYNONYMS
mleccha-gana—the *4ohammedan soldiers; asi’—after coming there;
prabhura—of 577 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vandila carana—worshiped the lotus
feet; prabhu-age kahe —said before the Lord; ei thak cari-jana—these four per-
sons are rogues.
TRANSLATION
All the Mohammedan soldiers then came before the Lord, worshiped His
lotus feet and said, ‘Here are four rogues.
TEXT 182
এই চারি মিলি” তোমায় ধুতুর| খাওয়াঞা।
তোমার ধন লৈল তোমায় পাগল করিয়। ॥ ১৮২ ॥


--- Page 224 ---
Text 184] The Lord’s Visit to $ri Vrndavana 221
ei cari mili’ tomaya dhutura khaoyana
tomara dhana laila tomaya pagala kariya
SYNONYMS
ei cari mili’—four rogues together; tomaya—You; dhutura khaoyana—making
to drink poison; tomara—Your; dhana—wealth; laila—took away; tomaya—You;
pagala—intoxicated; kariya—making.
TRANSLATION
‘These rogues have made You take dhutura. Having made You mad, they
have taken all Your possessions.”
TEXT 183
প্রভু কহেন, -_ঠক্‌ নহে, মোর “সঙ্গী” ऊन |
ভিক্ষুক সন্ন্যাসী, মোর ना। < কিছু ধন ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
prabhu kahena,—thak nahe, mora ‘sangi’ jana
bhiksuka sannyasi, mora nahi kichu dhana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; thak nahe—they are not
rogues; mora sangi jana—My associates; bhiksuka—beggar; sannyasi—sannyasi;
mora—My; nahi—are not; kichu—any; dhana—riches.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “These are not rogues. They are My associ-
ates. Being a sannyasi beggar, | do not possess anything.
TEXT 184
মৃগী-ব্যাধিতে আমি কভু হই অচেতন |
এই চারি wal করি” করেন পালন ॥ ১৮৪ ॥
mrgi-vyadhite ami kabhu ha-i acetana
ei cari daya kari’ karena palana
SYNONYMS
mrgi-vyadhite—due to epilepsy; ami—I; kabhu—sometimes; ha-i—become;
acetana—unconscious; ei cari—these four men; daya kari’—being merciful;
karena palana—maintain Me.


--- Page 225 ---
222 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
‘Due to epilepsy, | sometimes fall unconscious. Out of their mercy, these
four men maintain Me.”
TEXT 185
সেই ERIC এক পরম গম্ভীর |
কাল বস্ত্র পরে সেই,- লোকে কহে “পীর” ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
sei mleccha-madhye eka parama gambhira
kala vastra pare sei, —Iloke kahe ‘pira’
SYNONYMS
sei mleccha-madhye—among those Mohammedans; eka—one; parama
gambhira—very grave; kala vastra—black garments; pare sei—he wears; loke—
people; kahe—call; pira—a saintly person.
TRANSLATION
Among the Mohammedans was a grave person who was wearing a black
dress. People called him a saintly person.
TEXT 186
চিত্ত আর্দ্র হৈল তার গ্রভুরে দেখিয়া ।
“নির্বিশেষ-ত্রন্ম” স্থাপে স্বশাঙ্ত্র উঠাঞা! ॥ ১৮৬ |
citta ardra haila tanra prabhure dekhiya
‘nirvisesa-brahma’ sthape svasastra uthana
SYNONYMS
citta—heart; ardra—softened; haila—became; tarira—his; prabhure dekhiya—
seeing Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nirvisesa-brahma—impersonal Brahman;
sthape —wanted to establish; sva-sastra uthaiia—raising his scripture.
TRANSLATION
The heart of that saintly person softened upon seeing Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He wanted to talk to Him and establish impersonal Brahman on
the basis of his own scripture, the Koran.
TEXT 187
*“অদ্বৈত-ব্রহ্মবাদ” সেই করিল चनैन |
তার শাস্তযুক্তেয তারে AG. fa JECT ॥ ১৮৭ ॥


--- Page 226 ---
Text 189] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 223
‘advaita-brahma-vada’ sei karila sthapana
tara sastra-yuktye tare prabhu kaila khandana
SYNONYMS
advaita-brahma-vada—the impersonal Brahman conception; sei—that saintly
person; karila sthapana—established; tara sastra-yuktye—on the logic of his scrip-
ture; tare—unto him; prabhu—SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu; kaila—did; khandana—
refutation.
TRANSLATION
When that person established the impersonal Brahman conception of the
Absolute Truth on the basis of the Koran, $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu refuted his
argument.
TEXT 188
যেই যেই কহিল, প্রভু जकनि খণ্ডিল ।
উত্তর ন। আইসে মুখে, মহাস্তজ্ধ হৈল ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
yei yei kahila, prabhu sakali khandila
uttara na aise mukhe, maha-stabdha haila
SYNONYMS
yei yei kahila—whatever he spoke; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sakali
khandila—refuted everything; uttara—answer; na aise—could not come;
mukhe —in his mouth; maha-stabdha haila—he became greatly stunned.
TRANSLATION
Whatever arguments he put forward, the Lord refuted them all. Finally the
person became stunned and could not speak.
TEXT 189
প্রভু कटर, (गात्र मे| छ স্থাপে “নির্বিশেষে” |
ङ्‌] খণ্ডি' 'সবিশেষ” স্থাপিয়।ছে শেষে ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
prabhu (८2/06, —tomara sastra sthape ‘nirvisese’
taha khandi’ ‘savisesa’ sthapiyache sese
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued to speak; tomara sastra—
your scripture (the Koran); sthape—establishes; nirvisese —impersonalism; taha


--- Page 227 ---
224 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
khandi’—refuting that; sa-visesa—personal God; sthapiyache —established;
ese —at the end.
TRANSLATION
§ Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “The Koran has certainly established imper-
sonalism, but at the end it refutes that impersonalism and establishes the per-
sonal God.
TEXT 190
তোমার শাস্ত্রে কহে শেষে “একই ঈশ্বর” |
TRAE ভেঁহো-_শ্যাম-কলেবর ॥ ১৯০ ॥
tomara Sastre kahe $€ 5€ ‘eka-i isvara’
‘sarvaisvarya-parna tennho— syama-kalevara
SYNONYMS
tomdra sastre—in your scripture; kahe—it says; Sese—at the end; eka-i
isvara—there is one God; sarva-aisvarya-parna—full of all opulence; tennho—He;
Syama-kalevara—bodily complexion is blackish.
TRANSLATION
“The Koran accepts the fact that ultimately there is only one God. He is full
of opulence, and His bodily complexion is blackish.
PURPORT
The revealed scripture of the Mohammedans is the Koran. There is one
Mohammedan sampradaya known as the Sufis. The Sufis accept impersonalism,
believing in the oneness of the living entity with the Absolute Truth. Their
supreme slogan is “analahak.” The Sufi sampradaya was certainly derived from
Sankaracarya’s impersonalists.
TEXT 191
সচ্চিদানন্দ-দেহ, পূর্ণত্রদ্ম-স্বরূপ |
“সর্বাত্ম”, “সর্ব, নিত্য সর্বাদি-স্বূপ ॥ ১৯১ ॥
sac-cid-ananda-deha, parpa-brahma-svarapa
‘sarvatma’, ‘sarvajia’, nitya sarvadi-svarapa


--- Page 228 ---
Text 193] The Lord's Visit to $ri Vrndavana 225
SYNONYMS
sat-cit-ananda-deha—transcendental, blissful, spiritual body; parpa-brahma-
svarapa—the identification of the Absolute Truth; sarva-atma—all-pervading; sar-
va-jfia—omniscient; nitya—eternal; sarva-adi—the origin of everything; sva-
rapa—the real form of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
‘‘According to the Koran, the Lord has a supreme, blissful, transcendental
body. He is the Absolute Truth, the all-pervading, omniscient and eternal
being. He is the origin of everything.
TEXT 192
wR, স্থিতি, প্রলয় ङ्‌] হৈতে হয় |
স্থূল-সূন্লম-জগতের CSTR সমাশ্রয় ॥ ১৯২ ॥
srsti, 50910, pralaya tanha haite haya
sthala-saksma-jagatera tenho samasraya
SYNONYMS
srsti—creation;  sthiti—maintenance;  pralaya—dissolution;  tanha—Him;
haite—from;  haya—becomes possible; sthala—gross; saksma—subtle;
jagatera—of the cosmic manifestation; tenho—He; samasraya—the only shelter.
TRANSLATION
‘Creation, maintenance and dissolution come from Him. He is the original
shelter of all gross and subtle cosmic manifestations.
TEXT 193
“সর্ব-শ্রেষ্ঠ, সর্বারাধ্য, কারণের কারণ |
তার ভক্তেযে হয় জীবের সংসার-তারণ ॥১৯৩ ॥
‘sarva-srestha, sarvaradhya, karanera karana
tanra bhaktye haya jivera sarsara-tarana
SYNONYMS
sarva-srestha—the Supreme Truth; sarva-aradhya—worshipable by everyone;
karanera karana—the cause of all causes; tarira—His; bhaktye —by devotional ser-
vice; haya—becomes; jivera—of the living entity; sarsara-tarana—deliverance
from material existence.


--- Page 229 ---
226 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
“The Lord is the Supreme Truth worshipable by everyone. He is the cause
of all causes. By engaging in His devotional service, the living entity is
relieved from material existence.
TEXT 194
তাঁর সেবা বিনা জীবের না যায় Tra’ |
ভাহার চরণে প্রীতি পুরুষার্থ-পার” ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
tanra 563 vina jivera na yaya ‘samsara’
tanhara carane priti— ‘purusartha-sara’
SYNONYMS
tanra—His; seva—service; vind—without; jivera—of the conditioned soul;
na—not; yaya—finishes; sarnsara—material bondage; tanhara—His; carane—at
the lotus feet; priti—love; purusartha-sara—the ultimate goal of life.
TRANSLATION
‘No conditioned soul can get out of material bondage without serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Love at His lotus feet is the ultimate goal of
life.
PURPORT
According to the Mohammedan scripture, without evadat, offering prayers at a
mosque or elsewhere five times daily (namaja), one cannot be successful in life. ग
Caitanya Mahaprabhu pointed out that in the revealed scripture of the Moham-
medans, love of Godhead is the ultimate goal. Karma-yoga and jAana-yoga are
certainly described in the Koran, but ultimately the Koran states that the ultimate
goal is the offering of prayers to the Supreme Person (evadat).
TEXT 195
(मोक्रोङि আনন্দ যার নহে এক Fol’ |
পূর্গানন্দ-প্রাপ্তি তার চরণ-সেবন ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
moksadi ananda yara nahe eka ‘kana’
parnananda-prapti tanra carana-sevana
SYNONYMS
moksa-adi—liberation and so on; ananda—transcendental bliss; yara—whose;
nahe —not; eka—even; kana—a fragment; parna-ananda-prapti —attainment of
completely blissful life; {4012 carana-sevana —service to His lotus feet.


--- Page 230 ---
Text 197] The Lord’s Visit to $ri Vendavana 227
TRANSLATION
“The happiness of liberation, whereby one merges into the Lord’s exis-
tence, cannot even be compared to a fragment of the transcendental bliss ob-
tained by service unto the Lord's iotus feet.
TEXT 196
“কর্ম, ‘GI, “যোগ” আগে করিয়া স্থাপন ।
जव Af’ স্থাপে ঈশ্বর” তাহার সেবন” ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
‘karma’, 78/22; ‘yoga’ age kariya sthapana
saba khandi’ sthape ‘i$vara’, ‘tanhara sevana’
SYNONYMS
karma —fruitive activities; jAana—speculative knowledge; yoga —mystic
power; age—in the beginning; kariya sthapana—establishing; saba khandi’—
refuting everything; sthape—establishes; isvara—the Personality of Godhead;
tanhara sevana—His service.
TRANSLATION
“‘In the Koran there are descriptions of fruitive activity, speculative knowl-
edge, mystic power and union with the Supreme, but ultimately everything is
refuted as the Lord's personal feature and His devotional service is
established.
TEXT 197
তোমার পণ্ডিত-সবার নাহি शच-उ्डान ।
পূুর্বাপর-বিধি-মধ্যে em — বলবান্‌ ॥ ১৯৭ ॥
tomara pandita-sabara nahi $3573-1/83773
parvapara-vidhi-madhye ‘para’— balavan
SYNONYMS
tomara pandita-sabara—of the learned scholars of your community; nahi—
there is not; $astra-jiiana—knowledge of revealed scripture; pirva-apara—former
and latter; vidhi—regulative principles; madhye—among; para—the conclusion
at the end; balavan—most powerful.
TRANSLATION
“The scholars of the Koran are not very advanced in knowledge. Although
there are many methods prescribed, they do not know that the ultimate con-
clusion should be considered the most powerful.


--- Page 231 ---
228 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 198
নিজ-শান্ত দেখি” তুমি বিচার कत्निञ्न। ।
কি লিখিয়াছে শেষে কহ নির্ণয় করিয়। ॥ ১৯৮ ॥
nija-sastra dekhi’ tumi vicara kariya
ki likhiyache sese kaha nirnaya kariya
SYNONYMS
nija-sastra—your own scripture; dekhi’—seeing; tumi—you; vicara kariya—
deliberating; ki likhiyache —what was written; sese —at the end; kaha—say; nir-
naya kariya—ascertaining.
TRANSLATION
‘Seeing your own Koran and deliberating over what is written there, what is
your conclusion?’’
TEXT 199
(अन्ड কহে, যেই কহ, সেই SP হয়।
শাঙ্তে লিখিয়াছে, কেহ লইতে न পারয় ॥ >>> ॥
mleccha kahe, —yei kaha, sei ‘satya’ haya
sastre likhiyache, keha la-ite na paraya
SYNONYMS
mleccha kahe —the Mohammedan replied; yei kaha—what You say; sei—that;
satya haya—is true; sastre —in the Koran; likhiyache —it has been written; keha—
anyone; la-ite—to take; na paraya—is not able.
TRANSLATION
The saintly Mohammedan replied, ‘All that You have said is true. This has
certainly been written in the Koran, but our scholars can neither understand
nor accept it.
TEXT 200
নিবিশেষ-গোসাঞ্ঞচি লঞ। করেন ব্যাখ্যান।
“সাকার-গোসাঞ্ি'- সেব্য, কারে নাহি च्छान॥२००
‘nirvisesa-gosani’ lana karena vyakhyana
‘sakara-gosani’——sevya, karo nahi jiana


--- Page 232 ---
Text 202] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 229
SYNONYMS
nirvisesa-gosani—the Supreme Personality of Godhead as impersonal; land—
taking; karena vyakhyana—they describe; sa-akara-gosani—the personal feature
of the Lord; sevya—worshipable; karo nahi jidna—no one has this knowledge.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Usually they describe the Lord’s impersonal aspect, but they hardly know
that the Lord’s personal feature is worshipable. They are undoubtedly lacking
this knowledge.
PURPORT
The saintly Mohammedan admitted that those who were supposedly conver-
sant in the teachings of the Koran could not ultimately understand the essence of
the Koran. Because of this, they accepted only the Lord's impersonal feature.
Cenerally they recite and explain this portion only. Although the transcendental
body of the Lord is worshipable, most of them are unaware of this.
TEXT 201
RS 'গোসাঞ্চি' তুমি -. সাক্ষাৎ FU |
নোরে কৃপা কর, মুঞে-_ অযোগ্য পামর ॥ ২০১ ॥
seita ‘gosani’ tumi——saksat ‘isvara’
more krpa kara, munii——ayogya pamara
SYNONYMS
seita—that; gosani—Personality of Godhead; tumi—You; saksat—directly;
i$vara—the Personality of Godhead; more —upon me; krpa kara—kindly be mer-
ciful; muni—I; ayogya pamara—very fallen and unfit.
TRANSLATION
“Since You are that very same Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself,
please be merciful upon me. | am fallen and unfit.
TEXT 202
অলেক দেখিনু gfe ম্লেচ্ছ-শান্ত্র হৈতে।
“সাধ্য-সাধন-বশু” নারি নির্ধারিতে ॥ ২০২ ॥
aneka dekhinu muni mleccha-sastra haite
‘sadhya-sadhana-vastu’ nari nirdharite


--- Page 233 ---
230 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
aneka—many; dekhinu—have studied; (1471-1; mleccha-sastra—Moham-
medan scripture; haite —from; sadhya—the ultimate goal of life; sadhana—how
to approach it; vastu—matter; nari nirdharite—!| cannot decide conclusively.
TRANSLATION
‘I have studied the Mohammedan scripture very extensively, but from it |
cannot conclusively decide what the ultimate goal of life is or how I can ap-
proach it.
TEXT 203
তোমা দেখি जिच মোর বলে “কুষ্ণনাম”।
“আমি--বড় জ্ঞানী?- এই গেল আভিমান ॥ ২০৩ ॥
toma dekhi’ jihva mora bale ‘krspa-nama’
‘ami——bada jAani’—ei gela abhimana
SYNONYMS
toma dekhi’—by seeing You; jihva—tongue; mora—my; bale krspa-nama—
chants the Hare Krsna mantra; ami—I; bada jAani—very learned scholar; ei—this;
gela abhimana—false prestige has gone away.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Now that I have seen You, my tongue is chanting the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. The false prestige I felt from being a learned scholar is now gone.”
TEXT 204
কৃপা করি” বল মোরে “সাধ্য-সাধন্ে ।
এত বলি” পড়ে মহাপ্রভুর চরণে ॥ ২০৪ ॥
10003 kari’ bala more ‘sadhya-sadhane’
eta bali’ pade mahaprabhura carane
SYNONYMS
krpa kari’—by Your causeless mercy; bala—speak; more—to me; sadhya-
sadhane—the ultimate object of life and the process to achieve it; eta bali’—say-


--- Page 234 ---
Text 206] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 231
ing this; pade—falls down; mahaprabhura carape—at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Saying this, the saintly Mohammedan fell at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and requested Him to speak of life’s ultimate goal and the pro-
cess by which it could be obtained.
TEXT 205
প্রভু কহে, क़, কৃষ্ণনাম তুমি লইলা |
কোটি-জন্মের পাপ গেল, “পবিত্র' হইল! ॥ ২০৫ ॥
prabhu kahe,—utha, krsna-nama tumi la-ila
koti-janmera papa gela, ‘pavitra’ ha-ila
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; utha—please get up; krsna-
nama —the holy name of Krsna; tumi—you; la-ild—have taken; koti-janmera—of
many millions of births; papa gela—your sinful reactions have gone; pavitra ha-
ili—you have become pure.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘Please get up. You have chanted the holy
name of Krsna; therefore the sinful reactions you have accrued for many
millions of lives are now gone. You are now pure.”
TEXT 206
FE কহ, ‘TW कङ्‌, देकना। উপদেশ |
সবে “কৃষ্ণ কহে, সবার হৈল প্রেমাবেশ ॥ ২০৬ ॥
‘krsna’ kaha, ‘*krspa’ kaha, —kaila upadesa
sabe ‘krsna’ kahe, sabara haila premavesa
SYNONYMS
krspa kaha —just chant “Krsna”; krspa kaha—just chant “Krsna”; kaila
upadesa—Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed; sabe —all; krsna kahe—chant the
holy name of Krsna; sabdra—of all of them; haila—there was; prema-avesa—
ecstatic love.


--- Page 235 ---
232 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then told all the Mohammedans there, ‘‘Chant the
holy name of Krsna! Chant the holy name of Krsna!” As they all began to
chant, they were overwhelmed by ecstatic love.
TEXT 207
রামদাস' বলি” প্রভু ভার কৈল নাম।
আর এক পাঠান, ভার নাম- “বিজুলী-খাঁন” ॥ ২০৭ ॥
‘ramadasa’ bali’ prabhu tanra kaila nama
ara eka pathana, tanra nama— "vijuli-kharnna’
SYNONYMS
ramadasa bali’—of the name Ramadasa; prabhu—5$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
tanra—his; kaila—made; nama—name; dara eka pathana—another Moham-
medan; tanra nama—his name; vijuli-kharna—Vijuli Khan.
TRANSLATION
In this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu indirectly initiated the saintly Moham-
medan by advising him to chant the holy name of Krsna. The Mohammedan’s
name was changed to Ramadasa. There was also another Pathana Moslem
present whose name was Vijuli Khan.
PURPORT
After being initiated, the devotees in the Krsna consciousness movement
change their names. Whenever a person in the Western world becomes in-
terested in this Krsna consciousness movement, he is initiated by this process. In
India we are falsely accused of converting mlecchas and yavanas into the Hindu
religion. In India there are many Mayavadi sannyasis known as jagad-guru, al-
though they have hardly visited the whole world. Some are not even sufficiently
educated, yet they make accusations against our movement and accuse us of
destroying the principles of the Hindu religion by accepting Mohammedans and
yavanas as Vaisnavas. Such people are simply envious. We are not spoiling the
Hindu system of religion but are simply following in the footsteps of Sif Caitanya
Mahaprabhu by traveling all over the world and accepting those who are in-
terested in understanding Krsna as Krsnadasa or Ramadasa. By the process of a
bona fide initiation, their names are changed.


--- Page 236 ---
Text 210] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 233
TEXT 208
खन्न বয়স छर, রাজার কুমার ।
“রামদাস” আদি পাঠান-_ চাকর কাহার ॥ ২০৮ ॥
alpa vayasa tanra, rajara kumara
‘ramadasa’ adi pathana—-cakara tanhara
SYNONYMS
alpa vayasa tanra—his age is very young; rajara kumara—son of the king;
ramadasa—Ramadasa; adi—heading the list; pathana—the Mohammedans;
cakara tanhara—servants of him.
TRANSLATION
Vijuli Khan was very young, and he was the son of the king. All the other
Mohammedans, Pathanas, headed by Ramadasa, were his servants.
TEXT 209
‘FW বলি” পড়ে সেই মহাপ্রভুর পায়।
প্রভু sacl দিল তাহার মাথায় ॥ ২০৯ ॥
‘krsna’ bali’ pade sei mahaprabhura paya
prabhu sri-carana dila tanhara mathaya
SYNONYMS
krsna bali’—chanting the holy name of Krsna; pade—falls down; sei —that Vi-
juli Khan; mahaprabhura paya—at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; $ri-carana dila—placed His foot; tanhara
mathaya—on his head.
TRANSLATION
Vijuli Khan also fell down at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and
the Lord placed His foot on his head.
TEXT 210
তা-সবারে Fol করি” প্রভু ত” চলিলা।
সেইত পাঠান जव CARN হইল ॥ ২১০ ॥


--- Page 237 ---
234 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
tan-sabdre krpa kari’ prabhu ta’ calila
seita pathana saba ‘vairagi’ ha-ila
SYNONYMS
tan-sabare —to all of them; krpa kari’—bestowing mercy; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; ta’—indeed; calili—departed; seita—they; pathana—the Moham-
medans of the Pathana community; saba—all; vairagi ha-ili—became mendi-
cants.
TRANSLATION
Bestowing His mercy upon them in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left.
All the Pathana Mohammedans then became mendicants.
TEXT 211
পাঠান-বৈষ্ণব বলি” হৈল তার ifs ।
সর্বত্র গাহিয়া বুলে মহাপ্রভুর কীতি ॥ ২১১ ॥
pathana-vaispava bali’ haila tanra khyati
sarvatra gahiya bule mahaprabhura kirti
SYNONYMS
pathana-vaispava bali’—known 85 Pathana Vaisnavas; haila—became; tanra—
their; khyati—reputation; sarvatra—everywhere; gahiya bule—travel while
chanting; mahaprabhura—of 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kirti—glorious activities.
TRANSLATION
Later these very Pathanas became celebrated as the Pathana Vaisnavas. They
toured all over the country and chanted the glorious activities of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 212
সেই বিজুলী-খান হৈল “মহাভ্ডাগবত”।
ALEC হৈল তার পরম-মহত্ব ॥ ২১২ ॥
sei vijuli-khanna haila ‘maha-bhagavata’
sarva-tirthe haila tanra parama-mahattva
SYNONYMS
sei—that; vijuli-khanna—Vijuli Khan; haila—became; maha-bhagavata—most
advanced devotee; sarva-tirthe—in all places of pilgrimage; haila—became;
tanra—his; parama—great; mahattva—importance.


--- Page 238 ---
Text 214] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 235
TRANSLATION
Vijuli Khan became a greatly advanced devotee, and his importance was
celebrated at every holy place of pilgrimage.
TEXT 213
এছে লীল। করে প্রভু ল্রীরুষ্ণচৈতন্।
পশ্চিমে' আসিয়া কৈল যবনাদি ধন্য ॥ ২১৩ ॥
aiche lila kare prabhu $ri-krspa-caitanya
‘pascime’ asiya kaila yavanadi dhanya
SYNONYMS
aiche—in that way; lila—pastimes; kare —performed; prabhu—the Lord; sri-
krspa-caitanya—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pascime—to the western part of In-
dia; asiya—coming; kaila—made; yavana-adi—meat-eaters and others;
dhanya—fortunate.
TRANSLATION
In this way Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His pastimes. Coming
to the western part of India, He bestowed good fortune upon the yavanas and
mlecchas.
PURPORT
The word yavana means “meat-eater.” Anyone from a meat-eating community
is called a yavana. One who does not strictly observe the Vedic regulative prin-
ciples is called a mleccha. These words do not refer to any particular man. Even if a
person is born in a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or sadra family, he is a mleccha or
yavanaif he does not strictly follow the regulative principles or if he eats meat.
TEXT 214
সোরোক্ষেত্রে আসি?” अद्‌ কৈল। AMI |
গঙগাতীর-পথে टेकन्‌। প্রয়াগে প্রয়াণ ॥ ২১৪ ॥
soro-ksetre asi’ prabhu kaila ganga-snana
ganga-tira-pathe kaila prayage prayana
SYNONYMS
soro-ksetre —to Soro-ksetra; asi’—coming; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
kaila—did; gariga-snana—bathing in the Ganges; ganga-tira-pathe —on the path
on the bank of the Ganges; kaila—did; prayage prayana—departure for Prayaga.


--- Page 239 ---
236 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu next went to a holy place of pilgrimage called
Soro-ksetra. He took His bath in the Ganges there and started for Prayaga on
the path along the banks of the Ganges.
TEXT 215
সেই face), কৃষ্ণদাসে, প্রভু বিদায় দিলা |
যোড়-হাতে দুইজন কহিতে লাগিলা ॥ ২১৫ ॥
sei vipre, krsnadase, prabhu vidaya dila
yoda-hate dui-jana kahite lagila
SYNONYMS
sei vipre—to the Sanodiya brahmana; krspadase —and the Rajaputa Krsnadasa;
prabhu—S$rt Caitanya Mahaprabhu; viddya dili—asked to go back; yoda-hate—
with folded hands; dui-jana—two persons; kahite lagila—began to say.
TRANSLATION
At Soro-ksetra, the Lord requested the Sanodiya brahmana and Rajaputa
Krsnadasa to return home, but with folded hands they began to speak as
follows.
TEXT 216
প্রয়াগ-পর্যন্ত 2 02 তোমা-সঙ্গে याव |
তোমার চরণ-সঙ্গ পুনঃ কা পাব ? ২১৬ ॥
prayaga-paryanta dunhe toma-sange yaba
tomara carana-sanga punah kahan paba?
SYNONYMS
prayaga-paryanta—up to Prayaga; dunhe —both of us; toma-sange —with You;
yaba—shall go; tomara—Your; carana-sariga—association of the lotus feet;
punah —again; kaharn—where; paba—shall we get.
TRANSLATION
They prayed, ‘‘Let us go to Prayaga with You. If we do not go, when shall we
again get the association of Your lotus feet?


--- Page 240 ---
Text 219 The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 237
TEXT 217
গ্লেচ্ছদেশ, কেছ कां] করয়ে উৎপাত |
ভট্টাচার্য_ পণ্ডিত, কহিতে না৷ জানেন वांख्‌ ॥ ২১৭ ॥
mleccha-desa, keha kahan karaye utpata
bhattacarya— pandita, kahite na janena vat
SYNONYMS
mleccha-desa—this is a country occupied by the Mohammedans; keha—any-
one; kahan—anywhere; karaye utpata—can create a disturbance; bhattacarya—
Balabhadra Bhattacarya; pandita—learned scholar; kahite —to speak; na janena—
does not know; vat—language.
TRANSLATION
‘This country is mainly occupied by Mohammedans. At any place someone
can create a disturbance, and although Your companion Balabhadra Bhat-
tacarya is a learned scholar, he does not know how to speak the local
language.’
TEXT 218
শুনি” মহাপ্রভু ঈষৎ হাসিতে नाभिना |
সেই দুইজন প্রভুর সঙ্গে চলি” আইল ॥ ২১৮ ॥
Suni’ mahaprabhu 1530 hasite lagila
sei dui-jana prabhura sange cali’ aila
SYNONYMS
$uni’—hearing; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; isat—mildly; hasite
lagila—began to smile; sei—those; dui-jana—two persons; prabhura sarge —
with 5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cali’ aila—came.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted their proposal by smiling
mildly. Thus those two persons continued to accompany Him.
TEXT 219
যেই যেই जन প্রভুর পাইল দরশন।
সেই প্রেমে মত্ত হয়, করে কৃষ্ণ-সংকীর্তন ॥ ২১৯ ॥


--- Page 241 ---
238 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
yei yei jana prabhura paila darasana
sei preme matta haya, kare krsna-sankirtana
SYNONYMS
yei yei—anyone who; jana—person; prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
paila darasana—got the sight; sei—that person; preme —with ecstatic love; matta
haya—becomes overwhelmed; kare —performs; krsna-sankirtana—chanting of
the holy name of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Whoever got to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would feel himself over-
whelmed with ecstatic love and would begin to chant the Hare Krsna mantra.
TEXT 220
তার जट TID, ভার AH खान |
এইমত “বৈষ্ণব' কৈল। সব দেশ-গ্রাম ॥ २२० ॥
tanra sange anyonye, tanra sange ana
ei-mata ‘vaisnava’ kaila saba desa-grama
SYNONYMS
tanra sange—with Him; anyonye —other; tanra sarige—and with him; ana—
another; ei-mata—in this way; vaispava—Vaisnava; kaili—made; saba—all;
desa-grama —villages and towns.
TRANSLATION
Whoever met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became a Vaisnava, and whoever
met that Vaisnava also became a Vaisnava. In this way, all the towns and
villages one after the other became Vaisnava.
TEXT 221
দক্ষিণ যাইতে বৈছে শক্তি প্রকাশিলা।
সেইমত পশ্চিম দেশ, প্রেমে ভাসাইলা ॥ ২২১ ॥
daksina ydite yaiche sakti prakasila
sei-mata pascima desa, preme bhasaila


--- Page 242 ---
Text 222] The Lord's Visit to Sri Vrndavana 239
SYNONYMS
daksina yaite—while touring in the southern part of India; yaiche—as; Sakti
prakasila—manifested His spiritual energy; sei-mata—in that way; pascima
desa—the western part of India; preme bhasaila—inundated with love of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Just as the Lord inundated South India on His tour there, He also inundated
the western part of the country with love of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to some opinions, जाव Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited Kuruksetra while
going to Prayaga from Vindavana. There is a temple of Bhadra-kali in Kuruksetra,
and near that temple there is a temple containing the Deity of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 222
এইমত চলি' প্রভু “emia আইলা |
দশ-দিল ব্রিবেণীতে মকর-স্মান কৈল। ॥ ২২২ ॥
ei-mata cali’ prabhu ‘prayaga’ aila
dasa-dina trivenite makara-snana kaila
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; cali’—walking; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
prayaga—the holy place named Prayaga; aila—reached; dasa-dina—ten days;
trivenite—at the confluence of the Rivers Ganges and Yamuna; makara-snana
kaila—bathed during the festival of Makara, or Magha-mela.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu finally arrived at Prayaga and for ten successive
days bathed in the confluence of the Rivers Yamuna and Ganges during the
festival of Makara-sankranti [Magha-melal.
PURPORT
Actually the word trivenr indicates the confluence of three rivers—namely the
Ganges, Yamuna and Sarasvati. Presently the SarasvatiRiver is not visible, but the
River Ganges and the River Yamuna merge at Allahabad.


--- Page 243 ---
240 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
TEXT 223
বৃন্দাবন-গমন, প্রভু-চরিত্র অনজ্ত |
TRE যার নাহি পান অন্ত ॥ ২২৩ ॥
vrndavana-gamana, prabhu-caritra ananta
‘sahasra-vadana’ yanra nahi 03473 anta
SYNONYMS
vrndavana-gamana—going to Vindavana; prabhu-caritra—pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ananta—unlimited; sahasra-vadana—Lord Sesa, who has
thousands of hoods; yarra—whose; nahi—does not; pa’na—get; anta—limit.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s visit to Vrndavana and His activities there are
unlimited. Even Lord Sesa, who has thousands of hoods, cannot reach the end
of His activities.
TEXT 224
তাহা কে কহিতে পারে ক্ষুদ্র জীব হুঞ। |
দিগ.-দরশন বৈন্দু' मूः সূত্র করিয়া ॥ ২২৪ ॥
taha ke kahite pare ksudra jiva hana
dig-darasana kailur muni satra kariya
SYNONYMS
taha—that; ke kahite pare—who can describe; ksudra—very little; jiva 0278 —
being a conditioned soul; dik-darasana kailurn—have simply made an indication;
17/01 --1; 5003 kariyd—in codes.
TRANSLATION
What ordinary living being can describe the pastimes of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu? I have only indicated the general direction in the form of codes.
TEXT 225
অলোকিক-লীলা প্রভুর অলোৌকিক-রীতি।
শুনিলেও ভাগ্যহীনের না হয় প্রতীতি ॥ ২২৫ ॥


--- Page 244 ---
Text 227] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 241
alaukika-lila prabhura alaukika-riti
Sunileo bhagya-hinera na haya pratiti
SYNONYMS
alaukika-lila—uncommon pastimes; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
alaukika-riti—uncommon method; sunileo—even though one hears; bhagya-
hinera—of one who is unfortunate; na haya pratiti—there is no belief.
TRANSLATION
The pastimes and methods of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are uncommon. Un-
fortunate is he who cannot believe even after hearing all these things.
TEXT 226
खाटछागाख देषडछनोन।--“खटनोकिक' कानः |
অুদ্ধা করি” শুন ইহ, “সত্য' করি” মান” ॥ ২২৬ ॥
adyopanta caitanya-lila— ‘alaukika’ jana’
sraddha kari’ Suna 103, ‘satya’ kari’ mana’
SYNONYMS
adya-upanta—from beginning to end; caitanya-lili—the pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; alaukika jana’—everyone should know as uncommon;
Sraddha kari’—with faith; Suna iha—hear this; satya kari’ mana’—accepting it as
true and correct.
TRANSLATION
From beginning to end the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are un-
common. Just hear them with faith and accept them as true and correct.
TEXT 227
যেই তর্ক করে ইহ, সেই — ILA |
আপনার মুঞ্ডে সে আপনি পাড়ে বাজ ॥ ২২৭ ॥
yei tarka kare ihan, sei— ‘mtrkha-raja’
apandra munde se apani pade vaja


--- Page 245 ---
242 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 18
SYNONYMS
yei tarka kare —one who simply argues; ihan—in this matter; sei—that person;
miarkha-raja—a great fool; apanara munde—on his own head; se—that person;
apani—himself; pade vaja—strikes with a thunderbolt.
TRANSLATION
Whoever argues about this is a great fool. He intentionally and personally
brings a thunderbolt down upon his head.
TEXT 228
চেতন্ঞ-চরিত্র এই “aren fog ।
জগৎ আনন্দে ভাসায় যার একবিদ্দু ॥ ২২৮ ॥
caitanya-caritra ei— ‘amrtera sindhu’
jagat anande bhasaya yara eka-bindu
SYNONYMS
caitanya-caritra—pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ei—these; amrtera
sindhu—ocean of nectar; jagat—the whole world; anande—with bliss;
bhasaya—inundates; yara—of which; eka-bindu—one drop.
TRANSLATION
The pastimes of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are an ocean of nectar. Even a
drop of this ocean can inundate the whole world with transcendental bliss.
TEXT 229
জীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদে যার আশ |
LOTTE ASIYS কহে কৃষ্ণনাসস ॥ ২২৯ ॥
$ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnpadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Sri Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade—at the lotus feet; yara—whose; asa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritaimrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Srila
Krsnadasa Kavirdja Gosvami.


--- Page 246 ---
Text 229] The Lord’s Visit to Sri Vrndavana 243
TRANSLATION

Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and Sri Raghunitha, always desiring
their mercy, |, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
lila, Eighteenth Chapter, describing the Lord's visit to Sri Vrndavana and His con-
version of the Mohammedan soldiers on the way to Prayaga.


--- Page 247 ---
CHAPTER 19

Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami
A summary of this chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pra-
vaha-bhasya. Meeting Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu in a village called Ramakeli, two
brothers, Ripa and Sanatana, began to devise means to get out of their govern-
ment service. Both brothers appointed some brahmanas to perform purascarana
ceremonies and chant the holy name of Krsna. Srila Ripa Gosvami deposited ten
thousand gold coins with a grocer, and the balance he brought in two boats to a
place called Bakla Candradvipa. There he divided this money among the
brahmanas, Vaisnavas and his relatives, and a portion he kept for emergency
measures and personal needs. He was informed that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was going to Vrndavana from Jagannatha Puri through the forest of Madhya Pra-
desh; therefore he sent two people to Jagannatha Puri to find out when the Lord
would leave for Vrndavana. In this way Rapa Gosvami retired, but Sanatana
Gosvami told the Nawab that he was sick and could not attend to his work. Giv-
ing this excuse, he sat home and studied Srimad-Bhagavatam with learned
brahmana scholars. The Nawab Hussain Shah first sent his personal physician to
see what the real facts were; then he personally came to see why Sanatana was
not attending to official business. Knowing that he wanted to resign his post, the
Nawab had him arrested and imprisoned. The Nawab then went off to attack
Orissa.

When 6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu started for Vindavana through the forest of
Madhya Pradesh (Jharikhanda), Rapa Gosvami left home and sent news to
Sanatana that he was leaving home with his younger brother (Anupama Mallika)
to meet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Srila Rapa Gosvami finally reached Prayaga and
met with अ Caitanya Mahaprabhu for ten successive days. During this time,
Vallabha Bhatta extended an invitation to the Lord with great respect. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu introduced Srila Ripa Cosvami to Vallabha Bhatta. After this, a
brahmana scholar named Raghupati Upadhyaya arrived and discussed Krsna con-
sciousness with the Lord. Kavirdja Gosvami then extensively describes the living
condition of ऽते Ripa and Sanatana at Vrndavana. During the ten days at Prayaga,
Srila Rupa Gosvami was instructed by the Lord, who gave him the basic principles
of the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. The Lord then sent Srila Rapa Gosvami to
Vrndavana. The Lord Himself returned to Varanasi and stayed at the home of
Candrasekhara.

245


--- Page 248 ---
246 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 1
বৃন্দাবনীয়াং রসকেলিবার্তাং
কালেন FAR নিজশক্তিমুৎকঃ |
সঞ্চার্য রূপে ব্যতনোৎ পুনঃ ज
প্রভুবিধৌ প্রাগিব cere ॥ ১ ॥
vrndavaniyar rasa-keli-vartam
kalena luptar nija-saktim utkah
sancarya rape vyatanot punah sa
prabhur vidhau prag iva loka-srstim
SYNONYMS
vrndavaniyam—related to Vrndavana; rasa-keli-vartam—talks about the
pastimes of Sri Krsna; kalena—with the course of time; luptam—lost; nija-sak-
tim—His personal potency; utkah—being eager; saficarya—infusing; rape —to
Rapa Gosvami; vyatanot—manifested; punah—again; sah—He; prabhuh ডা
Caitanya 14373013608; vidhau—unto Lord Brahma; prak iva—as formerly; loka-
srstim—the creation of this cosmic manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Before the creation of this cosmic manifestation, the Lord enlightened the
heart of Lord Brahma with the details of the creation and manifested the Vedic
knowledge. In exactly the same way, the Lord, being anxious to revive the
Vrndavana pastimes of Lord Krsna, impregnated the heart of Ripa Gosvami
with spiritual potency. By this potency, Srila Ripa Gosvami could revive the
activities of Krsna in Vrndavana, activities almost lost to memory. In this way,
He spread Krsna consciousness throughout the world.
TEXT 2
জয় জয় लदिषङच জয় निरगरनम्त |
জয়াদ্বৈতচন্দ্র জয় গৌরভক্তবৃন্দ ॥ २ ॥
jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
SYNONYMS
jaya jaya sri-caitanya—all glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; jaya nitya-
nanda—all glories to Lord Nitydnanda; jaya advaita-candra—all glories to Advaita
Prabhu; jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda—all glories to the devotees of the Lord.


--- Page 249 ---
Text 5] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 247
TRANSLATION
All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord Nityananda!
All glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to all the devotees of the Lord!
TEXT 3
क्ोक्राग-ननोखन রহে রামকেলি-গ্রামে |
প্রভুরে মিলিয়। গেলা আপন-ভবনে ॥ ७ ॥
$ri-rapa-sanatana rahe ramakeli-grame
prabhure miliya gela apana-bhavane
SYNONYMS
Sri-rapa-sanatana—the brothers named Rapa and Sanitana; rahe—stayed;
ramakeli-grame —in Ramakeli; prabhure —5ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; miliya—
meeting; gela—went back; dpana-bhavane—to their own homes.
TRANSLATION
After meeting Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in the village of Ramakeli, the
brothers Ripa and Sanatana returned to their homes.
TEXT 4
তুইভাই বিষয়-ত্যাগের উপায় স্থজিল |
বছধন দিয়া দুই ত্রাহ্মণে বরিল ॥ ৪ ॥
dui-bhai visaya-tyagera upaya stjila
bhau-dhana diya dui brahmane varila
SYNONYMS
dui-bhai—the two brothers; visaya-tyagera—of giving up material activities;
updya srjila—discovered a means; bahu-dhana—much money; diya—paying;
dui brahmane —two brahmanas; varila—appointed.
TRANSLATION
The two brothers devised a means whereby they could give up their ma-
terial activities. For this purpose, they appointed two brahmanas and paid
them > large amount of money.
TEXT 5
কৃষ্ণমন্ত্রে করাইল দুই পুরশ্চরণ।
অচিরাৎও পাইবারে চৈতন্য-চরণ ॥ ৫ ॥


--- Page 250 ---
248 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
krspa-mantre karaila dui purascarana
acirat paibare caitanya-carana
SYNONYMS
krsna-mantre—in the holy mantra Hare Krsna; karaila—caused to perform;
dui—two; purascarana—religious ceremonies; acirat—without delay; paibare—
to get; caitanya-carana—the shelter of the lotus feet of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas performed religious ceremonies and chanted the holy name
of Krsna so that the two brothers might attain shelter at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu very soon.
PURPORT
A purascarana is a ritualistic ceremony performed under the guidance of an ex-
pert spiritual master or a brahmana. It is performed for the fulfillment of certain
desires. One rises early in the morning, chants the Hare Krsna mantra, performs ar-
cana by the arati ceremony and worships the Deities. These activities are de-
scribed in the Fifteenth Chapter, verse 108.
TEXT 6
জ্রীরূপ-গোসাঞ্ি তবে নৌকাতে ভরিয়া।
আপনার ঘরে আইল বছধন লঞা ॥ ७ ॥
৩11-70/03-80537/ tabe naukate bhariya
apanara ghare aila bahu-dhana lana
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa-gosani—Sri Rapa Gosvami; tabe —thereafter; naukate bhariya—filling
boats; apanara ghare—to his own house; aila—returned; bahu-dhana lana —tak-
ing large amounts of riches.
TRANSLATION
At this time, Sri Ripa Gosvami returned home, taking with him large quan-
tities of riches loaded in boats.
TEXT 7
ব্রাহ্মণ-বৈষ্ণবে जिन। তার অর্ধ-ধনে |
९
এক চৌঠি ধন जिल কুটুচ্ব-ভরণে ॥ ৭ ॥


--- Page 251 ---
Text 9] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 249
brahmana-vaisnave dila tara ardha-dhane
eka cauthi dhana dila kutumba-bharane
SYNONYMS
brahmana-vaisnave —to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas; dila—gave as charity;
tara—of the riches; ardha-dhane —fifty percent; eka cauthi dhana—one-fourth of
the riches; dila—gave; kutumba-bharane—to satisfy the relatives.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami divided the wealth that he brought back home. He gave
fifty percent in charity to brahmanas and Vaisnavas and twenty-five percent to
his relatives.
PURPORT
This is a practical example of how one should divide his money and retire from
household life. Fifty percent of one’s money should be distributed to qualified and
pure devotees of the Lord. Twenty-five percent may be given to family members,
and twenty-five percent may be kept for personal use in case of emergency.
TEXT 8
~~ <
দণ্ডবদ্ধ লাগি” চৌঠি সঞ্চয় করিলা।
ভাল-ভাল বিপ্র-স্থানে স্থাপ্য রাখিল। ॥ ৮ ॥
danda-bandha lagi’ cauthi saficaya karila
bhala-bhala vipra-sthane sthapya rakhila
SYNONYMS
danda-bandha lagi’—in case of legal implications; cauthi—one-fourth; saficaya
karila—he collected; bhala-bhala—very respectable; vipra-sthane—in the
custody of a brahmana; sthapya rakhila—kept deposited.
TRANSLATION
He kept one-fourth of his wealth with a respectable brahmana. He kept this
for his personal safety because he was expecting some legal complications.
TEXT 9
গোৌড়ে রাখিল মুদ্রে দশ-হাজারে |
সনাতন ব্যয় করে, রাখে মুদি-ঘরে ॥ > ॥


--- Page 252 ---
250 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
gaude rakhila mudra dasa-hajare
sanatana vyaya kare, rakhe mudi-ghare
SYNONYMS
gaude—in Bengal; rakhila—kept; mudra—coins; dasa-hajare—ten thousand;
sanatana—his elder brother; vyaya kare—spent; rakhe —deposited; mudi-
ghare —in the place of a local grocer.
TRANSLATION
He deposited ten thousand coins, which were later spent by Sri Sanatana
Gosvami, in the custody of a local Bengali grocer.
TEXT 10
জীরূপ শুনিল প্রভুর मोनोलि-भेमन ।
বনপথে যাবেন প্রভু BWIA ॥ ১০ ॥
$ri-rapa sunila prabhura niladri-gamana
vana-pathe yabena prabhu sri-vrndavana
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Ripa Gosvami; sunila—heard; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; niladri-gamana—departure for Jagannatha Puri; vana-pathe —on
the path through the forest; yabena—will go; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
$ri-vrndavana—to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
Sri Rapa Gosvami heard that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had returned to
Jagannatha Puri and was preparing to go to Vrndavana through the forest.
TEXT 11
রূপ-গোসাঞ্জি नोल)एटन পাঠ।ইল দুইজন |
প্রভু যবে বৃন্দাবন করেন গমন ॥ >> ॥
rapa-gosani nilacale pathaila dui-jana
prabhu yabe vrndavana karena gamana
SYNONYMS
rapa-gosani—Rapa Cosvami; nilacale—to Jagannatha Puri; pathaila—sent;
dui-jana—two persons; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yabe—when;
vrnddvana—to Vrndavana; karena—makes; gamana—departure.


--- Page 253 ---
Text 14] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 251
TRANSLATION
Sri Rapa Gosvami sent two people to Jagannatha Puri to find out when Sri
CaitanyaMahaprabhu would depart for Vrndavana.
TEXT 12
Rx আসি” মোরে ভার দিবা সমাচার ।
निग्न] তদনুক্ূপ করিব ব্যবহার ॥ ১২ ॥
Sighra asi’ more tanra 0103 samacara
Suniya tad-anurdpa kariba vyavahara
SYNONYMS
Sighra asi’—very hastily returning; more—unto me; tanra—His; diba—give;
samdacara—news; suniya—hearing; tat-anurapa—accordingly; kariba—! shall
make; vyavahara—arrangements.
TRANSLATION
Sri Ripa Gosvami told the two men, “You are to return quickly and let me
know when He will depart. Then I shall make the proper arrangements.”
TEXT 13
এথা সনাতন-গোসাণিও ভাবে মনে মন ।
রাজা মোরে প্রীতি করে, সে-__মোর वक्षन ॥ ১৩ ॥
etha sanatana-gosani bhave mane mana
raja more priti kare, se——mora bandhana
SYNONYMS
etha—here (in Gauda-deda); sanatana-gosani—the elder brother, Sanatana
Gosvami; bhave—considers; mane mana—in the mind; raja—the Nawab;
more—me; priti kare —loves very much; se—that; mora—my; bandhana—great
obligation.
TRANSLATION
While Sanatana Gosvami was at Gauda-desa, he was thinking, ‘The Nawab
is very pleased with me. | certainly have an obligation.
TEXT 14
(कोन মতে রাজা यनि মোরে वक. হয়।
তবে অব্যাহতি হয়, Fag নিশ্চয় ॥ ১৪ ॥


--- Page 254 ---
252 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
kona mate raja yadi more kruddha haya
tabe avyahati haya, karilun niscaya
SYNONYMS
kona mate —somehow or other; raja—the Nawab; yadi—if; more —upon me;
kruddha haya—becomes angry; tabe—then; avyahati—escape; haya—there is;
karilun niscaya—I have decided.
TRANSLATION
‘Somehow or other, if the Nawab becomes angry with me, | shall be greatly
relieved. That is my conclusion.”
TEXT 15
অস্বাস্থ্যের ছদ্ম করি' রহে মিজ-ঘরে।
রাজকার্য ছাড়িলা, না যায় রাজদ্বারে ॥ ১৫ ॥
asvasthyera chadma kari’ rahe nija-ghare
raja-karya chadila, na yaya raja-dvare
SYNONYMS
asvasthyera—of not being well; chadma—pretext; kari’—making; rahe —
remains; nija-ghare—at home; raja-karya—government service; chadila—relin-
quished; na yaya—did not go; raja-dvare—to the court of the Nawab.
TRANSLATION
On the pretext of bad health, Sanatana Gosvami remained home. Thus he
gave up government service and did not go to the royal court.
TEXT 16
লোভী কায়স্থগণ রাজকার্য করে।
আপনে স্বগৃহে করে HEA বিচারে ॥ ১৬ ॥
lobhi kayastha-gana raja-karya kare
apane svagrhe kare sastrera vicare
SYNONYMS
lobhi—greedy; kayastha-gana—persons engaged in secretarial and clerical
work; raja-karya kare —executed the government service; apane—personally;
sva-grhe—at home; kare —did; sastrera vicare —discussion of the revealed scrip-
tures.


--- Page 255 ---
Text 17] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 253
TRANSLATION

The greedy masters of his clerical and secretarial staff performed the
government duties while Sanatana personally remained home and discussed
revealed scriptures.

PURPORT

Sanatana Gosvami was the minister in charge of the government secretariat,
and his assistants —the undersecretaries and clerks —all belonged to the kayastha
community. Formerly the kayasthas belonged to the clerical and secretarial staff of
the government, and later if one served in such a post, he was called a kayastha.
Eventually if a person could not identify himself as a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or
$tdra, he used to intoduce himself as a kayastha to get a wealthy and honorable
position. In Bengal it is said that if one cannot give the identity of his caste, he calls
himself a kayastha. On the whole, the kayastha community is a mixture of all
castes, and it especially includes those engaged in clerical or secretarial work. Ma-
terially such people are always busy occupying responsible government posts.

When Sanatana Gosvami was relaxing and feeling inclined to retire from
government service, many kayasthas on his secretarial staff were very eager to oc-
cupy his post. In this regard, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura states that when Sanatana
Gosvami was a government minister and the kdyasthas who assisted him saw that
he was reluctant to continue, they became very expert in their duties. Sanatana
Gosvami was a brahmana belonging to the Sarasvata brahmana community. It is
said that when he resigned, an underworker named Purandara Khan, who was a
kayastha, occupied his post.

TEXT 17
ভট্টাচার্য পণ্ডিত বিশ ত্রিশ लयन |
ভাগবত বিচার করেন সভাতে afami ॥ ১৭ ॥
bhattacarya pandita bisa trisa lana
bhagavata vicara karena sabhate vasiya
SYNONYMS

bhattacarya pandita—learned scholars known as bhattacaryas; bisa trisa—
twenty or thirty; lana—taking with him; bhagavata vicara—discussion of Srimad-
Bhagavatam; karena—does; sabhate vasiya—sitting in an assembly.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sanatana Gosvami used to discuss Srimad-Bhagavatam in an assembly of

twenty or thirty learned brahmana scholars.


--- Page 256 ---
254 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives the following commentary on the
words bhagavata vicara. As confirmed in the Mundaka Upanisad (1.1.4,5), there
are two kinds of educational systems:
dve vidye veditavya iti, ha sma yad brahma-vido vadanti—para caivapara ca.
tatrapara rg-vedo yajur-vedah sama-vedo ‘tharva-vedah siksa kalpo vyakaranarn
niruktarh chando jyotisam iti. atha para yaya tad-aksaram adhigamyate.
“There are two kinds of educational systems. One deals with transcendental
knowledge [para vidyal and the other with material knowledge lapara vidyal. All
the Vedas—Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda and their corollaries
known as siksa, kalpa, vyakarana, nirukta, chanda and jyotisa—belong to the in-
ferior system of material knowledge lapara vidyal. By para vidya, one can under-
stand the aksara, Brahman or the Absolute Truth.” As far as Vedic literature is con-
cerned, Vedanta-satra is accepted as the para vidya. Srimad-Bhagavatam is an ex-
planation of that para vidya. Those who aspire for liberation (mukti or moksa) and
introduce themselves as vaidantika are also equal to those groups aspiring to im-
prove religion (dharma), economic development (artha) and sense gratification
(kama). Dharma, artha, kama and moksa are called catur-varga. They are all within
the system of inferior material knowledge. Any literature giving information about
the spiritual world, spiritual life, spiritual identity and the spirit soul is called para
vidya. Srimad-Bhagavatam does not have anything to do with the materialistic
way of life; it gives transcendental information to educate people in the superior
system of para vidya. 53173808173 Gosvami was engaged in discussing the
bhagavata-vidya, which means he discussed transcendental superior knowledge.
Those who are karmis, janis or yogis are not actually fit to discuss Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Only Vaisnavas or pure devotees are fit to discuss that literature. As
stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam itself (12.13.18):
srimad-bhagavatari puranam amalarm yad vaisnavanari priyam
yasmin paramahamsyam ekam amalarir jianan (22127 giyate
yatra jiana-viraga-bhakti-sahitarn naiskarmyam aviskrtari
tac chrnvan supathan vicarana-paro bhaktya vimucyen narah
Although Srimad-Bhagavatam is counted among the Puranas, it is called the spot-
less Purana. Because it does not discuss anything material, it is liked by transcen-
dental Vaisnava devotees. The subject matter found in Srimad-Bhagavatam is
meant for paramaharnas. As it is said: paramo-nirmatsaranam. A paramaharsa is
one who does not live in the material world and who does not envy others. In
Srimad-Bhagavatam, devotional service is discussed to arouse the living entity to
the transcendental position of jiiana (knowledge) and vairagya (renunciation). As
stated in $rimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.12):


--- Page 257 ---
Text 18] The Lord Instructs Srila Riipa Gosvami 255
tac chraddadhanah munayo
jAdna-vairagya-yuktaya
pasyanty atmani catmanarm
bhaktya sruta-grhitaya
“That Absolute Truth is realized by the seriously inquisitive student or sage who is
well equipped with knowledge and who has become detached by rendering
devotional service and hearing the Vedanta-sruti.”

This is not sentiment. Knowledge and renunciation can be obtained through
devotional service (bhaktya sruta-grhitaya), that is, by arousing one’s dormant
devotional consciousness, Krsna consciousness. When Krsna consciousness is
aroused, it relieves one from fruitive activity, activity for economic improvement
and material enjoyment. This relief is technically called naiskarma, and when one
is relieved, he is no longer interested in working hard for sense gratification.
Srimad-Bhagavatam is Srila Vyasadeva’s last mature contribution, and one should
read and hear it in an assembly of realized souls while engaging in devotional ser-
vice. At such a time one can be liberated from all material bondage. This was the
course taken by Sanatana Gosvami, who retired from government service to
study Srimad-Bhagavatam with learned scholars.

TEXT 18
আর দিন গৌড়েশ্বর, সঙ্গে একজন |
আচনম্বিতে গোসাঞি-সভাতে কৈল আগমন ॥ ১৮ ॥
ara dina gaudesvara, sange eka-jana
acambite gosani-sabhate kaila agamana
SYNONYMS

ara dina—one day; gaudesvara—the Nawab of Bengal; sarige—with; eka-
jana—one other person; acambite—suddenly; gosani-sabhate—in the assembly
of Sanatana Gosvami; kaila agamana—came.

TRANSLATION

While Sanatana Gosvami was studying Srimad-Bhagavatam in the assembly
of learned braihmanas, one day the Nawab of Bengal and another person sud-
denly appeared.

PURPORT

The full name of the Nawab of Bengal (Hussain Shah) was Alauddina Saiyada
Husena Saha Seripha Makka, and he ruled Bengal for twenty-three years, from
1420 to 1443 Sakabda Era. Sanatana Gosvami was studying Srimad-Bhagavatam
with the scholars in the year 1424.


--- Page 258 ---
256 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 19
পাছসাহ দেখিয়। সবে wees छिन) |
সন্তমে আসন দিয়া রাজারে বসাইল। ॥ ১৯ ॥
patsaha dekhiya sabe sambhrame uthila
sambhrame 35373 diya rajare vasaila
SYNONYMS

patsaha dekhiya—seeing the Nawab; sabe —all of them; sambhrame —in great
respect; uthila—stood up; sambhrame —with great respect; dsana diya—giving a
sitting place; rajare—the King; vasaili—made to sit.

TRANSLATION

As soon as all the brahmanas and Sanatana Gosvami saw the Nawab appear,

they all stood up and respectfully gave him a sitting place to honor him.
PURPORT

Although Nawab Hussain Shah was a mleccha-yavana, he was nonetheless the
governor of the country, and the learned scholars and Sanatana Gosvami offered
him all the respect due a king or a governor. When a person occupies an exalted
executive post, one should consider that he has acquired the grace of the Lord. In
Bhagavad-gita it is said:

yad yad vibhatimat sattvarin
$rimad arjitam eva va
tat tad evavagaccha tvarm
mama tejo ‘rhsa-sarhbhavam
“Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark of
My splendor.” (Bg. 10.41)

Whenever we see something exalted, we must consider it part of the power of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A powerful man (vibhatimat sattvam) is one
who has obtained the grace of the Lord or has derived some power from Him. In
Bhagavad-gita (7.10) Krsna says, tejas tejasvinam aham: “1 am the power of the
powerful.” The learned brahmana scholars showed respect to Nawab Hussain
Shah because he represented a fraction of Krsna's power.

TEXT 20
রাজা कटर, (डामोन्र স্থানে বৈদ্য পাঠাইলু* |
বৈত্ত কহে, ব্যাধি নাহি, স্বচ্ছ যে দেখিলু* ॥ ২০ ॥


--- Page 259 ---
Text 22] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 257
raja kahe, —tomara sthane vaidya pathailun
vaidya kahe, —vyadhi nahi, sustha ye dekhilun
SYNONYMS
raja kahe —the Nawab said; tomdra sthane —to your place; vaidya—a physi-
cian; pathailun—I sent; vaidya kahe —the physician said; vyadhi nahi—there is no
disease; su-stha—completely healthy; ye —that; dekhiluri—I have seen.
TRANSLATION
The Nawab said, “I sent my physician to you, and he has reported that you
are not diseased. As far as he could see, you are completely healthy.
TEXT 21
আমার য্ে কিছু কার্য, সব তোমা seni ।
কার্য ছাড়ি' রহিল৷ তুমি ঘরেতে বসিয়া ॥ ২১ ॥
amara ye kichu karya, saba toma lana
karya chadi’ rahila tumi gharete vasiya
SYNONYMS
amara—my; ye kichu—whatever; karya—business; saba—everything; toma —
you; land—with; karya chadi’—giving up your duties; rahild—remained; tumi—
you; gharete—at home; vasiya—sitting.
TRANSLATION
“| am depending on you to carry out so many of my activities, but you have
given up your governmental duties to sit here at home.
TEXT 22
মোর যত কার্য-কাম, जव কৈলা নাশ ।
কি তোমার জহৃদয়ে আছে, কহ মোর পাশ ॥ ২২ ॥
mora yata karya-kama, saba kaila nasa
ki tomara hrdaye ache, kaha mora pasa
SYNONYMS
mora—my; yata—all; karya-kama—occupational duties; saba—everything;
kaila nasa—you have spoiled; ki—what; tomara—your; hrdaye—within the
heart; ache —there is; kaha—kindly tell; mora pasa—to me.


--- Page 260 ---
258 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
‘‘You have spoiled all my activities. What is your intention? Please tell me
frankly.”
TEXT 23
সনাতন কহে, _-নহে আম। হৈতে कोम |
আর একজন দিয়] কর সমাধান ॥ ২৩ ॥
sanatana kahe, —nahe ama haite kama
ara eka-jana diya kara samadhana
SYNONYMS
sanatana kahe—Sanatana Cosvami replied; nahe—not; ama—me; haite—
from; kama—execution of the duty; ara eka-jana—someone else; diya—by
means of; kara samadhana—execute the management.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami replied, ‘‘You can no longer expect any service from me.
Please arrange for someone else to tend to the management.”
TEXT 24
তবে ক্রু क्त 2) ATEN কহে আরবার ।
তোমার “বড় ভাই” করে FHL ॥ ২৪ ॥
tabe kruddha hana raja kahe ara-bara
tomara ‘bada bhai’ kare dasyu-vyavahara
SYNONYMS
tabe —at that time; kruddha hana—becoming angry; raja kahe —the Nawab
said; ara-bara—again; tomara bada bhai—your elder brother; kare —does; dasyu-
vyavahara—the activity of a plunderer.
TRANSLATION
Becoming angry with Sanatana Gosvami, the Nawab said, ‘Your elder
brother is acting just like a plunderer.
TEXT 25
জীব-বছ মারি” टेकल GigE जव নাশ ।
এথা ভুমি देकल। মোর সর্ব কার্য নাশ ॥ ২৫ ॥


--- Page 261 ---
Text 27] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 259
jiva-bahu mari’ kaila cakla saba nasa
etha tumi kaila mora sarva karya nasa
SYNONYMS
jiva—living entities; bahu—many; mari’—killing; kaila—did; cakla—the prov-
ince of Bengal; saba—all; nasa—destruction; etha—here; tumi—you; kaila—did;
mora—my; sarva—all; karya—plans; nasa—destruction.
TRANSLATION
‘By killing many living entities, your elder brother has destroyed all Bengal.
Now here you are destroying all my plans.”
TEXT 26
সনাতন কহে, তুমি স্বতন্ত্র গৌড়েশ্বর |
যে যেই দোষ করে, দেহ” তার ফল ॥ ২৬ ॥
sanatana kahe,— tumi svatantra gaudesvara
ye yei dosa kare, deha’ tara phala
SYNONYMS
sanatana kahe—Sanatana Gosvami said; tumi—you; svatantra —independent;
gauda-isvara—the ruler of Bengal; ye yei—whatever; dosa—faults; kare —one
commits; deha’—you award; tara phala—the results of that.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami said, “You are the supreme ruler of Bengal and are com-
pletely independent. Whenever someone commits a fault, you punish him ac-
cordingly.”
TEXT 27
এত শুনি' গৌড়েশ্বর BF ঘরে গেলা |
পলাইব বলি” সনাতনেরে বান্ধিল] ॥ ২৭ ॥
eta suni’ gaudesvara uthi’ ghare gela
palaiba bali’ sanatanere bandhila
SYNONYMS
eta suni’—hearing this; gauda-isvara—the Nawab of Bengal; uthi’—standing
up; ghare gela—went back home; palaiba—I shall run away; bali’—because of
this; sanatanere bandhila—he arrested Sanatana.


--- Page 262 ---
260 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION

Hearing this, the Nawab of Bengal stood up and returned to his home. He

ordered the arrest of Sanatana Gosvami so that he would not be able to leave.
PURPORT

It is said that the relationship between the Nawab of Bengal and Sanatana
Gosvami was very intimate. The Nawab used to consider Sanatana Gosvami his
younger brother, and when Sanatana Gosvami showed a very strong intention to
resign, the Nawab, feeling familial affection, essentially said, “I am your elder
brother, but | do not look after the state management. My only business is attack-
ing other states with my soldiers and fighting everywhere as a plunderer. Because
| am a meateater [yavanal, | am used to hunting all kinds of living beings. In this
way | am destroying all kinds of living entities in Bengal. While engaged in this
destructive business, | am hoping that you will tend to the administration of the
state. Since 1, your elder brother, am engaged in such a destructive business, you,
being my younger brother, should look after the state management. If you do not,
how will things continue?” This talk was based on a family relationship, and
Sanatana Gosvami also replied in an intimate and joking way. Essentially he told
the Nawab, “My dear brother, you are the independent ruler of Bengal. You can
act in whatever way you like, and if someone commits fault, you can punish him
accordingly.” In other words, Sanatana Gosvami was saying that since the Nawab
was accustomed to acting like a plunderer, he should go ahead and take action.
Since Sanatana was not showing much enthusiasm in performing his duty, the
Nawab should dismiss him from his service. The Nawab could understand the in-
tention of Sanatana Gosvami's statement. He therefore left in an angry mood and
ordered Sanatana Gosvami's arrest.

TEXT 28
হেলকালে গেল त्राज। উড়িয়৷ মারিতে ।
সনাতনে কহে,-_ তুমি চল মোর সাথে ॥ ২৮ ॥
hena-kale gela raja udiya marite
sanatane kahe, —tumi cala mora sathe
SYNONYMS

hena-kale—at this time; gela—went; raja—the King; udiya marite—to attack
the Orissa province; sandtane kahe —he said to Sanatana Gosvami; tumi cala—
you come; mora sathe —along with me.


--- Page 263 ---
Text 30] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 261
TRANSLATION
At this time, the Nawab was going to attack the province of Orissa, and he
told Sanatana Gosvami, ‘Come along with me.”
PURPORT
Hussain Shah attacked the province of Orissa in 1424 Sakabda Era. At that time
he conquered the feudal princes of neighboring Orissa.
TEXT 29
(टश कटङ्‌,--याटव তুমি দেবতায় দুঃখ দিতে ।
মোর শক্তি নাহি, তোমার সঙ্গে যাইতে ॥ ২৯ ॥
tenho kahe,— yabe tumi devataya duhkha dite
mora Sakti nahi, tomara sarge yaite
SYNONYMS
tenho kahe—Sanatana Gosvami replied; yabe—will go; tumi—you;
devataya—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; duhkha dite —to give unhap-
piness; mora sakti—my power; nahi—there is not; tomara sarige —in company
with you; yaite—to go.
TRANSLATION
Sanatana Gosvami replied, ‘You are going to Orissa to give pain to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. For this reason | am powerless to go with
you.”’
TEXT 30
তবে ঙারে বাদ্ধি' রাখি' করিল। গমন ৷
এখা নীলাচল হৈতে প্রভু চলিলা বৃন্দাবন ॥ ৩০ ॥
tabe tarre bandhi’ rakhi’ karila gamana
etha nilacala haite prabhu calila vrndavana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; tanre—him; bandhi’—arresting; rakhi’—keeping; karila
gamana—he went away; etha—at this time; nilacala haite—from Jagannatha
Puri; prabhu—S$r Caitanya Mahaprabhu; calila vrndavana—departed for
Vrndavana.


--- Page 264 ---
262 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
The Nawab again arrested Sanatana Gosvami and kept him in prison. At this
time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu departed for Vrndavana from Jagannatha Puri.
TEXT 31
তবে সেই দুই চর রূপ-ঠাণ্ডি আইল |
“বৃন্দাবন চলিলা প্রভু --আসলিয়। কহিল ॥ ৩১ ॥
tabe sei dui cara rapa-thani 3//3
‘vrndavana calila prabhu’—asiya kahila
SYNONYMS
tabe—at that time; sei—those; dui—two; cara—messengers; rapa-thani—to
the presence of Rapa Gosvami; dila—came back; vrndavana calila prabhu—S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has departed for Vindavana; asiya—coming; kahila—they
informed.
TRANSLATION
The two persons who went to Jagannatha Puri to inquire about the 10105
departure returned and informed Ripa Gosvami that the Lord had already
departed for Vrndavana.
TEXT 32
শুনিয়া Amel লিখিল সনাতন-ঠাণ্ি |
“বৃন্দাবন एलिना। ল্রীচৈতন্য-গোসাঞি ॥ ৩২ ॥
Suniya sri-rapa likhila sanatana-thani
‘vindavana calila sri-caitanya-gosani
SYNONYMS
$uniya—hearing; $ri-rapa—Sri Rapa Gosvami; likhila—wrote; sanatana-tharni—
to Sanatana Gosvami; vrndavana—to Vrndavana; calila—has gone; sri-caitanya-
gosani—Sr1 Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Upon receiving this message from his two messengers, Ripa Gosvami im-
mediately wrote a letter to Sanatana Gosvami saying that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had departed for Vendavana.


--- Page 265 ---
Text 34] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 263
TEXT 33
আমি-দুইভাই চলিলাঙ হারে মিলিতে |
তুমি Lace তৈছে ছুটি” আইস छोर] হৈতে ॥ ৩৩ ॥
ami-dui-bhai calilana tanhare milite
tumi yaiche taiche chuti’ aisa tahan haite
SYNONYMS
ami-dui-bhai—we two brothers; calilana—have gone; tanhare milite—to meet
Him; tumi—you; yaiche taiche—somehow or other; chuti’—getting free; aisa—
come; tahan haite —from there.
TRANSLATION
In his letter to Sanatana Gosvami, Srila Rapa Gosvami wrote, “We two
brothers are starting out to go see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. You must also
somehow or other get released and come meet us.”
PURPORT
The two brothers herein mentioned are Rapa Gosvami and his younger brother,
Anupama Mallika. Rapa Gosvami was informing Sanatana Gosvami that he should
join him and his younger brother.
TEXT 34
ER মুদ্রা তথা আছে শুদি-স্থানে |
তাহা निग्र কর শীঘ আত্ম-বিমোচনে ॥ ৩৪ ॥
dasa-sahasra mudra tatha ache mudi-sthane
taha diya kara sighra atma-vimocane
SYNONYMS
dasa-sahasra mudra—ten thousand coins; titha—there; ache—there are;
mudi-sthdne—in the grocer’s place; taha diya—with this amount; kara—get;
Sighra—as soon as possible; atma-vimocane —release from the internment.
TRANSLATION
Ripa Gosvami further informed Srila Sanatana Gosvami: “I have left a
deposit of ten thousand coins with the grocer. Use that money to get out of
prison.


--- Page 266 ---
264 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 35
যেছে তৈছে ছুটি” তুমি আইস বৃন্দাবন ।
এত লিখি” দুইভাই করিল গমন ॥ we ॥
yaiche taiche chuti’ tumi aisa vrndavana’
eta 11001 dui-bhai karila gamana
SYNONYMS
yaiche taiche —somehow or other; chuti’—getting released; tumi—you; disa—
come; wvrndavana—to Vindavana; eta likhi’—writing this; dui-bhai—the two
brothers, namely Rapa Gosvami and his younger brother Anupama; karila
gamana—departed.
TRANSLATION
‘Somehow or other get yourself released and come to Vrndavana.” After
writing this, the two brothers [Ripa Gosvami and Anupamal went to see Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 36
অনুপম মল্লিক, $17 नान -“ब्योवन्नरः |
রূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞর ছোটভাই--পরম-বৈষ্ণব ॥ ৩৬ ॥
anupama mallika, tanra nama— ‘sri-vallabha’
rapa-gosanira chota-bhai——parama-vaisnava
SYNONYMS
anupama mallika—Anupama Mallika; {5/1/2 nama—his name; $ri-vallabha—Sri
Vallabha; rapa-gosanira—of Rapa Gosvami; chota-bhai—younger brother;
parama-vaisnava—great devotee.
TRANSLATION
Rapa Gosvami’s younger brother was a great devotee whose actual name
was Sri Vallabha, but he was given the name Anupama Mallika.
TEXT 37
ভাহা লঞা রূপ-গোসাঞ্ি প্রয়াগে আইলা |
মহাপ্রভু তাহ শুনি” আনন্দিত হৈল। ॥ ৩৭ ॥
(3703 lana rapa-gosani prayage aila
mahaprabhu tahan suni’ anandita haila


--- Page 267 ---
Text 39] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 265
SYNONYMS
tanha lana—taking him along; rapa-gosani—Sri Rapa Gosvami; prayage—to
Prayaga; aili—came; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tahan—there;
Suni’—hearing; anandita haili—were very much pleased.
TRANSLATION
Sri Rapa Gosvami and Anupama Mallika went to Prayaga, and they were
very pleased to hear news that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was there.
TEXT 38
প্রভু চলিয়াছেন বিল্দুমাধব-দরশনে |
লক্ষ লক্ষ লোক আইসে প্রভুর মিলনে ॥ ৩৮ ॥
prabhu caliyachena bindu-madhava-darasane
laksa laksa loka aise prabhura milane
SYNONYMS
prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; caliydchena—was going; bindu-madhava-
darasane —to see Lord Bindu Madhava; laksa laksa loka—many hundreds of thou-
sands of people; aise—came; prabhura—with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
milane —for meeting.
TRANSLATION
At Prayaga, Sri Caitanya Mahiaprabhu went to see the temple of Bindu
Madhava, and many hundreds of thousands of people followed Him just to
meet Him.
TEXT 39
(कङ्‌ কান্দে, কেহ হাসে, কেহ নাচে, গায়।
“কৃষ্ণ” FR বলি” কেহ গড়াগড়ি যায় ॥ <> ॥
keha kande, keha hase, keha nace, gaya
‘krsna’ ‘*krsna’ bali’ keha gadagadi yaya
SYNONYMS
keha kande—some cried; keha hase—some laughed; keha nace—some
danced; gaya—chanted; krsna krspa bali’—saying Krsna, Krsna; keha—some;
gadagadi yaya—rolled on the ground.


--- Page 268 ---
266 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Some of the people following the Lord were crying. Some were laughing,
some dancing and some chanting. Indeed, some of them were rolling on the
ground, exclaiming, “Krsna! Krsna!”
TEXT 40
গলজা-যমুনা প্রয়াগ নারিল ভুবাইতে |
প্রভু ডুবাইল কৃষ্ণপ্রেমের বন্যাতে ॥ ৪০ ॥
ganga-yamuna prayaga narila dubaite
prabhu dubadila krsna-premera vanyate
SYNONYMS
ganga-yamuna—the River Ganges and River Yamuna; prayaga—Prayaga;
ndrila—were not able; dubaite—to flood; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
dubaila—flooded; krsna-premera—of ecstatic love of Krsna; vanyate—in an inun-
dation.
TRANSLATION
Prayaga is located at the confluence of two rivers—the Ganges and the
Yamuna. Although these rivers were not able to flood Prayaga with water, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu inundated the whole area with waves of ecstatic love
for Krsna.
TEXT 41
ভিড় দেখি” দুই ভাই রহিল৷ নির্জনে |
প্রভুর আবেশ देन মাধব-দরশনে ॥ ৪১ ॥
bhida dekhi’ dui bhai rahila nirjane
prabhura avesa haila madhava-darasane
SYNONYMS
bhida dekhi’—seeing the crowd; dui bhai—the two brothers; rahila—
remained; nirjane—in a secluded place; prabhura—of Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
avesa—ecstasy; haila—there was; madhava-darasane—by seeing the Deity,
Bindu Madhava.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the great crowd, the two brothers remained standing in a secluded
place. They could see that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was ecstatic to see Lord
Bindu Madhava.


--- Page 269 ---
Text 44] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 267
TEXT 42
প্রেমাবেশে নাচে প্রভু হরিধ্বনি করি”।
छेक्षव वांछ করি” বলে বল “হরি” “হরি” ॥ ৪২ ॥
premavese nace prabhu hari-dhvani kari’
ardhva bahu kari’ bale——bala ‘hari’ ‘hari’
SYNONYMS
prema-avese—in ecstatic love; nace—danced; prabhu—Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; hari-dhvani kari’—vibrating the holy name of Hari; ardhva—raised;
bahu—the arms; kari’—making; bale —says; bala hari hari—chant Hari, Hari.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was loudly chanting the holy name of Hari. Dancing in ecstatic
love and raising His arms, He asked everyone to chant “Hari! Hari!"’
TEXT 43
প্রভুর মহিম| দেখি” লোকে চমৎকার |
প্রয়াগে প্রভুর नोन নারি বর্ণিবার ॥ ৪৩ ॥
prabhura mahima dekhi’ loke camatkara
prayage prabhura lila nari varnibara
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; mahima—the greatness; dekhi’—
seeing; loke—in all people; camatkara—astonishment; prayage—at Prayaga;
prabhura—of 311 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; 1115 -- 016 pastimes; nari—| am not able;
varnibdra—to describe.
TRANSLATION
Everyone was astounded to see the greatness of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Indeed, | cannot properly describe the pastimes of the Lord at Prayaga.
TEXT 44
দাক্ষিণত্য-বিপ্র-সনে আছে পরিচয় ।
সেই विष्य নিমন্ট্রিয়৷ নিল নিজালয় ॥ ৪৪ ॥


--- Page 270 ---
268 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
daksinatya-vipra-sane ache paricaya
sei vipra nimantriya nila nijalaya
SYNONYMS
daksipatya—Deccan; vipra-sane—with a brdhmana; 4dche—there was;
paricaya—acquaintance; sei—that; vipra—brahmana; nimantriya—inviting;
nila—brought; nija-alaya—to his own place.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had made an acquaintance with a brahmana from
Deccan [in South Indial, and that brahmana invited Him for meals and took
Him to his place.
TEXT 45
বিপ্র-গৃহে खौजि' প্রভু fagrs वजिल। ।
জ্রীরূপ-বল্পভ gor खा जिन्न भिनिल। ॥ 8८ ॥
vipra-grhe asi’ prabhu nibhrte vasila
Sri-rapa-vallabha dunhe asiya milila
SYNONYMS
vipra-grhe—to the house of that brahmana; asi’—coming; prabhu—S$r
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nibhrte—in a solitary place; vasila—sat down; sri-rapa-
vallabha—the two brothers Rapa Gosvami and Sri Vallabha; durnhe—both of
them; asiya—coming; milili—met Him.
TRANSLATION
While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was sitting in a solitary place in the home of
that Deccan 01311111313, Ripa Gosvami and Sri Vallabha [Anupama Mallikal
came to meet Him.
TEXT 46
তুইগুচ্ছ छन 3 टर দশনে ধরিয়া ।
প্রভু দেখি” দূরে পড়ে দণ্ডবছ TW ॥ ৪৬ ॥
dui-guccha (009 dunhe dasane dhariya
prabhu dekhi’ dare pade dandavat hana


--- Page 271 ---
Text 48] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 269
SYNONYMS
dui-guccha—two bunches; trna—straw; dunhe—both of them; dasane
dhariya—holding in the teeth; prabhu dekhi’—seeing the Lord; dire —in a distant
place; pade—fell down; danda-vat—like rods; hana—becoming.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the Lord from a distance, the two brothers put two clumps of straw
between their teeth and immediately fell down on the ground like rods, offer-
ing Him obeisances.
TEXT 47
नाना শ্লোক পড়ি” উঠে, পড়ে am বার ।
প্রভু দেখি” প্রেমাবেশ হুইল দু'হার ॥ ৪৭ ॥
nana sloka padi’ uthe, pade bara bara
prabhu dekhi’ premavesa ha-ila durihara
SYNONYMS
haha—various; sloka—verses; padi’—reciting; uthe—stood up; pade—fell
down; bara bara—again and again; prabhu dekhi’—seeing the Lord; prema-
avesa —ecstatic emotion; ha-ila—there was; dunhara—of both of them.
TRANSLATION
Both brothers were overwhelmed with ecstatic emotion, and reciting
various Sanskrit verses, they stood up and fell down again and again.
TEXT 48
জীরূপে দেখিয়া প্রভুর প্রসন্ন হৈল मन 1
“উঠ, উঠ, রূপ, আইস”, वनिल। বচন ॥ ৪৮ ॥
$ri-rape dekhiya prabhura prasanna haila mana
‘utha, utha, rapa, aisa’, balila vacana
SYNONYMS
sri-rape dekhiya—seeing Srila Rapa Gosvami; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; prasanna—very pleased; haila—was; mana—mind; utha—please
stand up; utha—please stand up; ridpa—My dear Rapa; disa—come; balila—He
said; vacana—the words.


--- Page 272 ---
270 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased to see Srila Ripa Gosvami, and
He told him, “Stand up! Stand up! My dear Ripa, come here.”
TEXT 49
কষ্ণের TP কিছু না যায় বর্ণনে |
বিষয়কুপ হৈতে কাড়িল তোমা দুইজনে ॥ ৪৯ ॥
krsnera karuna kichu na yaya varpane
visaya-kapa haite kadila toma dui-jane
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Lord Krsna; karuna—the mercy; kichu—any; na—not; ydya—is
possible; varnane —to describe; visaya-kapa haite —from the well of material en-
joyment; kadila—delivered; toma—you; dui-jane—both.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, “It is not possible to describe Krsna’s
mercy, for He has delivered you both from the well of material enjoyment.
TEXT 50
न মেইভক্তশ্চতুর্বেদী गः শ্বপচঃ প্রিয়ঃ ৷
SUH দেয়ং ততে। AFL AT LET] यथ) হৃহম্‌ ॥८०॥
na me ‘bhaktas catur-vedi
mad-bhaktah svapacah priyah
tasmai deyam tato grahyam
sa ca puajyo yatha hy aham
SYNONYMS
na—not; me—My; abhaktah—devoid of pure devotional service; catuh-
vedi—a scholar in the four Vedas; mat-bhaktah—My devotee; $va-pacah—even
from a family of dog-eaters; priyah —very dear; tasmai—to him (a pure devotee,
even though born in a very low family); deyam —should be given; tatah—from
him; grahyam —should be accepted (remnants of food); sah —that person; ca—
also; pajyah—worshipable; yatha—as much 25; hi—certainly; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Even though a person is a very learned scholar of the Sanskrit Vedic
literatures, he is not accepted as My devotee unless he is pure in devotional


--- Page 273 ---
Text 52] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 271
service. Even though a person is born in a family of dog-eaters, he is very dear
to Me if he is a pure devotee who has no motive to enjoy fruitive activities or
mental speculation. Indeed, all respects should be given to him, and whatever
he offers should be accepted. Such devotees are as worshipable as | am.”
PURPORT
This verse is included in the Hari-bhakti-vildsa (10.127) compiled by Sanatana
Gosvami.
TEXT 51
এই শ্লোক পড়ি' দু'হারে কৈল। আলিঙ্গন |
FICS FET মাথায় ধরিল। চরণ ॥ ৫১ ॥
ei $/০0/3 padi’ dunhare kaila alingana
krpate dunhara mathaya dharila carana
SYNONYMS
ei sloka—this verse; padi’—reciting; dunhare—the two brothers; kaila
alingana—embraced; krpate—out of causeless mercy; dunhara—of both of
them; mathaya—on the heads; dharila—placed; carana—His feet.
TRANSLATION
After reciting this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced both brothers,
and out of His causeless mercy He placed His feet on their heads.
TEXT 52
প্রভু-কূপা नं 1491 দু'হে দুই হাত যুড়ি'।
দীন হঞ चडि করে বিনয় আচরি” ॥ ৫২ ॥
prabhu-krpa pana dunhe dui hata yudi’
dina hana stuti kare vinaya acari’
SYNONYMS
prabhu-krpa—the Lord's mercy; pana—getting; durthe—both of them; dui—
two; hata—hands; yudi’—folding; dina hafid—most humbly; stuti kare—offer
prayers; vinaya acari’—with submission.
TRANSLATION
After receiving the Lord’s causeless mercy, the brothers folded their hands
and in great humility offered the following prayers unto the Lord.


--- Page 274 ---
272 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 53
নমো মহাবদান্তযায় কষ্ণপ্রেমপ্রদায় তে |
কষ্ণায় কুষ্চৈতন্যনাম্নে গৌরত্বিষে নমঃ ॥ ৫৩ ॥
namo maha-vadanyaya
krsna-prema-pradaya te
krsnaya krsna-caitanya-
namne gaura-tvise namah
SYNONYMS
namah —obeisances; maha-vadanyaya—who is most munificent and charitably
disposed; krsna-prema—love of Krsna; praddaya—who can give; te—unto You;
krsnaya—the original Personality of Godhead; krsna-caitanya-namne —under the
name Krsna Caitanya; gaura-tvise —whose complexion is the golden complexion
of Srimati Radharani; namah —obeisances.
TRANSLATION
“0 most munificent incarnation! You are Krsna Himself appearing as Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu. You have assumed the golden color of Srimati
Radharani, and You are widely distributing pure love of Krsna. We offer our
respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 54
যেোইজ্ঞানমত্তং IAL দয়ালুরুল্লাঘয়ন্নপ্যকরেৎ প্রমত্তম্‌।
স্বপ্রেমনস্পতসুধয়াত্ভুতেহং শরীরুষ্টচৈতন্যমমূৎ গ্রপদ্ে ॥ ৫৪ ॥
yo ‘jAidana-mattari bhuvanari dayalur
ullaghayann apy akarot pramattam
sva-prema-sampat-sudhayadbhutehari
$ri-krspa-caitanyam amum prapadye
SYNONYMS
yah —that Personality of Godhead who; ajfiana-mattam—maddened by ig-
norance or foolishly passing time in karma, (722, yoga and Mayavada philosophy;
bhuvanam—the entire three worlds; dayaluh—so merciful; ullaghayan—subdu-
ing such processes as karma, jAana and yoga; api—despite; akarot—made; pra-
mattam—maddened; sva-prema-sampat-sudhaya—by the nectar of His personal
devotional service, which is an invaluable treasure of bliss; adbhuta-tham—whose
activities are wonderful;  éri-krspa-caitanyam—unto Lord ऽ = Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; amum—that; prapadye—I| surrender.


--- Page 275 ---
Text 56] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 273
TRANSLATION
“We offer our respectful obeisances unto that merciful Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead who has converted all three worlds, which were mad-
dened by ignorance, and saved them from their diseased condition by making
them mad with the nectar from the treasure-house of love of God. Let us take
full shelter of that Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna Caitanya, whose activities
are wonderful.”
PURPORT
This verse is found in the Govinda-lilamrta (1.2).
TEXT 55
তবে মহাপ্রভু Sita নিকটে বসাইলা ।
“সনাতনের বার্তা কহ?_ তাহারে পুছিল। ॥ ৫৫ ॥
tabe mahaprabhu tanre nikate vasaila
‘sanatanera varta kaha’——tanhare puchila
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; (^€ —them;
nikate—near Him; vasdila—sat down; sanitanera vartai—news of Sanatana;
kaha —please tell; tanhare —them; puchila—questioned.
TRANSLATION
After this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat them down by His side and asked
them, “What news do you have of Sanatana?’’
TEXT 56
রূপ কহেন, EE বন্দী হয় রাজ-ঘরে।
তুমি विं উদ্ধার” তবে হইবে উদ্ধারে ॥ ৫৬ ॥
rapa kahena,— tenho bandi haya raja-ghare
tumi yadi uddhara’, tabe ha-ibe uddhare
SYNONYMS
rapa kahena—Rapa Gosvami said; tenho —he; bandi—arrested; haya—is; raja-
ghare —in the court of the government; tumi—You; yadi—if; uddhara’—kindly
rescue; tabe—then; ha-ibe—he will be; uddhare —relieved from that entangle-
ment.


--- Page 276 ---
274 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Ripa Gosvami replied, “59311313113 has now been arrested by the government
of Hussain Shah. If You kindly save him, he can be liberated from that en-
tanglement.”
TEXT 57
প্রভু কহে,-_সনাতনের হঞাছে মোচন।
অচিরাৎ আমা-সহ হইবে মিলন ॥ ৫৭ ॥
prabhu kahe, —sanatanera haiache mocana
acirat ama-saha ha-ibe milana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; sanatanera—of 53173803173
Gosvami; handache—there has been; mocana—release; acirat—very soon; ama-
saha—with Me; ha-ibe milana—there will be meeting.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately replied, “Sanatana has already been
released from his confinement, and he will very soon meet with Me.”
TEXT 58
মধ্যাহ্ করিতে বিপ্র প্রভুরে কহিল ।
রূপ-গোসাণঞ্ঞি সে-দিবস তথাঞ্চি রহিলা ॥ ৫৮ ॥
madhyahna karite vipra prabhure kahila
rapa-gosani se-divasa tathani rahila
SYNONYMS
madhyahna karite—to accept lunch; vipra—the brahmana of Deccan;
prabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahila—requested; rupa-gosani—Rapa
Cosvami; se-divasa—that day; tathani—there; rahila—remained.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was then requested by the brahmana to accept
His lunch. 003 Gosvami also remained there that day.


--- Page 277 ---
Text 61] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 275
TEXT 59
ভট্টাচার্য দুই ভাইয়ে নিমন্ত্রণ কৈল।
প্রভুর শেষ প্রসাদ-পাত্র তুইভাই পাইল ॥ ৫৯ ॥
bhattacarya dui bhaiye nimantrana kaila
prabhura Sesa prasada-patra dui-bhai paila
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Balabhadra Bhattacarya; dui bhaiye—the two brothers;
nimantrana kaila—invited to take lunch; prabhura sesa prasada-patra—the rem-
nants of the plate of food offered to जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dui-bhai paila—
the two brothers obtained.
TRANSLATION
Balabhadra Bhattacarya invited the two brothers to take lunch also. The
remnants of food from the plate of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu were offered to
them.
TEXT 60
जिटवनी-खनै्र প্রভুর বাসা-ঘর স্থান |
দুই ভাই বাসা टेकन প্রভু-সম্নিধান ॥ ve ॥
triveni-upara prabhura vasa-ghara sthana
dui bhai vasa kaila prabhu-sannidhana
SYNONYMS
tri-veni-upara—on the bank of the confluence of the Yamuna and Ganges;
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; vasa-ghara—of the residential house;
sthana—the place; dui bhai—the two brothers; vasa kaila—resided; prabhu-san-
nidhana—near Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu selected His residence beside the confluence of
the Ganges and Yamuna at a place called Triveni. The two brothers —Riipa
Gosvami and $ri Vallabha—selected their residence near the Lord's.
TEXT 61
সে-কালে AWS-SF রহে আড়াইল-গ্রামে |
মহাপ্রভু আইল৷ শুনি” আইল তার স্থানে ॥ ৬১ ॥


--- Page 278 ---
276 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
se-kale vallabha-bhatta rahe adaila-grame
mahaprabhu aila suni’ aila tarnra sthane
SYNONYMS

se-kale—at that time; vallabha-bhatta—Vallabha Bhatta; rahe —resided;
adaila-grame—in the village known as Adaila; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; aila—has come; suni’—hearing; aila—came; tarnra sthane —to His
place.

TRANSLATION

At that time, Sri Vallabha Bhatta was staying at Adaila-grama, and when he
heard that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had arrived, he went to His place to see
Him.

PURPORT

Vallabha Bhatta was a great learned scholar of Vaisnavism. In the beginning he
was very much devoted to ঠা Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but since he thought that
he could not receive proper respect from Him, he later joined the Visnusvami sect
and became dacarya of that sect. His sect is celebrated as the Vallabhacarya-
sampradaya. This sampradaya has had great influence in Vindavana near Gokula
and in Bombay. Vallabha Bhatta wrote many books, including a commentary on
Srimad-Bhagavatam called Subodhini-tika, and notes on the Vedanta-satra, in the
form of an Anubhasya. He also wrote a combination of sixteen short works called
Sodasa-grantha. Adaila-grama, where he was staying, was near the confluence of
the Rivers Ganges and Yamuna on the other side of the Yamuna about one mile
from the river. The village there is called Adeli-grama, or Adaila-grama. A temple
of Lord Visnu there still belongs to the Vallabha-sampradaya.

Vallabha Bhatta was originally from a place in southern India called Trailanga.
There is a railway station there called Nidadabhalu. Sixteen miles from that station
is a village called Kankadabada, or Kakunrapadhu. A learned brahmana named
Laksmana Diksita used to live there, and Vallabha Bhatta was his son. There are
five sections of the brahmana community of Andhra Pradesh known as bella-nati,
vegi-nati, muraki-nati, telagu-nati and kasala-nati. Out of these five brahminical
communities, Vallabhacarya took his birth in the community of bella-nati in the
year 1400 Sakabda Era. According to some people, Vallabha Bhattacarya's father
took sannyasa before Vallabha's birth, and he returned home to take
Vallabhacarya as his son. According to the opinion of others, Vallabhacarya was
born in 1400 Sakabda Era on the Ekadaéi day of the dark moon in the month of
Caitra, and he took his birth in a brahmana family surnamed Khambharhpatibaru.
According to this account, his father's name was Laksmana Bhatta Diksita, and he
was born in Campakaranya. In someone else's opinion, Vallabhacarya appeared


--- Page 279 ---
Text 63] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 277
near the village named Canpa-jhara-grama, which is near a railway station named
Rajima in Madhya Pradesh.

After studying for eleven years at Varanasi, Vallabhacarya returned home. On
his return, he heard that his father had departed from the material world. Keeping
his brother and mother at home, he went to the banks of the River Tungabhadra
in a village called Vidyanagara, and it was there that he enlightened Krsnadeva,
the grandson of King Bukkaraja. After that, he traveled throughout India thrice on
trips lasting six years. Thus he passed eighteen years and became victorious in his
discussions of revealed scripture. When he was thirty years old, he married
Mahalaksmi, who belonged to the same brahmana community. Near Govardhana
Hill he established a Deity in the valley. Finally he came to Adaila, which is on the
other side of Prayaga.

Vallabhacarya had two sons, Copinatha and Viththale$vara, and in his old age
he accepted the renounced order. In 1452 Sakabda Era, he passed away from the
material world at Varanasi. His book known as Sodasa-grantha and his commen-
taries on Vedanta-satra (Anubhasya) and Srimad-Bhagavatam (Subodhini) are very
famous. He has written many other books besides.

TEXT 62
তেঁহো vee বকৈল, প্রভু टेकन। আলিঙ্গন |
তুই জনে কৃষ্ণকথা হৈল কতক্ষণ ॥ ৬২ ॥
tenho dandavat kaila, prabhu kaila alingana
dui jane krspa-katha haila kata-ksana
SYNONYMS

tenho—he; dandavat—obeisances; kaila—made; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; kaila—did; alingana—embracing; dui jane —between the two of
them; krsna-katha—topics about Lord Krsna; haila—there were; kata-ksana—for
some time.

TRANSLATION

Vallabha Bhattacarya offered Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu his obeisances, and
the Lord embraced him. After that, they discussed topics about Krsna for
some time.

TEXT 63
কৃষ্ণকথায় প্রভুর মহাপ্রেম উৎলিল।
ভট্টের সন্কেচে প্রভু AGA কৈল ॥ ৬৩ ॥


--- Page 280 ---
278 इन Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
krsna-kathaya prabhura maha-prema uthalila
bhattera sarikoce prabhu samvarana kaila
SYNONYMS
krsna-kathdya—in the discussion on Krsna; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; maha-prema—great love; uthalila —arose; bhattera—of Bhat-
tacarya; sankoce—due to shyness; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sam-
varana kaila—restrained Himself.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt great ecstatic love when they began discuss-
ing Krsna, but the Lord checked His feelings because He felt shy before
Vallabha Bhatta.
TEXT 64
অন্তরে গর-গর প্রেম, নহে FART |
দেখি” চমৎকার হৈল বল্লভ-ভট্টের মন ॥ ৬৪ ॥
antare gara-gara prema, nahe samvarana
dekhi’ camatkara haila vallabha-bhattera mana
SYNONYMS
antare—inside; gara-gara—raged; prema —ecstatic love; nahe —there was not;
samvarana—checking; dekhi’—detecting; camatkara—astonishment; haila—
there was; vallabha-bhattera mana—on the mind of Vallabha Bhatta.
TRANSLATION
Although the Lord restrained Himself externally, ecstatic love raged within.
There was no checking that. Vallabha Bhatta was astonished to detect this.
TEXT 65
তবে ভট্ট মহাপ্রভুরে নিমন্ত্রণ কৈলা |
মহাপ্রভু তুইভাই তাহারে Rede ॥ ৬৫ ॥
tabe bhatta mahaprabhure nimantrana kaila
mahaprabhu dui-bhai tanhare milaila
SYNONYMS
tabe —then; bhatta—Vallabha  Bhatta; mahaprabhure—S$ri = Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nimantrana kaila—invited; mahaprabhu—5$ri == Caitanya


--- Page 281 ---
Text 67] The Lord Instructs Srila 003 Gosvami 279
Mahaprabhu; dui-bhai—the two brothers Rapa and Vallabha; tanhare—to him;
milaila—introduced.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Vallabha Bhatta invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for lunch, and
the Lord introduced the brothers Ripa and Vallabha to him.
TEXT 66
তুইভাই দুর হৈতে জুমিতে शङ |
ভট্ট্রে দণ্ডবৎ কৈল। অতি দীন ङ| ॥ ৬৬ ॥
dui-bhai dara haite bhamite padiya
bhatte dandavat kaila ati dina hana
SYNONYMS
dui-bhai—the two brothers; dara haite—from a distance; bhamite—on the
ground; padiya—falling flat; bhatte—to Vallabha Bhatta; dandavat kaila—offered
obeisances; ati dina hana—being very humble.
TRANSLATION
From a distance, the brothers Riipa Gosvami and Sri Vallabha fell on the
ground and offered obeisances to Vallabha Bhatta with great humility.
TEXT 67
ভট্ট মিলিবারে arm, দু'হে পলায় দুরে |
वसन) পামর মু, না ছু'ইহ মোরে ॥ ৬৭ ॥
bhatta milibare yaya, dunhe palaya dare
‘asprsya pamara muni, na chuniha more’
SYNONYMS
bhatta—Vallabha Bhatta; milibare—to meet; yaya—goes; durnhe—the two
brothers; paldya—ran away; ddre—to a distant place; asprsya—untouchable;
pamara—most fallen; (70/71 --| ; na chuniha—do not touch; more—me.
TRANSLATION
When Vallabha Bhattacarya walked toward them, they ran away to a more
distant place. Ripa Gosvami said, ‘I am untouchable and most sinful. Please
do not touch me.”


--- Page 282 ---
280 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 68
ভট্টের বিস্ময় হৈল, প্রভুর ङ्व मन 1
SLT কহিলা প্রভু তার বিবরণ ॥ ৬৮ ॥
bhattera vismaya haila, prabhura harsa mana
bhattere kahila prabhu {4/2 vivarana
SYNONYMS
bhattera—of Vallabha Bhattacarya; vismaya haila—there was surprise;
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; harsa—very happy; mana—the mind;
bhattere  kahilai—said to Vallabha Bhattacarya; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; tanra vivarana—description of Rapa Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhattacarya was very surprised at this. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
however, was very pleased, and He therefore spoke to him this description of
Rapa Gosvami.
TEXT 69
“ই"হো না স্পশিহ, ই"হে। জাতি सङि-दौन !
বৈদিক, ষাঙ্ঞিক তুমি কুলীন প্রবীণ !” ৬৯ ॥
41300 na sparsiha, inho jati ati-hina!
vaidika, yajiika tumi kulina pravina!’
SYNONYMS
inho—him; na sparsiha—do not touch; inho—He; jati—caste; ati-hina—very
low; vaidika—a follower of Vedic principles; yajAika—a performer of many
sacrifices; tumi—you; kulina—aristocratic brahmana; pravina—an experienced
person.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “Don’t touch him, for he belongs to a very
low caste. You are a follower of Vedic principles and are a well experienced
performer of many sacrifices. You also belong to the aristocracy.”
PURPORT
Generally brahmanas are puffed up with false prestige because they belong to
the aristocracy and perform many Vedic sacrifices. In South India especially, this


--- Page 283 ---
Text 70] The Lord Instructs Srila 003 Gosvami 281
fastidious position is most prominent. At any rate, this was the case five hundred
years ago. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu actually started a revolution against this
brahminical system by inaugurating the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. By this
chanting, one can be delivered regardless of caste, creed, color or social position.
Whoever chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is immediately purified due to the
transcendental position of devotional service. आ Caitanya Mahaprabhu is here
hinting to Vallabha Bhattacarya that an exalted brahmana who makes sacrifices
and follows Vedic principles should not neglect a person who is engaged in devo-
tional service by chanting the holy name of the Lord.

Actually Rapa Gosvami did not belong to a lower caste. He was from a highly
aristocratic brahmana family, but due to his association with the Mohammedan
Nawab, he was considered fallen and excommunicated from brahmana society.
However, due to his advanced devotional service, ज Caitanya Mahaprabhu ac-
cepted him as a gosvami. Vallabha Bhattacarya knew all this. One who is a devo-
tee is above caste and creed, yet Vallabha Bhattacarya felt himself prestigious.

The present head of the Vallabha Bhattacarya sampradaya of Bombay is named
Diksita Maharaja. He is very friendly to our movement, and whenever we meet
him, this learned brahmana scholar highly praises the activities of the Hare Krsna
movement. He is a life member of our Society, and although he is a learned
scholar in the brahminical caste tradition, he accepts our Society and considers its
members bona fide devotees of Lord Visnu.

TEXT 70
9, =
দুঁহার qed নিরস্তর কৃষ্ণনাম of)
ভট্ট কহে, প্রভুর কিছু ইজিত-ভঙ্গী জানি” ॥ ৭০ ॥
dunhara mukhe nirantara krsna-nama suni’
bhatta kahe, prabhura kichu ingita-bhangi jani’
SYNONYMS

dunhara mukhe—in the mouths of both Rapa Gosvami and his brother
Vallabha; nirantara—continuously; krsna-nama suni’—hearing the chanting of the
holy name of Krsna; bhatta kahe—Vallabha Bhattacarya said; prabhura—of Lord
ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kichu—some; ingita—indications; bhangi—nhints;
jani’—understanding.

TRANSLATION

Hearing the holy name constantly vibrated by the two brothers, Vallabha

Bhattacarya could understand the hints of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 284 ---
282 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 71
८
2 ZA মুখে FRAN করিছে नन |
এই-ভুই “समः নহে, হয় ACAI ॥ ৭১ ॥
‘dunhara mukhe krspa-nama kariche nartana
ei-dui ‘adhama’ nahe, haya ‘sarvottama’
SYNONYMS
durnhara mukhe—in the mouths of both; krsna-nama—the holy name of Lord
Krsna; kariche—is doing; nartana—dancing; ei-dui—both of them; adhama
nahe—not fallen; haya —are; sarva-uttama—the most exalted.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhattacarya admitted, ‘Since these two are constantly chanting
the holy name of Krsna, how can they be untouchable? On the contrary, they
are most exalted.”
PURPORT
Vallabha Bhattacarya’'s admission of the brothers’ exalted position should serve
as a lesson to one who is falsely proud of his position as a brahmana. Sometimes
so-called brahmanas do not recognize our European and American disciples as
devotees or brahmanas, and some brahmanas are so proud that they do not allow
them to enter temples. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu herein gives a great lesson. Al-
though Vallabha Bhattacarya was a great authority on brahmanism and a learned
scholar, he admitted that those who chant the Lord's holy name are bona fide
brahmanas and Vaisnavas and are therefore exalted.
TEXT 72
অহো বতশ্বপচোইতে।গরাীয়ান্‌
যজ্জিহ্বাগ্রে বর্ততে নাম তুভাম্‌ |
তেপুস্তপপ্তে জুহুবুঃ ATT
ত্রম্মানুচুনাম গৃণস্তি যে তে॥ ৭২
aho bata $va-paco ‘to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmandcur nama grpanti ye te


--- Page 285 ---
Text 72] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 283
SYNONYMS

aho bata—how wonderful it is; sva-pacah—dog-eaters; atah—than the ini-
tiated brahmana; gariyan—more glorious; yat—of whom; jihva-agre—on the
tongue; vartate—remains; nama—the holy name; tubhyam—of You, my Lord;
tepuh—have performed; tapah—austerity; te—they; juhuvuh—have performed
sacrifices; sasnuh—have bathed in all holy places; aryah —really belonging to the
Aryan race; brahma—all the Vedas; andcuh—have studied; nama—the holy
name; grnanti—chant; ye—who; te—they.

TRANSLATION

Vallabha Bhattacarya then recited the following verse: / ‘My dear Lord, one
who always keeps Your holy name on his tongue becomes greater than an ini-
tiated brahmana. Although he may be born in a family of dog-eaters and may
therefore, by material calculation, be the lowest among men, he is still
glorious. This is the wonderful effect of chanting the holy name of the Lord. It
is therefore concluded that one who chants the holy name of the Lord should
be understood to have performed all kinds of austerities and great sacrifices
mentioned in the Vedas. He has already taken his bath in all the holy places of
pilgrimage. He has studied all the Vedas, and he is actually an Aryan.” ”

PURPORT
This verse is quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7).
TEXT 73
IF মহাপ্রভু ভারে বহু প্রশংশিলা।
(यमां चष्टे ड শ্লোক পড়িতে লাগিল ॥ ৭৩ ॥
Suni” mahaprabhu tanre bahu prasamsila
premavista hana $loka padite lagila
SYNONYMS

Suni’—hearing; mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre—him; bahu—
very much; prasamsila—praised; prema-avista haina—becoming ecstatic in love
of Godhead; $loka—verses; padite lagila—began to recite.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased to hear Vallabha Bhatta quoting

from $astra about the position of a devotee. The Lord praised him personally,


--- Page 286 ---
284 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Iila, Ch. 19
and, feeling ecstatic love of Godhead, began to quote many verses from
53519.
TEXT 74
শুচিঃ সম্তক্তিদীপ্তাগ্নিদগ্ধহর্জা তিকল্মষঃ |
gore IRM বুধৈঃ শ্লাঘ্যে। ন বেদজ্ঞোহপি নাস্তিকঃ ॥৭৪॥
Sucih sad-bhakti-diptagni-
dagdha-durjati-kalmasah
$vapako ‘pi budhaih slagyo
na vedajno ‘pi nastikah
SYNONYMS
Sucih—a brahmana purified internally and externally; sat-bhakti—of devotional
service without motives; dipta-agni—by the blazing fire; dagdha—burmnt to
ashes; durjati—such as birth in a low family; kalmasah—whose sinful reactions;
$va-pakah api—even though born in a family of dog-eaters; budhaih—by learned
scholars; slagyah —recognized; na—not; veda-jiah api—even though com-
pletely conversant in Vedic knowledge; nastikah—an atheist.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, // ‘A person who has the pure characteristics
of a brahmana due to devotional service, which is like a blazing fire burning to
ashes all the sinful reactions of past lives, is certainly saved from the conse-
quences of sinful acts, such as taking birth in a lower family. Even though he
may be born in a family of dog-eaters, he is recognized by learned scholars.
However, although a person may be a learned scholar in Vedic knowledge, he
is not recognized if he is an atheist.
PURPORT
This verse and the next are quoted from the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (311,12), a
transcendental literature extracted from the Puranas.
TEXT 75
ভগবত্তক্তিহীনস্তয জাতিঃ শান্ত্রং জপস্তপঃ |
অপ্রাণসো্যেব দেহস্ত মণ্ডনং লোকরঞ্জনম্‌ ॥ ৭৫ ॥
bhagavad-bhakti-hinasya
13010 55118171 japas tapah


--- Page 287 ---
Text 771 The Lord Instructs Srila 003 Gosvami 285
apranasyeva dehasya
mandanarn loka-rafijanam
SYNONYMS
bhagavat-bhakti-hinasya—of a person devoid of devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; jatih—birth in a high caste; sastram—knowl-
edge in revealed scriptures; japah—pronunciation of mantras; tapah—austerities
and penances; apranasya—which is dead; iva—like; dehasya—of a body; man-
danam —decoration; loka—to the whims of people in general; rafijanam—simply
pleasing.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘For a person devoid of devotional service, birth in a great family or
nation, knowledge of revealed scripture, performance of austerities and
penance, and chanting of Vedic mantras are all like ornaments on a dead
body. Such ornaments simply serve the concocted pleasures of the general
populace.” ^“
TEXT 76
প্রভুর প্রেমাবেশ, আর राव ভক্তিসার।
সৌন্দর্যাদি দেখি” SL হৈল চমৎকার ॥ ৭৬ ॥
prabhura premavesa, ara prabhava bhakti-sara
saundaryadi dekhi’ bhattera haila camatkara
SYNONYMS
prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prema-avesa—ecstasy in love of God-
head; ara—and; prabhdava—the influence; bhakti-sdra—the essence of devo-
tional service; saundarya-adi—personal beauty and other qualities; dekhi’—
seeing; bhattera—of Vallabha Bhattacarya; haila—there was; camatkara—
astonishment.
TRANSLATION
When he saw the Lord’s ecstatic love, Vallabha Bhattacarya was certainly
very astonished. He was also astonished by the Lord's knowledge of the
essence of devotional service, as well as by His personal beauty and influence.
TEXT 77
সগণে প্রভুরে ভট্ট নৌকাতে চড়াঞা |
fowl দিতে নিজ-ঘরে एनिन्‌। नश। ॥ ৭৭ ॥


--- Page 288 ---
286 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
sagane prabhure bhatta naukate cadana
bhiksa dite nija-ghare calila 1375
SYNONYMS
sa-gane —with His associates; prabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhatta—
Vallabha Bhattacarya; naukate—a boat; cadana—putting aboard; bhiksa dite —to
offer lunch; nija-ghare —to his own place; calila—departed; lana—taking.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhattacarya then put Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates
aboard a boat and took them to his own place to offer them lunch.
TEXT 78
যমুলার जल HY চিন্কণ छागल ।
প্রেমাবেশে মহাপ্রভু হইলা বিহ্বল ॥ ৭৮ ॥
yamunara jala dekhi’ cikkana syamala
premavese mahaprabhu ha-ila vihvala
SYNONYMS
yamunara—of the River Yamuna; jala—the water; dekhi’—seeing; cikkana—
glossy; Syamala—blackish; prema-avese—in ecstatic love; mahaprabhu—Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; ha-ili—became; vihvala—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
While crossing the River Yamuna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the glossy
black water and was immediately bewildered with ecstatic love.
TEXT 79
ख्ङोत्र कञ्चि' যমুনার জলে দিলা ঝাপ ।
প্রভু দেখি” লবার মনে হৈল ভয়-কীাপ ॥ ৭৯ ॥
hunkara kari’ yamunara jale dila jhanpa
prabhu dekhi’ sabara mane haila bhaya-kanpa
SYNONYMS
hurikara kari’—making a loud sound; yamunara jale—in the water of the River
Yamuna; dila—gave; jhanpa—a plunge; prabhu dekhi’—seeing Lord Sri Caitanya


--- Page 289 ---
Text 81] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 287
Mahaprabhu; sabara—of everyone; mane—in the mind; haila—there was;
bhaya-karipa—fear and trembling.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, as soon as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the River Yamuna, He im-
mediately made a great sound and jumped into the water. Everyone was filled
with fear and trembling to see this.
TEXT 80
আস্তে-ব্যস্তে সবে ধরি” প্রভুরে উঠাইল ।
নৌকার উপরে প্রভু নাচিতে नोजिन ॥ ৮০ ॥
aste-vyaste sabe dhari’ prabhure uthaila
naukara upare prabhu nacite lagila
SYNONYMS
aste-vyaste—with great haste; sabe—all of them; dhari’—catching;
prabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; uthaila—raised; naukara—of the boat;
upare—on top; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nacite lagila—began to
dance.
TRANSLATION
They all hastily grabbed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and pulled Him out of the
water. Once on the boat's platform, the Lord began to dance.
TEXT 81
মহাপ্রভুর ভরে নৌকা করে টলমল |
ডুবিতে লাগিল নৌকা, ঝলকে ভরে জল ॥ ৮১ ॥
mahaprabhura bhare nauka kare talamala
dubite lagila nauka, jhalake bhare jala
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of 911 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; bhare—because of the weight;
nauka—the boat; kare —does; talamala—tilting; dubite —to sink; lagila—began;
nauka—the boat; jhalake —in gushes; bhare —fills; jala—water.
TRANSLATION
Due to the Lord’s heavy weight, the boat began to tilt. It began filling up
with water and was on the verge of sinking.


--- Page 290 ---
288 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 82
TU ভট্টের আগে প্রভুর ধৈর্য হৈল मन ।
তুর্বার উদ্ভট প্রেম নহে AE ॥ ৮২ ॥
yadyapi bhattera age prabhura dhairya haila mana
durvara udbhata prema nahe samvarana
SYNONYMS
„ yadyapi—although; bhattera—of Vallabhacarya; age—in front; prabhura—of
Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dhairya—patient; haila—was; mana—the mind; dur-
vara—difficult to stop; udbhata—wonderful; prema—ecstatic love; nahe —there
is not; samvarana—checking.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tried to restrain Himself as far as possible before
Vallabhacarya, but although He tried to keep calm, His ecstatic love could not
be checked.
TEXT 83
দেশ-পাত্র দেখি” মহাপ্রভু ধৈর্য হইল ।
আড়াইলের ঘাটে नौ क আসি” উত্তরিল ॥ ৮৩ ॥
desa-patra dekhi’ mahaprabhu dhairya ha-ila
adailera ghate nauka asi’ uttarila
SYNONYMS
desa-patra dekhi’—seeing the circumstances; mahaprabhu—S$ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; dhairya ha-ila—became calm; adailera ghate—at the shore of the
village Adaila; naukd —the boat; dsi’—coming; uttarila—landed.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the circumstances, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu finally became calm so
that the boat was able to reach the shore of Adaila and land there.
TEXT 84
ভয়ে ভট্ট সঙ্গে রহে, AGB FAT |
নিজ-গৃহে আনিলা প্রভুরে जटकटङ नयं ॥ ৮৪ ॥


--- Page 291 ---
Text 86] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 289
bhaye bhatta sange rahe, madhyahna (८1867
nija-grhe anila prabhure sangete lana
SYNONYMS
bhaye—with fear; bhatta—Vallabha Bhattacarya; sarige—in Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s association; rahe —remains; madhyahna karana—after arranging
for His bath; nija-grhe—to his own home; anila—brought; prabhure —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sangete—in company; laina—taking.
TRANSLATION
Fearing for the Lord’s welfare, Vallabha Bhatticarya stayed in His asso-
ciation. After arranging for the Lord’s bath, he took Him to his own house.
TEXT 85
আনন্দিত হঞ। ভট্ট দিল দিব্যাসল |
আপনে করিল প্রভুর পাদপ্রক্কালন ॥ ৮৫ ॥
anandita hana bhatta dila divyasana
apane karila prabhura pada-praksalana
SYNONYMS
anandita hafia—becoming pleased; bhatta—Vallabha Bhattacarya; dila—gave;
divya-asana—a nice sitting place; apane —personally; karila—did; prabhura—of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pada-praksalana—washing of the feet.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived at his home, Vallabha Bhattacarya,
being greatly pleased, offered the Lord a nice sitting place and personally
washed His feet.
TEXT 86
जवश्ट সেই জল मटक ধরিল।
নৃতন কৌপীন-বহির্বাস পরাইল ॥ ৮৬ ॥
savarise sei jala mastake dharila
natana kaupina-bahirvasa paraila


--- Page 292 ---
290 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
sa-varhse —with all the family members; sei—that; jala—water; mastake —on
the head; dharila—sprinkled; natana—fresh; kaupina—underwear; bahirvasa—
external covering; paraila—put on.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhattacarya and his whole family then sprinkled that water over
their heads. They then offered the Lord new underwear and outer garments.
TEXT 87
গদ্ধ-পুষ্প-ধূপ-দীপে মহাপুজ। কৈল।
ভট্টাচার্যে মান্য করি” পাক করাইল ॥ ৮৭ ॥
gandha-puspa-dhapa-dipe maha-paja kaila
bhattacarye manya kari’ paka karaila
SYNONYMS
gandha—scents; puspa—flowers; dhapa—incense; dipe—by lamps; maha-
puja kaila—he worshiped the Lord with great pomp; bhattacarye —to Balabhadra
Bhattacarya; manya kari’—offering respect; paka karaila—engaging in cooking.
TRANSLATION
Vallabhacarya worshiped the Lord with great pomp, offering scents, in-
cense, flowers and lamps, and with great respect he induced Balabhadra Bhat-
ta [the Lord’s cook] to cook.
TEXT 88
ভিক্ষা করাইল প্রভুরে সঙ্গেহ ISL |
রূপগোসাঞ্জি দুইভাইয়ে করাইল ভোজনে ॥ bbe
bhiksa karaila prabhure sasneha yatane
rapa-gosani dui-bhaiye karaila bhojane
SYNONYMS
bhiksa karaila—made take His lunch; prabhure —Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sa-
sneha—with affection; yatane—with great care; rdpa-gosani—Srila Rapa
Cosvami; dui-bhaiye—the two brothers; karaila bhojane—made eat.


--- Page 293 ---
Text 90] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 291
TRANSLATION
Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was offered lunch with great care and affec-
tion. The brothers Ripa Gosvami and Sri Vallabha were also offered food.
TEXT 89
ভট্টাচার্য প্রীরূপে দেওয়াইল ‘TECH’ |
তবে সেই প্রসাদ কৃষ্ণনাস পাইল শেষ ॥ ৮৯ ॥
bhattacarya sri-rape deoydila ‘avasesa’
tabe sei prasada krspadasa paila sesa
SYNONYMS
bhattacarya—Vallabha Bhattacarya; sri-ripe—to Srila Rapa Gosvami;
deoydila—offered; avasesa—the remnants; tabe—thereafter; sei—those;
prasada—remnants of food; krsnadasa—Krsnadasa; paila—got; sesa—the
balance.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhattacarya first offered the remnants of the Lord’s food to Srila
Ripa Gosvami and then to Krsnadasa.
TEXT 90
মুখবাস দিয়া প্রভুরে করাইল =F |
আপনে ভট্ট করেন প্রভুর পাদ-সন্ছাহন ॥ >° ॥
mukha-vasa diya prabhure karaila sayana
apane bhatta karena prabhura pada-samvahana
SYNONYMS
mukha-vasa—spices; diya—offering; prabhure—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
karaila—made to do; sayana—resting; dpane—personally; bhatta—Srila Vallabha
Bhatta; karena—does; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pada-sam-
vahana—massaging the leg.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was then given spices to purify His mouth. Afterwards He was
made to rest, and Vallabha Bhattacarya personally massaged His legs.


--- Page 294 ---
292 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 91
প্রভু পাঠাইল Sie করিতে ভোজনে |
ভোজন कत्रि আইলা (Sra প্রভুর চরণে ॥ >> ॥
prabhu pathaila tanre karite bhojane
bhojana kari’ 3//3 tenho prabhura carane
SYNONYMS
prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; pathaila—sent; tarire—him (Vallabha Bhat-
tacarya); karite bhojane—to take his lunch; bhojana kari’—after taking lunch;
aila—came; tenho—he; prabhura carane—to the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
While vallabha Bhattacarya was massaging Him, the Lord asked him to go
take prasada. After taking prasada, he returned to the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 92
হেনকালে আইলা রঘুপতি উপাধ্যায়।
তিরুহিত। পণ্ডিত, বড় বৈষ্ণব, মহাশয় ॥ ৯২ ॥
hena-kale aila raghupati upadhyaya
tiruhita pandita, bada vaisnava, mahasaya
SYNONYMS
hena-kale—at this time; aila—arrived; raghupati upadhyaya—a brahmana
named Raghupati Upadhyaya; tiruhita—belonging to the Tiruhita state; pandita—
a very learned scholar; bada—great; vaisnava—devotee; mahasaya—respectable
gentleman.
TRANSLATION
At that time there arrived Raghupati Upadhyaya, who belonged to the
Tiruhita district. He was a very learned scholar, a great devotee and a respect-
able gentleman.
PURPORT
Tiruhita, or Tirhutiya, is a combination of four districts in Behar: Sarana, Cam-
parana, Majahphara-pura and Dvarabhanga. The people of this state are called
Tirutiya.


--- Page 295 ---
Text 95] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 293
TEXT 93
আসি” (Stal কৈল প্রভুর চরণ वन्न |
‘FT মতি Iw বলি” প্রভুর বচন ॥ >< ॥
asi’ tenho kaila prabhura carana vandana
‘krsne mati rahu’ bali’ prabhura vacana
SYNONYMS
asi’—coming; tenho—he; kaila—did; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
carana vandana—worshiping the lotus feet; krsne mati rahu—just remain always
Krsna conscious; bali‘—saying; prabhura vacana—the blessings of $i Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Raghupati Upadhyaya first offered his respects to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
and the Lord gave him His blessings, saying, ‘Always stay in Krsna conscious-
ness.”
TEXT 94
শুনি” আনন্দিত হৈল উপাধ্যায়ের मन |
প্রভু তারে কহিল, “কহ কৃষ্ণের বর্ণন' ॥ ৯৪ ॥
Suni” anandita haila upadhyayera mana
prabhu tanre kahila, — ‘kaha krsnera ৮৭/03/7397
SYNONYMS
Suni’—hearing; dnandita—very pleased; haila—became; upadhyayera mana—
the mind of Upadhyaya; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tarnre—to him;
kahila—spoke; kaha krsnera varnana—just try to describe Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Raghupati Upadhyaya was very pleased to hear the Lord’s blessings. The
Lord then asked him to describe Krsna.
TEXT 95
নিজ-কৃত কৃষ্ণলীলা-প্লোক পড়িল |
শুনি” মহাপ্রভুর মহা প্রেমাবেশ হৈল ॥ ৯৫ ॥


--- Page 296 ---
294 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
nija-krta krsna-lila-sloka padila
Suni’ mahaprabhura maha premavesa haila
SYNONYMS
nija-krta—personally composed; krsna-lili—on pastimes of Krsna; sloka—
verses; padila—recited; $uni’—hearing; mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; maha—great; prema-avesa—ecstatic love; haila—there was.
TRANSLATION
When Raghupati Upadhyaya was requested to describe Krsna, he began to
recite some verses he had personally composed about Krsna’s pastimes. Hear-
ing those verses, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was overwhelmed with ecstatic
love.
TEXT 96
শ্রুতিমপরে স্থতিমিতরে ভারতমন্তযে ङ्‌ ভব-ভীতাঃ |
অহমিহই নন্দং বন্দে যস্যালিন্দে পরং ব্রহ্ম ॥ ৯৬ ॥
Srutim apare smrtim itare
bharatam anye bhajantu bhava-bhitah
aham iha nandam vande
yasyalinde param brahma
SYNONYMS
Srutim—Vedic literature; apare—someone; smrtim—corollary to the Vedic
literature; itare—others; bharatam—Mahabharata; anye —still others; bhajantu—
let them worship; bhava-bhitah—those who are afraid of material existence;
aham—l; iha—here; nandam—Maharaja Nanda; vande—worship; yasya—
whose; alinde—in the courtyard; param brahma—the Supreme Brahman, Ab-
solute Truth.
TRANSLATION
Raghupati Upadhyaya recited: “Those who are afraid of material existence
worship Vedic literature. Some worship smrti, the corollaries to Vedic
literature, and others worship the Mahabharata. As far as 1 am concerned, |
worship Maharaja Nanda, the father of Krsna, in whose courtyard the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is playing.”
PURPORT
This verse recited by Raghupati Upadhyaya was later included in Sri Rapa
Cosvami's Padyavali (126).


--- Page 297 ---
Text 98] The Lord Instructs Srila [003 Gosvami 295
TEXT 97
“আগে কহ প্রভু-বাক্যে উপাধ্যায় কহিল |
রঘুপতি উপাধ্যায় নমস্কার কৈল ॥ ৯৭ ॥
‘age kaha’— prabhu-vakye upadhyaya kahila
raghupati upadhyaya namaskara kaila
SYNONYMS
age kaha—please speak further; prabhu-vakye —on the request of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu;  upadhyaya—Raghupati Upadhyaya; kahila—said; raghupati
upadhyaya—Raghupati Upadhyaya; namaskara kaila—offered Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu obeisances.
TRANSLATION
When Raghupati Upadhyaya was requested by the Lord to recite more, he
immediately offered his respects to the Lord and granted His request.
TEXT 98
wef কথয়িতুমীণে সমপ্রতি কো द्‌। প্রতীতিমায়াতু |
গোপ তি-তনয়াকুঞ্জে গোপবধূটা-বেটং ব্রহ্ম ॥ ৯৮ ॥
kam prati kathayitum ise
samprati ko va pratitim ayatu
go-pati-tanaya-kunje
gopa-vadhati-vitari brahma
SYNONYMS
kam prati—unto whom; kathayitum—to speak; iSe—am | able; samprati—
now; kah—who; va—or; pratitim—belief; ayatu—would do; go-pati—of the
sun-god; tanaya—of the daughter (the Yamuna); kuije—in the bushes on the
bank; gopa-vadhati—of the cowherd girls; vitam—the hunter; brahma—the
Supreme Personality of Codhead.
TRANSLATION
“To whom can | speak who will believe me when | say that Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is hunting the gopis in the bushes by the
banks of the River Yamuna? In this way the Lord demonstrates His pastimes.’’


--- Page 298 ---
296 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
This verse was also later included in Padyavali (98).
TEXT 99
প্রভু কহেন,- কহ, তেঁহে। পড়ে কৃষ্ণলীলা |
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভুর দেহ-মন SAFI] ॥ >> ॥
prabhu kahena,——kaha, tenho pade krsna-lila
premavese prabhura deha-mana ayuyaila
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahena—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said; kaha—please go on speaking;
tenho—he; pade—recites; krspa-lila—the pastimes of Lord Krsna; prema-
avese—in great ecstasy of love; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; deha-
mana—body and mind; ayuyaila—became slackened.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested Raghupati Upadhyaya to continue
speaking about the pastimes of Sri Krsna. Thus the Lord was absorbed in
ecstatic love, and His mind and body slackened.
PURPORT
Our minds and bodies are always engaged in material activities. When they are
activated on the spiritual platform, they slacken on the material platform.
TEXT 100
প্রেম দেখি” উপাধ্যায়ের হৈল চমৎকার |
AFF নহে, ই-হো- কৃষ্ণ করিল निर्धन ॥ ১০০ ॥
prema dekhi’ upadhyayera haila camatkara
‘manusya nahe, inho——krspa’——karila nirdhara
SYNONYMS
prema dekhi’—seeing His ecstatic love; upadhyayera—of Raghupati
Upadhyaya; haila—there was; camatkara—wonder; manusya nahe—not a
human being; inho—He; krspa—Lord Krsna Himself; karila nirdhara—made
assessment.


--- Page 299 ---
Text 102] The Lord Instructs Srila ९००० Gosvami 297
TRANSLATION
When Raghupati Upadhyaya saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s ecstatic
symptoms, he decided that the Lord was not a human being but Krsna Him-
self.
TEXT 101
প্রভু कटङ,- উপাধ্যায়, শ্রেষ্ঠ মান” কায় ?
“শ্যামমেব পরং রূপং কহে উপাধ্যায় ॥ ১০১ ॥
prabhu kahe, —upadhyaya, srestha mana’ kaya?
‘Syamam eva param raparh’——kahe upadhyaya
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired; upadhyaya—My dear
Upadhyaya; srestha—the supermost; mana’—you consider; kdya—what;
Syamam—Syamasundara, Krsna; eva—certainly; param rdpam—the supreme
form; kahe—replied; upadhyaya—Raghupati Upadhyaya.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Raghupati Upadhyaya, “According to your
decision, who is the foremost being?’’ Raghupati Upadhyaya replied, “Lord
Syamasundarais the supreme form.”
TEXT 102
শ্যাম-রূপের বাসস্থান শ্রেষ্ঠ মান” কায় ?
“পুরী মধুপুরী वव्र — FL" উপাধ্যায় ॥ ১০২ ॥
Syama-rapera vasa-sthana srestha mana’ kaya?
‘puri madhu-puri vara’—kahe upadhyaya
SYNONYMS
$yama-rapera—of the supreme form, Syamasundara; vdsa-sthana—residence;
srestha—the supreme; mana’—you accept; kaya—which; puri—the city;
madhu-puri—Mathura; = varda—best;  kahe—said; upadhyaya—Raghupati
Upadhyaya.
TRANSLATION
“Of all Krsna’s abodes, which do you think is the best?” Raghupati
Upadhyaya said, ‘‘Madhu-puri, or Mathura-dhama, is certainly the best.”


--- Page 300 ---
298 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
Lord Krsna has many forms, as stated in Brahma-sarnhita (5.33): advaitam
acyutam anadim ananta-rapam. ऽं Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Raghupati
Upadhyaya which form was the best of Lord Krsna’s millions of forms, and he im-
mediately replied that the supreme form was the Syamasundara form. In that
form, Krsna stands curved in three places and holds His flute. The Syamasundara
form is also described in Brahma-sarnhita (5.38):
premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yar Syamasundaram acintya-guna-svaraparm
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee whose
eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form of Syama-
sundara situated within the heart of the devotee.”
Those who are filled with ecstatic love for Krsna always see the form of Syama-
sundara within their hearts. Raghupati Upadhyaya confirms that the Absolute
Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has many incarnations —Narayana,
Nrsirha, Varaha and others—but Krsna is distinguished as the supermost. Ac-
cording to Srimad-Bhagavatam: krsnas tu bhagavan svayam. “Krsna is the original
Personality of Godhead.” Krsna means Syamasundara, who plays His flute in
Vrndavana. Of all forms, this form is the best of all. Krsna lives sometimes in
Mathura and sometimes in Dvaraka, but Mathura is considered the better place.
This is also confirmed by Rapa Gosvami in his Upadesamrta (9): vaikunthaj janito
vara madhu-puri. “Madhu-puri, or Mathura, is far superior to the Vaikunthalokas in
the spiritual world.”
TEXT 103
বাল্য, পৌগণ্ড, কৈশোরে, শ্রেষ্ঠ মান” কায় ?
‘qx: কৈশোরকং (HIT কহে উপাধ্যায় ॥ ১০৩ ॥
balya, pauganda, kaisore, srestha mana’ kaya?
‘vayah kaisorakarn dhyeyarm’——kahe upadhyaya
SYNONYMS
balya—childhood; pauganda—the boyhood age before youth; kaisore —the
beginning of youth; srestha—best; mana’—you think; kdaya—which; vayah —the
age; kaisorakam—kaisora or fresh youth; dhyeyam—most worshipable; kahe —
said; upadhyaya—Raghupati Upadhyaya.


--- Page 301 ---
Text 105] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 299
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked, “Of the three ages of Krsna known as
childhood, boyhood and fresh youth, which do you consider best?”
Raghupati Upadhyaya replied, ‘Fresh youth is the best age.”
TEXT 104
রসগণ-মধ্যে তুমি শ্রেষ্ঠ মান” কায় ?
“आंच এব পরো রসঃ*--কহে উপাধ্যায় ॥ ১০৪ ॥
rasa-gana-madhye tumi Srestha mana’ kaya?
‘adya eva paro rasah’——kahe upadhyaya
SYNONYMS
rasa-gana-madhye —among all the mellows; tumi—you; Srestha—as supreme;
mana’—accept; kdya—which one; adyah—conjugal love; eva—certainly; parah
rasah—the best of all mellows; kahe—replied; upadhyaya—Raghupati
Upadhyaya.
TRANSLATION
When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked, “Among all the mellows, which do
you consider 0০517” Raghupati Upadhyaya replied, “116 mellow of conjugal
love is supermost.”’
TEXT 105
প্রভু কহে,- ভাল ष मिथाटेन মোরে |
এত বলি” শ্লোক পড়ে গদগদ-স্বরে ॥ ১০৫ ॥
prabhu kahe, —bhala tattva sikhaila more
eta bali’ sloka pade gadgada-svare
SYNONYMS
prabhu —5Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; kahe —said; bhala—good; tattva —conclu-
sions; Sikhaila more —you have taught Me; eta bali’—saying this; sloka pade —5ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited the full verse; gadgada-svare—in a faltering voice.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, ‘You have certainly given first-class
conclusions.” After saying this, He began to recite the full verse with a falter-
ing voice.


--- Page 302 ---
300 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 106
শ্বামমেব পরৎ রূপং পুরী মধুপুরী বর! ৷
বয়ঃ কৈশোরকং ধোযেয়মাছ্য এব পরে त॒मः ॥ ১০৬ ॥
Syamam eva param rapam
puri madhu-puri vara
vayah kaisorakar dhyeyam
adya eva paro rasah
SYNONYMS
Syamam—the form of Syamasundara; eva—certainly; param—supreme;
rapam—form; puri—the place; madhu-puri—Mathura; vara—best; vayah—the
age; kaisorakam—fresh youth; dhyeyam—always to be meditated on; adyah—
the original transcendental mellow, or conjugal love; eva—certainly; parah—the
supreme; rasah—mellow.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘The form of Syamasundara is the supreme form, the city of Mathura is the
supreme abode, Lord Krsna’s fresh youth should always be meditated upon,
and the mellow of conjugal love is the supreme mellow.’ ^^
PURPORT
This verse is found in Padyavali (82).
TEXT 107
প্রেমাবেশে প্রভু তারে কৈল৷ আলিঙ্গন |
প্রেম মত্ত Z| তেঁহে। করেন নর্তন ॥ ১০৭ ॥
premavese prabhu (3776 kaila alingana
prema matta hana tenho karena nartana
SYNONYMS
prema-avese—in ecstatic love; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre—
him; kaila—did; alingana—embracing; prema matta haia—being overwhelmed
by ecstatic love; terlho—he; karena nartana—began to dance.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then embraced Raghupati Upadhyaya in ecstatic
love. Raghupati Upadhyaya also was overwhelmed by love, and he began to
dance.


--- Page 303 ---
Text 109] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 301
TEXT 108
দেখি ব্ল্পভ-ভট্ট মনে চমৎকার देन |
তুই পুজ আনি প্রভুর চরণে পাড়িল ॥ ১০৮. ॥
dekhi’ vallabha-bhatta mane camatkara haila
dui putra ani’ prabhura carane padila
SYNONYMS
dekhi’—seeing; vallabha-bhatta—of Vallabha Bhattacarya; mane —in the mind;
camatkara haila—there was astonishment; dui putra ani’—bringing his two sons;
prabhura carane padila—made them lie at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhatticirya was struck with wonder to see Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and Raghupati Upadhyaya dance. He even brought forward his
two sons and made them fall down at the Lord's lotus feet.
PURPORT
The two sons of Vallabhacarya were Gopinatha and Viththalesvara. When $ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited Prayaga in the year 1434 or 1435 Sakabda Era,
Viththaledvara was not yet born. In this regard, one should see Madhya-1ila 18.47.
TEXT 109
প্রভু দেখিবারে গ্রামের সব-লোক खादेन |
প্রভু-দরশনে সবে ‘FRESE হইল ॥ ১০৯ ॥
prabhu dekhibare gramera saba-loka aila
prabhu-darasane sabe ‘krsna-bhakta’ ha-ila
SYNONYMS
prabhu dekhibare —to see Sr Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gramera—of the village;
saba-loka—all the people; dila—came; prabhu-darasane —simply by seeing Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sabe —all of them; krsna-bhakta ha-ila—became devo-
tees of Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing that $ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had arrived, all the villagers
went to see Him. Simply by seeing Him, they all became devotees of Krsna.


--- Page 304 ---
302 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 110
ত্রাঙ্মণসকল করেন প্রভুর নিমন্ত্রণ |
বল্লভ-ভট্ট ভা-সবারে করেন নিবারণ ॥ ১১০ ॥
brahmana-sakala karena prabhura nimantrana
vallabha-bhatta tan-sabare karena nivarana
SYNONYMS
brahmana-sakala—all the brahmanas of that village; karena—make; prabhura—
of जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nimantrana—invitations; vallabha-bhatta—Vallabha
Bhattacarya; tan-sabare —all of them; karena—does; nivarana—forbidding.
TRANSLATION
All the brahmanas of the village were anxious to extend invitations to the
Lord, but Vallabha Bhattacarya forbade them to do so.
TEXT 111
প্রেমোন্মাদে পড়ে গোসাঞ্ঞি মধ্য-যমুনাতে |
প্রয়াগে চালাইৰ, 2&1 न। দিব রহিতে ॥ ১১১ ॥
‘premonmade pade gosani madhya-yamunate
prayage calaiba, 1037 na diba rahite
SYNONYMS
prema-unmade—in the madness of ecstatic love; pade —fell down; gosani —Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; madhya-yamunate—in the River Yamuna; prayage
calaiba—! shall again take Him to Prayaga; ihan—here; na—not; diba—I shall
allow Him; rahite—to stay.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhatta then decided not to keep Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at
Adaila because the Lord had jumped into the River Yamuna in ecstatic love.
Therefore he decided to bring Him to Prayaga.
TEXT 112
यत्र ইচ্ছ প্রয়াগে যাঞা করিবে নিমন্ত্রণ” |
এত বলি' প্রভু Few! করিল গমন ॥ ১১২ ॥


--- Page 305 ---
Text 114] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 303
yanra 1০003, prayage yana karibe nimantrana’
eta bali’ prabhu lana karila gamana
SYNONYMS
yanra—of whom; iccha—there is a desire; prayage yana—going to Prayaga;
karibe—may do; nimantrana—invitations; eta bali’—saying this; prabhu lana—
with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; karila gamana—he departed for Prayaga.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhatta said, “If anyone likes, he can go to Prayaga and extend in-
vitations to the Lord.” In this way he took the Lord with him and departed for
Prayaga.
TEXT 113
भेशा-नटय মহাপ্রভুরে নৌকাতে বসাঞ। |
প্রয়াগে আইল৷ ভট্ট গোসাঞ্িরে লঞ। ॥ ১১৩ ॥
ganga-pathe mahaprabhure naukate vasana
prayage aila bhatta gosanire lana
SYNONYMS
ganga-pathe—on the Ganges; mahaprabhure—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
naukate vasana—making to sit down on the boat; prayage aila—went to Prayaga;
bhatta—Vallabha Bhatta; gosanire land—with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Vallabha Bhattacarya avoided the River Yamuna. Putting the Lord on a boat
in the River Ganges, he went with Him to Prayaga.
TEXT 114
লোক-ভিড়-ভয়ে প্রভু “দশাস্বমেধে” যাঞ। |
রূপ-গোসাঞ্ঞিরে শিক্ষ। করান শক্তি সঞ্চারিয়।॥১১৪॥
loka-bhida-bhaye prabhu ‘dasasvamedhe’ yana
rapa-gosanire siksa kara’na sakti sancariya
SYNONYMS
loka-bhida-bhaye —from fear of the great crowd of people; prabhu—S$ri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dasasvamedhe —to Dasasvamedha-ghata; yana—going;


--- Page 306 ---
304 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-Ilila, Ch. 19
rapa-gosanire—Rapa Gosvami; siksa kara'na—teaches; Sakti saicariya—endow-
ing him with potency.
TRANSLATION

Due to the great crowds in Prayaga, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to a
place called Dasasvamedha-ghata. It was there that the Lord instructed Sri
Rapa Gosvami and empowered him in the philosophy of devotional service.

PURPORT

Parasya saktir vividhaiva srayate. The Supreme Lord has multi-potencies, which
the Lord bestows on His fortunate devotees. The Lord has a special potency by
which He spreads the Krsna consciousness movement. This is also explained in
Caitanya-caritamrta (Antya 7.11). Krspa-sakti vina nahe tara pravartana: “One
cannot spread the holy name of Krsna without being specifically empowered by
Lord Krsna.” A devotee who receives this power from the Lord must be con-
sidered very fortunate. The Krsna consciousness movement is spreading to en-
lighten people about their real position, their original relationship with Krsna. One
requires Krsna's special power in order to be able to do this. People forget their
relationship with Krsna and work under the spell of maya life after life,
transmigrating from one body to another. This is the process of material existence.
The Supreme Lord Sri Krsna personally descends to teach people that their posi-
tion in the material world is a mistaken one. The Lord again comes as 5 Caitanya
Mahaprabhu to induce people to take to Krsna consciousness. The Lord also em-
powers a special devotee to teach people their constitutional position.

TEXT 115
কৃষ্ণতস্ব-ভক্তিতত্ব-রসতন্ত্র-প্রান্ত |
जव শিখাইল প্রভু ভাগবত-সিদ্ধান্ত ॥ ১১৫ ॥
krsnatattva-bhaktitattva-rasatattva-pranta
saba sikhaila prabhu bhagavata-siddhanta
SYNONYMS

krsna-tattva—of the truth about Lord Krsna; bhakti-tattva—of the truth about
devotional service; rasa-tattva—of the truth about transcendental mellows;
pranta—the ultimate limit; saba—all; sikhaila—taught; prabhu—Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; bhagavata-siddhanta—the conclusions of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

TRANSLATION

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught Srila Ripa Gosvami the ultimate limit of

the truth about Lord Krsna, the truth about devotional service and the truth


--- Page 307 ---
Text 117] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 305
about transcendental mellows, consummating in conjugal love between
Radha and Krsna. Finally He told Ripa Gosvami about the ultimate conclu-
sions of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 116
রামানন্দব-পাশে যত সিদ্ধান্ত শুনিলা।
রূপে কৃপা করি” তাহ। সব সঞ্চারিল। ॥ ১১৬ ॥
ramananda-pase yata siddhanta sunila
rape krpa kari’ taha saba sancarila
SYNONYMS
ramananda-pase — from Ramananda Raya; yata—all; siddhanta—the ultimate
conclusions; Sunila—he heard; rape —unto Sri Rapa Cosvami; krpa kari’—show-
ing His causeless mercy; (303 saba—all those; saricarila—infused.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught Ripa Gosvami all the conclusions He had
heard from Ramananda Raya and duly empowered him so that he could
understand them.
TEXT 117
প্লীরূপ-হুদয়ে প্রভু শক্তি সঞ্চারিলা |
সর্বতস্ব-নিকরূপণে “প্রবীণ' করিল ॥ ১১৭ ॥
Sri-rapa-hrdaye prabhu sakti sarnicarila
sarva-tattva-nirapane ‘pravina’ karila
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa-hrdaye —in the heart of Srila Rapa Gosvami; prabhu—Lord $ri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; sakti sancarila—infused spiritual strength; sarva-tattva—all con-
clusive truths; nirdgpane—in ascertaining; pravina karili—made him fully ex-
perienced.
TRANSLATION
By entering the heart of Ripa Gosvami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu em-
powered him to ascertain properly the conclusions of all truths. He made him
an experienced devotee whose decisions correctly agreed with the verdicts of
the disciplic succession. Thus Sri Ripa Gosvami was personally empowered
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 308 ---
306 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
The principles of devotional service are only apparently under the jurisdiction
of material activity. To be rightly guided, one must be personally guided by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This was the case with Srila Rapa Gosvami, Sanatana
Gosvami and other acaryas.
TEXT 118
শিবানন্দ-সেনের शरू “কবিকর্ণপুর”।
রূপের মিলন” স্ব-গ্রন্থে লিখিয়াছেন প্রচুর ॥ ১১৮ ॥
sivananda-senera putra ‘kavi-karpapara’
‘rapera milana’ sva-granthe likhiyachena pracura
SYNONYMS
Sivananda-senera—of Sivananda Sena; putra—the son; kavi-karnaptra—Kavi-
1৫311730013; rapera milana—meeting Rapa Cosvami; sva-granthe—in his own
book; likhiyachena pracura—has written profusely.
TRANSLATION
In his book Caitanya-candrodaya, Kavi-karnapira, the son of Sivananda
Sena, has elaborately described the meeting between Sri Ripa Gosvami and
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 119
কালেন বৃন্দাবনকেলিবার্তা
লুপ্তেতিতাংখ্যাপয়িতুংবিশিয়য।
ক্পামৃতেনাভিষিষেচ দেব-
TCA রূপঞ্চ সনাতনঞ্চ ॥ ১১৯ ॥
kalena vrndavana-keli-varta
lupteti tar khyapayiturn visisya
krpamrtenabhisiseca devas
tatraiva rdpar ca sanatanam ca
SYNONYMS
kalena—in the course of time; vrndavana-keli-varta—topics concerning the
transcendental mellows of the pastimes of Lord Krsna in Vrndavana; lupta—
almost lost; iti—thus; tam —all those; khyapayitum—to enunciate; visisya—mak-
ing specific; krpa-amrtena—with the nectar of mercy; abhisiseca—sprinkled;


--- Page 309 ---
Text 120] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 307
devah—the Lord; tatra—there; eva—indeed; rapam—Srila Rapa Gosvami; ca—
and; sanatanam—Sanatana Gosvami; ca—as well as.
TRANSLATION
“In the course of time, the transcendental news of Krsna’'s pastimes in
Vrndavana was almost lost. To enunciate explicitly those transcendental
pastimes, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, at Prayaga, empowered Srila Rapa
Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami with the nectar of His mercy to carry out this
work in Vrndavana.
PURPORT
This verse and the following two verses are from Act Nine (38,29,30) of
Caitanya-candrodaya by Sri Kavi-karnapdara.
TEXT 120
যঃ প্রাগেব প্রিয়গুণগণৈর্গাঢ়বদ্ধোহপি মুক্তো
গেহাধ্যা সাভ্রস ইব পরো মূর্ত এবাপমূর্তঃ ৷
প্রেমালাপৈরদূঢ়িতরপরিধঙ্গরঙ্গৈঃ প্রয়াগে
তং শ্রীক্ূপং সমমঙ্গপমেনাঙ্ুজগাহ দেবঃ ॥ ১২০
yah prag eva priya-guna-ganair gadha-baddho ‘pi mukto
gehadhyasad rasa iva paro marta evapy amdartah
premalapair drdhatara-parisvanga-rangaih prayage
tari $ri-raparih samam anupamenanujagraha devah
SYNONYMS
yah—who; prak eva—previously; priya-guna-ganaih—by the desirable tran-
scendental qualities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; gadha—deeply; baddhah—at-
tached; api—although; muktah —liberated; geha-adhyasat—from the bondage of
family life; rasah—transcendental mellows; iva—like; parah—transcendental;
martah —personal form; eva—certainly; api—although; amartah—without hav-
ing a material form; prema-alapaih —by discussions of transcendental love of the
Supreme; drdhatara—firm; parisvariga—of embracing; rangaih—with great
pleasure; prayage—at Prayaga; tam—to him; sri-rapam—Rapa  Gosvamr;
samam—with; anupamena—Anupama; anujagraha—showed mercy; devah—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
“From the very beginning, Srila Ripa Gosvami was deeply attracted by the
transcendental qualities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thus he was perma-


--- Page 310 ---
308 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
nently relieved from family life. Srila Ripa Gosvami and his younger brother,
Vallabha, were blessed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Although the Lord was
transcendentally situated in His transcendental eternal form, at Prayaga He
told Rapa Gosvami about transcendental ecstatic love of Krsna. The Lord then
embraced him very fondly and bestowed all His mercy upon him.
TEXT 121
প্রিয়স্বরূপে দয়িতস্বরূপে প্রেমস্বরূপে সহজাভিক্সপে |
নিজাঙুরূপে প্রভুরেকরূপে ততান রূপে স্ববিলাসরূপে ॥১২১॥
priya-svarape dayita-svarape
prema-svarape sahajabhirape
nijanurape prabhur eka-rape
tatana rape svavilasa-rape
SYNONYMS
priya-svarpe—unto the person whose dear friend was Srila Svarapa Damodara
Gosvami; dayita-svardpe —who was very dear to Him (Sr Caitanya 14317313870);
prema-svarape —unto the replica of His personal ecstatic love; sahaja-abhirape —
who was naturally very beautiful; nija-anurape —who exactly followed the prin-
ciples of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; prabhuh—Si Caitanya Mahaprabhu; eka-
rape—to the one; tatana—explained; ripe—unto Rapa Gosvami; sva-vildsa-
rape —who describes the pastimes of Lord Krsna.
TRANSLATION
“Indeed, Srila Rapa Gosvami, whose dear friend was Svarapa Damodara,
was the exact replica of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he was very, very dear
to the Lord. Being the embodiment of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s ecstatic
love, Ripa Gosvami was naturally very beautiful. He very carefully followed
the principles enunciated by the Lord, and he was a competent person to ex-
plain properly the pastimes of Lord Krsna. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu expanded
His mercy to Srila Ripa Gosvami just so he could render service by writing
transcendental literatures.”
TEXT 122
এইমত কর্ণপূৰ লিখে স্থানে-স্থানে |
প্রভু FH टेकन्‌। LACT কূপ-সনাতনে ॥ ১২২ ॥
ei-mata karnapara likhe sthane-sthane
prabhu krpa kaila yaiche rapa-sanatane


--- Page 311 ---
Text 124] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 309
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; karna-para—the poet known as Kavi-karnapara; likhe —
writes; sthane-sthane—in various places; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
krpa kaili—showed His mercy; yaiche—how; rapa-sanatane—to Srila Rapa
Gosvami and Srila Sanatana Gosvamr.
TRANSLATION
The characteristics of Srila Rapa Gosvami have thus been described in
various places by the poet Kavi-karnapiira. An account has also been given of
how ऽ Caitanya Mahaprabhu bestowed His causeless mercy upon Srila Ripa
Gosvami and Srila Sanatana Gosvami.
TEXT 123
মহাপ্রভুর যত বড় বড় ভক্ত মাত্র।
রূপ-সন।তন- সবার কুপা-গোৌরব-পাত্র ॥ ১২৩ ॥
mahaprabhura yata bada bada bhakta matra
rapa-sanatana—sabara krpa-gaurava-patra
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; yata —all; bada bada—great,
great; bhakta—devotees; matra—up to; rdpa-sanatana—Srila Rapa Gosvami and
Srila Sanatana Cosvami; sabara—of everyone; krpa—of the mercy; gaurava—and
honor; patra—objects.
TRANSLATION
Srila Ripa Gosvami and Sanitana Gosvami were the objects of love and
honor for all the great stalwart devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 124
কেহ যদি দেশে যায় দেখি” বৃন্দাবন ।
তারে প্রশ্ন করেন প্রভুর পারিষদগণ 1 ১২৪ ॥
keha yadi dese yaya dekhi’ vindavana
tanre prasna karena prabhura parisada-gana
SYNONYMS
keha—someone; yadi—if; dese—to his country; yaya—goes; dekhi’—after
seeing; vrndavana—Vrndavana; tanre—unto that person; prasna karena—put


--- Page 312 ---
310 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
questions; prabhura—of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; parisada-gana—personal
associates.
TRANSLATION
If someone returned to his country after seeing Vrndavana, the associates of
the Lord would ask him questions.
TEXT 125
“कङ्‌, डा] কৈছে রহে রূপ-সনাতন ?
বৈছে রহে, কৈছে বৈরাগ্য, কৈছে ভোজন ? ১২৫ ॥
“kaha, —tahan kaiche rahe rapa-sanatana?
kaiche rahe, kaiche vairagya, kaiche bhojana?
SYNONYMS
kaha—please describe; tahan—there; kaiche —how; rahe —remain; rapa—
Rapa Gosvami; sandtana—Sanatana Gosvami; kaiche rahe—how do they live;
kaiche vairagya—how do they practice renunciation; kaiche bhojana—how do
they eat.
TRANSLATION
They would ask those returning from Vrndavana, “How are Rapa and
Sanatana doing in Vrndavana? What are their activities in the renounced
order? How do they manage to eat?’ These were the questions asked.
TEXT 126
বকৈছে অষ্টগ্রহর করেন AF-S ?”
তবে প্রশংসিয়| ঝহে সেই ভক্তগণ ॥ ১২৬ ॥
kaiche asta-prahara karena sri-krsna-bhajana?”
tabe prasarnsiya kahe sei bhakta-gana
SYNONYMS
kaiche —how; asta-prahara—twenty-four hours; karena—do; sri-krsna-bha-
jana—worshiping of Lord Krsna; tabe—at that time; prasarsiya—praising;
kahe —described; sei bhakta-gana—those devotees.


--- Page 313 ---
Text 128] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 311
TRANSLATION
The [०१५५ associates would also ask, ‘How is it that Rapa and Sanatana are
engaging in devotional service twenty-four hours daily ?” At that time the per-
son who had returned from Vrndavana would praise Srila ९००० and Sanatana
Gosvami.
TEXT 127
“অনিকেত তুঁহে, বনে যত বৃচ্ষগাণ |
এক এক বৃক্ষের তলে এক এক রাত্রি শয়ন ॥ ১২৭ ॥
“aniketa dunhe, vane yata vrksa-gana
eka eka vrksera tale eka eka ratri sayana
SYNONYMS
aniketa—without a residence; dunhe—both of them; vane —in the forest; yata
vrksa-gana—as many trees as there are; eka eka vrksera—of one tree after
another; tale—at the base; eka eka ratri—one night after another; sayana—lying
down to sleep.
TRANSLATION
‘The brothers actually have no fixed residence. They reside beneath trees —
one night under one tree and the next night under another.
TEXT 128
“বিপ্রগৃহে” স্থূলভিক্ষি॥ কাই মাধুকরী |
শুদ্ক রুটা-চান| চিবায় ভোগ পরিহরি' ॥ ১২৮ ॥
‘vipra-grhe’ sthala-bhiksa, kahan madhu-kari
Suska ruti-cana civaya bhoga parihari’
SYNONYMS
vipra-grhe—in the house of a brahmana; sthala-bhiksa—full meals; kahan—
sometimes; madhu-kari—begging little by little like honeybees; suska—dry;
ruti—bread; cana—chick-peas; civdya—chew; bhoga parihari’—giving up all
kinds of material enjoyment.


--- Page 314 ---
312 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
“Srila Rapa and Sanatana Gosvami beg a little food from the houses of
brahmanas. Giving up all kinds of material enjoyment, they only take some
dry bread and fried chick-peas.
TEXT 129
করো য়া-মাত্র হাতে, কাথা ছি ড়া, বহির্বাস ৷
কৃষ্ণকথ, কৃষ্ণনাম, নর্তন-উল্লাস ॥ ১২৯ ॥
karonya-matra hate, kantha chinda, bahirvasa
krsna-katha, krspa-nama, nartana-ullasa
SYNONYMS
karonya—the waterpot of a sannyasi; matra—only; hate—in the hand; kantha
chinda—torn quilt; bahirvasa—outer garments; krsna-katha—discussion of
Krsna's pastimes; krsna-nama—chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna; nartana-
ullasa—dancing in jubilation.
TRANSLATION
‘They carry only waterpots, and they wear torn quilts. They always chant
the holy names of Krsna and discuss His pastimes. In great jubilation, they
also dance.
TEXT 130
অষ্টগ্রহর FRESH, চারি দণ্ড শয়নে |
নাম-সঙ্ধীর্তনে সেহ নহে কোন দিনে ॥ ১৩০ ॥
asta-prahara krsna-bhajana, cari 03093 sayane
nama-sankirtane seha nahe kona dine
SYNONYMS
asta-prahara—twenty-four hours; krsna-bhajana—worshiping Lord Krsna; cari
danda—four dandas (one danda equals twenty-four minutes); sayane—for sleep-
ing; nama-sankirtane—because of chanting the holy name of the Lord; seha—
that much time; nahe —not; kona dine—some days.
TRANSLATION
“They engage almost twenty-four hours daily in rendering service to the
Lord. They usually sleep only an hour and a half, and some days, when they
continuously chant the Lord’s holy name, they do not sleep at all.


--- Page 315 ---
Text 132] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 313
TEXT 131
কভু खकछिन्रजनाछ করয়ে লিখন |
চৈতন্তযকথা শুনে, করে চৈতন্ত-চিজ্তন ॥” ১৩১ ॥
kabhu bhakti-rasa-sastra karaye likhana
caitanya-katha sune, kare caitanya-cintana”
SYNONYMS
kabhu—sometimes; bhakti-rasa-sastra—transcendental literature about the
mellows of ‘devotional service; karaye likhana—write; caitanya-katha —talks
about the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; sune—they hear; kare—do;
caitanya-cintana—thinking of Lord Caitanya.
TRANSLATION
‘Sometimes they write transcendental literatures about devotional service,
and sometimes they hear about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and spend their time
thinking about the Lord.”
TEXT 132
«दे कथा শুনি” মহান্তের मारय হয় |
চেতন্তের রূপা যীহে, छं1टङ कि বিশ্যয় ? ১৩২ ॥
ei-katha suni’ mahantera maha-sukha haya
caitanyera krpa yanhe, tanhe ki vismaya?
SYNONYMS
ei-katha suni’—hearing this news; mahantera—of all the devotees; maha-
sukha—great pleasure; haya—was; caitanyera—of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu;
krpa—mercy; yanhe —on whom; tarihe—in him; ki—what; vismaya—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
When the personal associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would hear of the
activities of Ripa and Sanatana Gosvamis, they would say, “What is wonder-
ful for a person who has been granted the Lord's mercy?”
PURPORT
Srila Rapa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami had no fixed residence. They stayed
beneath a tree for one day only and wrote huge volumes of transcendental
literature. They not only wrote books but chanted, danced, discussed Krsna and


--- Page 316 ---
314 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
remembered जा Caitanya Mahaprabhu'’s pastimes. Thus they executed devotional
service.

In Vrndavana there are prakrta-sahajiyas who say that writing books or even
touching books is taboo. For them, devotional service means being relieved from
these activities. Whenever they are asked to hear a recitation of Vedic literature,
they refuse, saying, “What business do we have reading or hearing transcendental
literatures? They are meant for neophytes.” They pose themselves to be too ele-
vated to exert energy for reading, writing and hearing. However, pure devotees
under the guidance of Srila Ripa Gosvami reject this sahajiya philosophy. It is cer-
tainly not good to write literature for money or reputation, but to write books and
publish them for the enlightenment of the general populace is real service to the
Lord. That was Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati’s opinion, and he specifically told his
disciples to write books. He actually preferred to publish books rather than
establish temples. Temple construction is meant for the general populace and
neophyte devotees, but the business of advanced and empowered devotees is to
write books, publish them and distribute them widely. According to Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, distributing literature is like playing on a great
mrdanga. Consequently we always request members of the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness to publish as many books as possible and distribute
them widely throughout the world. By thus following in the footsteps of Srila
Rapa Gosvami, one can become a rapanuga devotee.

TEXT 133
দেতন্তযের Fo রূপ লিখিয়াছেন আপনে |
রসাম্বতসিজ্ধু-গ্রন্থের মঙ্গলাচরণে ॥ ১৩৩ ॥
caitanyera krpa rapa likhiyachena apane
rasamrta-sindhu-granthera mangalacarane
SYNONYMS

caitanyera—of Lord 511 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; krpa—the mercy; rapa—Srila
Rapa Gosvami; likhiyachena—has written; apane—personally; rasamrta-sindhu-
granthera—of the book known as Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu; mangala-acarane —in
the auspicious introduction.

TRANSLATION

Srila Rapa Gosvami has personally spoken about the mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in his auspicious introduction to his book Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu [1.1.2].


--- Page 317 ---
Text 135] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 315
TEXT 134
হৃদি যস্য প্রেরণয়া প্রবতিতোইহং বরাকরূপোইহাপ 1
खम्‌] र्‌८ब्रः পদকমলং ACH চৈততন্যদেবস্য ॥ ১৩৪ ॥
hrdi yasya preranaya
pravartito ‘ham varaka-rapo ‘pi
tasya hareh pada-kamalari
vande caitanya-devasya
SYNONYMS
hrdi—within the heart; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who gives His pure devotees intelligence with which to spread the Krsna con-
sciousness movement); preranayd—by the inspiration; pravartitah—engaged;
aham—I; varaka—insignificant and low; rapah—Rapa Gosvami; api—although;
tasya—of Him; hareh—who is Lord Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pada-kamalam—to the lotus feet; vande—let me offer my prayers; caitanya-
devasya—of जान Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
‘Although | am the lowest of men and have no knowledge, the inspiration
to write transcendental literatures about devotional service has been mer-
cifully bestowed upon me. Therefore | am offering my obeisances at the lotus
feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
has given me the chance to write these books.”
TEXT 135
এইমত দশদিন প্রয়াগে Afzal ।
প্রীরূপে শিক্ষা निन শক্তি সঞ্চারিয়। ॥ ১৩৫ ॥
ei-mata dasa-dina prayage rahiya
sri-rape Siksa dila sakti saiicariya
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; dasa-dina—for ten days; prayage —at Prayaga; rahiya—
staying; Sri-rape—to Srila Rapa Cosvami; Siksa—instructions; dila—imparted;
Sakti saicariya—bestowing upon him the necessary potency.
TRANSLATION
For ten days Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at Prayaga and instructed
Ripa Gosvami, empowering him with the necessary potency.


--- Page 318 ---
316 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT

This is a confirmation of the statement krsna-sakti vind nahe tara pravartana.
Unless one is specifically empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
cannot spread the Krsna consciousness movement. An empowered devotee sees
and feels himself to be the lowest of men, for he knows that whatever he does is
due to the inspiration given by the Lord in the heart. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita:

tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatarn priti-parvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, | give the
understanding by which they can come to Me.” Bg. 10.10)

To be empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one has to qualify
himself. This means that one must engage twenty-four hours daily in the loving
devotional service of the Lord. The material position of a devotee doesn’t matter
because devotional service is not dependent on material considerations. In his
earlier life, Srila Rapa Gosvami was a government officer and a grhastha. He was
not even a brahmacari or sannyasi. He associated with mlecchas and yavanas, but
because he was always eager to serve, he was a qualified recipient for the Lord's
mercy. A sincere devotee can therefore be empowered by the Lord regardless of
his situation. In the preceding verse from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Srila Rapa
Gosvami has described how he was personally empowered by the Lord. He
further states in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187):

103 yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu
jivan-muktah sa ucyate
“A person acting in the service of Krsna with his body, mind and words is a liber-
ated person even in the material world, although he may be engaged in many so-
called material activities.”

To keep oneself free from material contamination and attain the Lord's favor,
one must be sincerely anxious to render service to the Lord. This is the only
qualification necessary. As soon as one is favored by the mercy of the spiritual
master and the Lord, one is immediately given all the power necessary to write
books and propagate the Krsna consciousness movement without being ham-
pered by material considerations.


--- Page 319 ---
Text 138] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 317
TEXT 136
প্রভু কহে,- শুন, রূপ, ভক্তিরসের লক্ষণ |
FEF কহি, বিস্তার না যায় বর্ণন ॥ ১৩৬ ॥
prabhu kahe, —suna, rapa, bhakti-rasera laksana
satra-rape kahi, vistara na yaya varnana
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe --5 Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke; suna—please listen; rapa—My
dear Rapa; bhakti-rasera—of the transcendental mellows in devotional service;
laksana—the symptoms; satra-rape—in the form of a synopsis; kahi—I shall ex-
plain; vistara—the whole breadth; na—not; yaya—is possible; varnana—descrip-
tion.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, “My dear Riipa, please listen to Me. It is not
possible to describe devotional service completely; therefore | am just trying
to give you a synopsis of the symptoms of devotional service.
TEXT 137
পারাপার-শুন্য গভীর ভক্তিরস-সিজ্ধু ৷
তোমায় চাখাইতে তার কহি এক “বিন্দু! ॥ ১৩৭ ॥
parapara-sanya gabhira bhakti-rasa-sindhu
tomaya cakhaite tara kahi eka ‘bindu’
SYNONYMS
para-apara—the length and breadth; sanya—without; gabhira—deep; bhakti-
rasa—of the mellows in devotional service; sindhu—the ocean; tomaya—to you;
cakhaite—to give a taste; tara—of this ocean; kahi—I shall speak; eka—one;
bindu—drop.
TRANSLATION
“The ocean of the transcendental mellow of devotional service is so big that
no one can estimate its length and breadth. However, just to help you taste it,
॥ am describing but one drop.
TEXT 138
এইত लक्ता ভরি” অনন্ত জীবগণ |
চৌরাশী-লক্ক যোনিতে করয়ে শুমণ ॥ ১৩৮ ॥


--- Page 320 ---
318 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
eita brahmanda bhari’ ananta jiva-gana
caurasi-laksa yonite karaye bhramana
SYNONYMS

ei-ta—in this way; brahmanda—the whole universe; bhari’—filling; ananta—
unlimited; jiva-gana—living entities; caurasi-laksa—8,400,000; yonite—in
species of life; karaye—do; bhramana—wandering.

TRANSLATION

‘In this universe there are limitless living entities in 8,400,000 species, and

all are wandering within this universe.
PURPORT

This is a challenge to so-called scientists and philosophers who presume that
there are living entities on this planet only. So-called scientists are going to the
moon, and they say that there is no life there. This does not tally with जा Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s version. He says that everywhere within the universe there are un-
limited numbers of living entities in 8,400,000 different forms. In Bhagavad-gita
(2.24) we find that the living entities are sarva-gatah, which means that they can
go anywhere. This indicates that there are living entities everywhere. They exist
on land, in water, in air, in fire and in ether. Thus there are living entities in all types
of material elements. Since the entire material universe is composed of five ele-
ments—earth, water, fire, air and ether—why should there be living entities on
one planet and not others? Such a foolish version can never be accepted by Vedic
students. From the Vedic literatures we understand that there are living entities on
each and every planet, regardless of whether the planet is composed of earth,
water, fire or ether. These living entities may not have the same forms that are
found on this planet earth, but they have different forms composed of different
elements. Even on this earth we can see that the forms of land animals are dif-
ferent from the forms of aquatics. According to the circumstance, living condi-
tions differ, but undoubtedly there are living entities everywhere. Why should we
deny the existence of living entities on this or that planet? Those who have
claimed to have gone to the moon have not gone there, or else their imperfect
vision cannot actually perceive the particular type of living entities there.

Living entities are described as ananta, or unlimited; nonetheless, they are said
to belong to 8,400,000 species. As stated in the Visnu Purana:

jalaja nava-laksani
sthavara laksa-vimsati
krmayo rudra-sarikhyakah
paksinari dasa-laksanam


--- Page 321 ---
Text 139] The Lord Instructs Srila 003 Gosvami 319
trimsal-laksani pasavah
catur-laksani manusah
“There are 900,000 species living in the water. There are also 2,000,000 nonmov-
ing living entities (sthavara) such as trees and plants. There are also 1,100,000
species of insects and reptiles, and there are 1,000,000 species of birds. As far as
quadrupeds are concerned there are 3,000,000 varieties, and there are 400,000
human species.” Some of these species may exist on one planet and not on
another, but in any case within all the planets of the universe—and even in the
sun—there are living entities. This is the verdict of Vedic literatures. As Bhagavad-
gita (2.20) confirms:
na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayarm bhatva bhavita va na bhayah
ajo nityah sasvato ‘yarn purano
na hanyate hanyamane sarire
“For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he ever
cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. He is not
slain when the body is slain.”

Since the living entities are never annihilated, they simply transmigrate from
one life form to another. Thus there is an evolution of forms according to the
degree of developed consciousness. One experiences different degrees of con-
sciousness in different forms. A dog's consciousness is different from a man's. Even
within a species we find that a father’s consciousness is different from his son's
and that a child's consciousness is different from a youth's. Just as we find dif-
ferent forms, we find different states of consciousness. When we see different
states of consciousness, we may take it for granted that the bodies are different.
In other words, different types of bodies depend on different states of conscious-
ness. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (8.6): yam yar vapi smaran bhavam.
One's consciousness at the time of death determines a type of body of the living
entity. This is the process of transmigration of the soul. A variety of bodies is
already there; we change from one body to another in terms of our conscious-
ness.

TEXT 139
কেশাগ্র-শতেক-ভাগ পুনঃ শতাংশ कत्रि |
তার-সম Iw জীবের “wm বিচারি ॥ ১৩৯ ॥

kesagra-sateka-bhaga punah $9(3/7753 kari
tara sama saksma jivera ‘svarapa’ vicari


--- Page 322 ---
320 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS

kesa-agra—from the tip of a hair; sata-eka—one hundred; bhaga—divisions;
punah—again; sata-armsa—one hundred divisions; kari—making; tara sama—
equal to that; saksma—very fine; jivera—of the living entity; sva-rdpa—the ac-
tual form; vicari—I consider.

TRANSLATION

‘The length and breadth of the living entity is described as one ten-
thousandth part of the tip of a hair. This is the original subtle nature of the liv-
ing entity.

TEXT 140
কেশাগ্রশতভাগস্য শতাংশসদৃশাসজ্মকঃ ৷
জীবঃ স্ম্ম্স্বরূপোইয়ং সংখ্যাতীতো হি চিংকণঃ ॥ ১৪০ ॥
kesagra-sata-bhagasya
satarnsa-sadrsatmakah
jivah saksma-svardpo ‘yam
sankhyatito hi cit-kanah
SYNONYMS

kesa-agra—of the tip of a hair; sata-bhagasya—of one hundredth; sata-armsa—
a hundredth part; sadrsa—equal to; atmakah—whose nature; jivah—the living
entity; saksma—very fine; sva-rapah—identification; ayam—this; sankhya-
atitah—numbering beyond calculation; hi—certainly; cit-kanah —spiritual
particle.

TRANSLATION

‘If we divide the tip of a hair into a hundred parts and then take one of
these parts and divide it again into a hundred parts, that very fine division is
the size of but one of the numberless living entities. They are all cit-kana, par-
ticles of spirit, not matter.’

PURPORT

This is quoted from the commentary on the portion of Srimad-Bhagavatam
wherein the Vedas personified offer their obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.7). Mamaivarnso jiva-
loke jiva-bhdatah sanatanah: “The living entities in this conditioned world are My
eternal, fragmental parts.”


--- Page 323 ---
Text 142] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 321
Lord ज Krsna personally identifies Himself with the minute living entities. Lord
Krsna is the supreme spirit, the Supersoul, and the living entities are His very
minute parts and parcels. Of course, we cannot divide the tip of a hair into such
fine particles, but spiritually such small particles can exist. Spiritual strength is so
powerful that a mere atomic portion of spirit can be the biggest brain in the ma-
terial world. The same spiritual spark is within an ant and within the body of
Brahma. According to his karma, material activities, the spiritual spark attains a cer-
tain type of body. Material activities are carried out in goodness, passion and ig-
norance or a combination of these. According to the mixture of the modes of ma-
terial nature, the living entity is awarded a particular type of body. This is the con-
clusion.
TEXT 141
বালাগ্রশতভাগস্য শতধা FIASAT ए ।
Stes জীবঃ म বিজ্ঞেয় ইতি চাহ পরা শ্রুতিঃ ॥ ১৪১ ॥
balagra-sata-bhagasya
satadha kalpitasya ca
bhago jivah sa vijieya
iti caha para srutih
SYNONYMS
bala-agra—the tip of a hair; sata-bhagasya—of one hundredth; sata-dha—into
one hundred parts; kalpitasya—divided; ca—and; bhagah—minute portion;
jivah—the living entity; sah —that; vijieyah —to be understood; iti—thus; ca—
and; dha—have said; para—chief; srutih—Vedic mantras.
TRANSLATION
^“ “If we divide the tip of a hair into one hundred parts and then take one
part and divide this into another one hundred parts, that ten-thousandth part
is the dimension of the living entity. This is the verdict of the chief Vedic
mantras.’
PURPORT
The first three padas of this verse from the Paricadasi Citradipa (81) are taken
from the Svetasvatara Upanisad (5.9).
TEXT 142
সুস্্মাণামপ্যহ্‌ং জীবঃ ॥ ১৪২ ॥
saksmapam apy aha jivah


--- Page 324 ---
322 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS

stiksmanam—of the minute particles; api—certainly; aham—I; jivah—the liv-

ing entity.
TRANSLATION
‘“ ‘Among minute particles, | am the living entity.’
PURPORT

The living entity is one with and different from the Supreme Personality of God-
head. As spirit soul, the living entity is one in quality with the Supreme Lord;
however, the Supreme Lord is bigger than the biggest, and the living entity is the
smallest of the small. This quote is the third pada of a verse from Srimad-
Bhagavatam (11.16.11).

TEXT 143
অপরিমিতা छव्‌] खड ङ््ड) যদি সর্বগতা-
স্তহি ন শাস্যতেতি নিয়মে कव নেতরথা |
অজনি চ যন্মরং তদবিমুচ্য fags, sas
সমমন্তজানতাং যদমতং মতছুষ্টতয়।॥ ১৪৩ ॥
aparimita dhruvas tanu-bhrto yadi sarva-gatas
tarhi na sasyateti niyamo dhruva netaratha
ajani ca yan-mayam tad avimucya niyantr bhavet
samam anujanatam yad amatam mata-dustataya
SYNONYMS

aparimitah—unlimited in number; dhruvah—eternals; tanu-bhrtah—who have
accepted material bodies; yadi—if; sarva-gatah—all-pervading; tarhi—then; na—
not; sasyata—controllable; iti—thus; niyamah—regulation; dhruva—O Supreme
Truth; na—not; itaratha—in another manner; ajani—have been born; ca—and;
yat-mayam—consisting of which; tat—that; avimucya—without giving up;
niyantr—controller; bhavet—may become; samam—equal in all respects; anu-
janatam—of those who follow this philosophical calculation; yat—that;
amatam—not conclusive; mata-dustataya—by faulty calculations.

TRANSLATION

“0 Lord, although the living entities who have accepted material bodies
are spiritual and unlimited in number, if they were all-pervading there would
be no question of their being under Your control. If they are accepted,


--- Page 325 ---
Text 144] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 323
however, as particles of the eternally existing spiritual entity—as part of You,
who are the supreme spirit whole—we must conclude that they are always
under Your control. If the living entities are simply satisfied with being identi-
cal with You as spiritual particles, then they will be happy being controllers of
so many things. The conclusion that the living entities and the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead are one and the same is a faulty conclusion. It is not a
fact.’
PURPORT
This verse, which is also from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.30), was spoken by
the personified Vedas.
TEXT 144
তার মধ্যে “স্থাবর”, 'জঙ্গম'- তুই ভেদ |
জঙ্গমে তির্যক্-জল-স্থলচর-বিভ্ভেদ ॥ ১৪৪ ॥
tara madhye ‘sthavara’, ‘jangama’——dui bheda
jarigame tiryak-jala-sthalacara-vibheda
SYNONYMS
tara madhye —among the living entities who are conditioned within the ma-
terial world; sthavara—immovable; jarigama—movable; dui bheda—two divi-
sions; jarigame —among the living entities who can move; tiryak —the living en-
tities who can move in the air (the birds); jala—or living entities who can move
within the water; sthala-cara—living entities who can move on land; vibheda—
three divisions.
TRANSLATION
‘The unlimited living entities can be divided into two divisions —those that
can move and those that cannot move. Among living entities that can move,
there are birds, aquatics and animals.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is giving clear instructions on how the living entities
live under different conditions. There are trees, plants and stones that cannot
move, but still they must be considered living entities, or spiritual sparks. The soul
is present in bodies like those of trees, plants and stones. They are all living en-
tities. Among moving living entities such as birds, aquatics and animals, the same
spiritual spark is there. As stated herein, there are living entities that can fly, swim
and walk. We must also conclude that there are living entities that can move


--- Page 326 ---
324 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
within fire and ether. Living entities have different material bodies composed of
earth, water, air, fire and ether. The words tara madhye mean “within this uni-
verse.” The entire material universe is composed of five material elements. It is not
true that living entities reside only within this planet and not within others. Such a
conclusion is completely contradictory to the Vedas. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(2.24):
acchedyo ‘yam adahyo ‘yam
akledyo Sosya eva ca
nityah sarva-gatah sthanur
acalo yarn sanatanah
“This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned nor
dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable and eternally the
same.”

The soul has nothing to do with the material elements. Any material element
can be cut to pieces, especially earth. As far as the living entity is concerned,
however, it can neither be burned nor cut to pieces. It can therefore live within
fire. We can conclude that there are also living entities within the sun. Why
should living entities be denied this planet or that planet? According to the Vedas,
the living entities can live anywhere and everywhere —on land, in water, in air and
in fire. Whatever the condition, the living entity is unchangeable (sthanu). From
the statements of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Bhagavad-gita, we are to con-
clude that living entities are everywhere throughout the universes. They are dis-
tributed as trees, plants, aquatics, birds, human beings and so on.

TEXT 145
তার মধ্যে মন্দুম্য-জাতি অতি অঞ্জতর |
তার মধ্যে (बर्हे, পু(লিম্দ, বৌদ্ধ, শবর ॥ ১৪৫ ॥
tara madhye manusya-jati ati alpatara
tara madhye mleccha, pulinda, bauddha, sabara
SYNONYMS

tara madhye—among all such living entities; manusya-jati—entities born as
human beings; ati—very; alpatara—small in quantity; tara madhye—among the
small quantity of human beings; mleccha—uncivilized men who cannot follow
the Vedic principles; pulinda—unregulated; bauddha—followers of Buddhist phi-
losophy; sabara—the lowest of men (the hunter class).


--- Page 327 ---
Text 146] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 325
TRANSLATION
‘‘Although the living entities known as human beings are very small in
quantity, that division may be still further subdivided, for there are many un-
cultured human beings like mlecchas, pulindas, bauddhas and $abaras.
TEXT 146
বেদনিষ্ঠ-মধ্যে অর্ধেক বেদ “মুখে' मोटन |
CRAG পাপ করে, ধর্ম নাহি शट ॥ ১৪৬ ॥
veda-nistha-madhye ardheka veda ‘mukhe’” mane
veda-nisiddha papa kare, dharma nahi gane
SYNONYMS
veda-nistha-madhye—among persons who are followers of the Vedas;
ardheka—almost half; veda — Vedic scriptures; mukhe —in the mouth; mane —ac-
cept; veda-nisiddha—forbidden in the Vedas; papa—sins; kare—perform;
dharma —religious principles; nahi—not; gane—count.
TRANSLATION
‘Among human beings, those who are followers of the Vedic principles are
considered civilized. Among these, almost half simply give lip service while
committing all kinds of sinful activities against these principles. Such people
do not care for the regulative principles.
PURPORT
The word veda means “knowledge.” Supreme knowledge consists of under-
standing the Supreme Personality of Godhead and our relationship with Him and
acting according to that relationship. Action in accordance with the Vedic prin-
ciples is called religion. Religion means following the orders of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The Vedic principles are the injunctions given by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aryans are civilized human beings who have
been following the Vedic principles since time immemorial. No one can trace out
the history of the Vedic principles set forth so that man might understand the
Supreme Being. Literature or knowledge that seeks the Supreme Being can be ac-
cepted as a bona fide religious system, but there are many different types of
religious systems according to the place, the disciples and the people's capacity to
understand. i
The highest type of religious system is described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.6)
thus: sa vai purhsarin paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje. The highest form of


--- Page 328 ---
326 $i Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
religion is that by which one becomes fully conscious of the existence of God, His
form, name, qualities, pastimes, abode and all-pervasive features. When every-
thing is completely known, that is the perfection of Vedic knowledge. The fulfill-
ment of Vedic knowledge is systematic knowledge of the characteristics of God.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.15): vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. The
aim of Vedic knowledge is to understand God. Those who are actually following
Vedic knowledge and searching after God cannot commit sinful activities against
the Supreme Lord's order. However, in this age of Kali, although men profess to
belong to so many different kinds of religion, most of them commit sinful ac-
tivities against the orders of the Vedic scriptures. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
therefore says herein: veda-nisiddha papa kare, dharma nahi gane. In this age,
men may profess a religion, but they actually do not follow the principles. Instead,
they commit all kinds of sin.
TEXT 147
ধর্মাচারি-মধ্যে বছত “কর্মনিষ্ঠ'।
ক্োটি-কর্মনিষ্ঠ-মধ্যে এক জ্ঞানী” শ্রেষ্ঠ ॥ ১৪৭ ॥
dharmacari-madhye bahuta ‘karma-nistha’
koti-karma-nistha-madhye eka 48/27. srestha
SYNONYMS
dharma-acari-madhye—among persons who actually follow the Vedic prin-
ciples or religious system; bahuta—many of them; karma-nistha—attracted to
fruitive activities; koti-karma-nistha-madhye —among millions of such performers
of fruitive activities according to Vedic principles; eka—one; jAani—wise man;
drestha—the chief.
TRANSLATION
‘“Among the followers of Vedic knowledge, most are following the process
of fruitive activity and distinguishing between good and bad work. Out of
many such sincere fruitive actors, there may be one who is actually wise.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura states that the word karma-nistha refers
to one who aspires to enjoy the results of his good work and pious activity. Some
followers of Vedic principles offer everything to the Absolute Truth and do not
aspire to enjoy the results of their pious actions. These are also considered among
the karma-nisthas. Sometimes we see pious men earn money with great hardship
and then spend the money for some pious cause by opening public charities,


--- Page 329 ---
Text 148] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 327
schools and hospitals. Whether one earns money for himself or for the public
benefit, he is called a karma-nistha. Out of millions of karma-nisthas there may be
one who is wise. Those who try to avoid fruitive activity and who become silent
in order to merge into the spiritual existence of the Absolute Truth are generally
known as janis, wise men. They are not interested in fruitive activity but in merg-
ing into the Supreme. In either case, both are interested in personal benefit. The
karmis are directly interested in personal benefit within the material world, and
the jAanis are interested in merging into the existence of the Supreme. The jiAanis
maintain that fruitive activity is imperfect. For them, perfection is the cessation of
work and the merging into the supreme existence. That is their goal in life. The
10127 wants to extinguish the distinction between knowledge, the knower and
the aim of knowledge. This philosophy is called monism, or oneness, and is
characterized by spiritual silence.
TEXT 148
ক্োটিজ্ঞানি-মধ্যে হয় একজন “মুক্ত? |
ক্োটিমুক্ত-মধ্যে ‘GIS এক FST ॥ ১৪৮ ॥
(८0{1-155/21-11120/1)/€ haya eka-jana ‘mukta’
koti-mukta-madhye ‘durlabha’ eka krsna-bhakta
SYNONYMS

koti-jnani-madhye —out of many millions of such wise men; haya—there is;
eka-jana—one person; mukta—actually liberated; koti-mukta-madhye—out of
many millions of such liberated persons; durlabha—very rare; eka—one; krsna-
bhakta—pure devotee of Lord Krsna.

TRANSLATION

“’Qut of many millions of such wise men, one may actually become liber-
ated [muktal, and out of many millions of such liberated persons, a pure
devotee of Lord Krsna is very difficult to find.

PURPORT

In Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that due to their poor fund of knowledge, the
jnanis are not actually liberated. They simply think that they are liberated. The
perfection of knowledge culminates when one comes to the platform of knowing
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdy-
ate. The Absolute Truth (satya-vastu) is described as Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavan. Knowledge of impersonal Brahman and the Supersoul is imperfect until
one comes to the platform of knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is


--- Page 330 ---
328 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
therefore clearly said in this verse: koti-mukta-madhye ‘durlabha’ eka krsna-bhak-
ta. Those who search after the knowledge of impersonal Brahman or localized
Paramatma are certainly accepted as liberated, but due to their imperfect knowl-
edge they are described in Srimad-Bhagavatam as vimukta-maninah. Since their
knowledge is imperfect, their conception of liberation is imperfect. Perfect knowl-
edge is possible when one knows the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
supported in Bhagavad-gita (5.29):
bhoktararn yajnia-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdam sarva-bhatanam
jAdatva mam santim rcchati
“The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and well-wisher
of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of material miseries.”

Research is going on for the karmis, jAianis and yogis, but until the search is
complete, no one can attain peace. Therefore Bhagavad-gita says, jidtva mam
santim rcchati: one can actually attain peace when he knows Krsna. This is de-
scribed in the next verse.

TEXT 149
কৃষ্ণভক্ত- निम, অতএব “শান্ত? ।
ভুক্তি-মুক্তি-সিস্ধি-কামী-_ সকলি “অশান্ত? ॥ ১৪৯ ॥
krsna-bhakta——niskama, ataeva ‘santa’
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kami—sakali ‘asanta’
SYNONYMS

krsna-bhakta—a devotee of Lord Krsna; niskama—actually desireless; ataeva—
therefore; santa—peaceful; bhukti—of material enjoyment; mukti—of liberation
from material activities; siddhi—of perfection in yogic performance; kami—those
who are desirous; sakali—all of them; asanta—not peaceful.

TRANSLATION

‘‘Because a devotee of Lord Krsna is desireless, he is peaceful. Fruitive
workers desire material enjoyment, jiianis desire liberation, and yogis desire
material opulence; therefore they are all lusty and cannot be peaceful.

PURPORT

The devotee of Lord Krsna has no desire other than serving Krsna. Even so-

called liberated people are full of desires. Fruitive actors desire better living ac-


--- Page 331 ---
Text 149] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 329
commodations, and jAanis want to be one with the Supreme. Yogis desire material
opulence, yogic perfections and magic. All of these are lusty (kami). Because they
desire something, they cannot have peace.

The peace formula is given by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita:

bhoktararm yajia-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdarn sarva-bhatanarm
jAatva marn santim rcchati
If one can understand that the only supreme enjoyer is Krsna, one will perform all
kinds of sacrifices, penances and austerities in order to attain Krsna's devotional
service. Krsna is the Supreme Being, the proprietor of all the material worlds;
therefore throughout the entire universe He is the only enjoyer and beneficiary.
He is the only friend who can actually do good to all living entities (suhrdarn sar-
va-bhatanam). If one understands Krsna, he immediately becomes desireless
(niskama) because a krspa-bhakta knows that his friend and protector in all
respects is Krsna, who is able to do anything for His devotee. Krsna says, kaunteya
pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: “O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My
devotee never perishes.” Since Krsna gives this assurance, the devotee lives in
Krsna and has no desire for personal benefit. The background for the devotee is
the all-good Himself. Why should the devotee aspire for something good for him-
self? His only business is to please the Supreme by rendering service as much as
possible. A krsna-bhakta has no desire for his own personal benefit. He is com-
pletely protected by the Supreme. Avasya raksibe krsna visvasa palana. Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura says that he is desireless because Krsna will give him protection in
all circumstances. It is not that he expects any assistance from Krsna; he simply
depends on Krsna just as a child depends on his parents. The child does not know
how to expect service from his parents, but he is always protected nevertheless.
This is called niskama (desirelessness).

Although karmis, jianis and yogis fulfill their desires by performing various ac-
tivities, they are never satisfied. A karmi may work very hard to acquire a million
dollars, but as soon as he gets a million dollars he desires another million. For the
karmis, there is no end of desire. The more the karmi gets, the more he desires.
The jAanis cannot be desireless because their intelligence is unsound. They want
to merge into the Brahman effulgence, but even though they may be raised to
that platform, they cannot be satisfied there. There are many jAanis or sannyasis
who give up the world as false, but after taking sannyasa they return to the world
to engage in politics or philanthropy or to open schools and hospitals. This means
that they could not attain the real Brahman (brahma satyam). They have to come
down to the material platform to engage in philanthropic activity. Thus they again
cultivate desires, and when these desires are exhausted, they desire something
different. Therefore the {04/27 cannot be niskama, desireless. Nor can the yogis be


--- Page 332 ---
330 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
desireless, for they desire yogic perfections in order to exhibit some magical feats
and gain popularity. People gather around these yogis, and the yogis desire more
and more adulation. Because they misuse their mystic power, they fall down again
onto the material platform. It is not possible for them to become niskama, desire-
less.

The conclusion is that only the devotees who are simply satisfied in serving the
Lord can actually become desireless. Therefore it is written: krsna-bhakta niskama.
Since the krspa-bhakta, the devotee of Krsna, is satisfied with Krsna, there is no
possibility of falldown.

TEXT 150
মুক্তানামপি সিদ্ধানাং নারায়ণপরায়ণঃ ৷
হুদুর্লভঃ প্রশান্তাত্ম৷ কোটিঘপি মহামুনে ॥ ১৫০ ॥
muktanam api siddhanarn
narayana-parayanah
sudurlabhah prasantatma
kotisv api maha-mune
SYNONYMS

muktanam—of persons liberated or freed from the bondage of ignorance;
api—even; siddhanam—of persons who have achieved perfection; narayana—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parayanah—the devotee; su-durlabhah—
very rare; prasanta-atma—completely satisfied, desireless; kotisu—among many
millions; api—certainly; maha-mune—O great sage.

TRANSLATION

1:10 great sage, out of many millions of materially liberated people who are
free from ignorance, and out of many millions of siddhas who have nearly at-
tained perfection, there is hardly one pure devotee of Narayana. Only such a
devotee is actually completely satisfied and peaceful.’

PURPORT

This verse is quoted from $rimad-Bhagavatam (6.14.5). The narayana-parayana,
the devotee of Lord Narayana, is the only blissful person. One who becomes a
narayana-pardyana is already liberated from material bondage. He already
possesses all the perfections of yoga. Unless one comes to the platform of
narayana-pardyana and passes over the platform of bhukti-mukti-siddhi, he can-
not be fully satisfied. That is the pure devotional stage.


--- Page 333 ---
Text 151] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 331
anyabhilasita-sanyarn
jAana-karmady-anavrtam
anukalyena krsnanu-
Silanam bhaktir uttama
One who has no other desire but Krsna and who is not influenced by the process
of jiana-marga (cultivation of knowledge) actually becomes free from ignorance.
A first-class person is one who is not influenced by karma (fruitive activity) or
yoga (mystic power). He simply depends on Krsna and is satisfied in his devotional
service. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.17.28): narayana-parah sarve na
kutascana bibhyati. Such a person is never afraid of anything. For him, heaven and
hell are the same. Not knowing the situation of a narayana-parayana, rascals be-
come envious. By the grace of Narayana, a devotee is situated in the most opu-
lent position in the material world. Rascals are envious of Narayana and His devo-
tee, but the devotee knows how to please another devotee of Narayana because
he knows that by pleasing Narayana's representative, one directly pleases Lord
Narayana. Therefore a devotee offers the best facilities to his spiritual master be-
cause he knows that by pleasing Narayana's representative, he can please Lord
Narayana. Outsiders who have no knowledge of Narayana are envious both of
Narayana and of His devotee. Consequently when they see that Narayana's devo-
tee is opulently situated, they become envious. But when the devotee of
Narayana asks such foolish people to come live with him in the same comfortable
situation, they do not agree because they cannot give up illicit sex, meat eating,
intoxication and gambling. Therefore the materialist refuses the company of a
narayana-pardyana, although he is envious qf the devotee’s material situation. In
Western countries when ordinary men—storekeepers and workers—see our
devotees living and eating sumptuously and yet not working, they become very
anxious to know where they get the money. Such people become envious and
ask, “How is it possible to live so comfortably without working? How is it you
have so many cars, bright faces and nice clothes?” Not knowing that Krsna looks
after His devotees, such people become surprised, and some become envious.
TEXT 151

TWD ভ্রমিতে কোন ভাগ্যবান্‌ জীব।

গুরু-কষ্ণ-প্রসাদে পায় ভক্তিলতা-বীজ ॥ ১৫১ ॥

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva

guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija


--- Page 334 ---
332 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS

brahmanda bhramite—wandering in this universe; kona—some; bhagyavan—
most fortunate; jiva—living being; guru —of the spiritual master; krspa—of Krsna;
prasade—by the mercy; paya—gets; bhakti-lata—of the creeper of devotional
service; bija—the seed.

TRANSLATION

“According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout the
entire universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper planetary
systems, and some are going down into the lower planetary systems. Out of
many millions of wandering living entities, one who is very fortunate gets an
opportunity to associate with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of
Krsna. By the mercy of both Krsna and the spiritual master, such a person
receives the seed of the creeper of devotional service.

PURPORT

When we speak of brahmanda, we refer to the whole universe, or to the cluster
of many millions of universes. In all universes, there are innumerable planets and
innumerable living entities upon those planets in the air and in the water. There
are millions and trillions of living entities everywhere, and they are engaged by
maya in suffering and enjoying the results of their fruitive activity life after life. This
is the position of the materially conditioned living entities. Out of many of these
living entities, if one is actually fortunate (bhagyavan), he comes in contact with a
bona fide spiritual master by Krsna's mercy.

Krsna is situated in everyone's heart, and if one desires something, Krsna fulfills
one’s desire. If the living entity by chance or fortune comes in contact with the
Krsna consciousness movement and wishes to associate with that movement,
Krsna, who is situated in everyone's heart, gives him the chance to meet a bona
fide spiritual master. This is called guru-krsna-prasada. Krsna is prepared to bestow
His mercy upon all living entities, and as soon as a living entity desires the Lord's
mercy, the Lord immediately gives him an opportunity to meet a bona fide
spiritual master. Such a person is fortified by both Krsna and the spiritual master.
He is helped from within by Krsna and from without by the spiritual master. Both
are prepared to help the sincere living being become free from this material
bondage.

How one can become this fortunate can be seen in the life of Srila Narada Muni.
In his previous life he was born of a maidservant. Although he was not born into a
prestigious position, his mother was fortunately engaged in rendering service to
some Vaisnavas. When these Vaisnavas were resting during the Caturmasya
period, the boy Narada took the opportunity to engage in their service. Taking
compassion upon the boy, the Vaisnavas offered him the remnants of their food.


--- Page 335 ---
Text 152] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 333
By serving them and obeying their orders, the boy became the object of sympa-
thy for the Vaisnavas, and, by the Vaisnavas’ unknown mercy, he gradually be-
came a pure devotee. In the next life he was Narada Muni, the most exalted of
Vaisnavas and the most important guru and acarya of Vaisnavas.

Following in the footsteps of Narada Muni, this Krsna consciousness movement
is rendering service to humanity by giving everyone a chance to come in contact
with Krsna. If one is fortunate, he becomes intimately related with this movement.
Then, by the grace of Krsna, one’s life becomes successful. Everyone has dormant
krsna-bhakti—love for Krsna—and in the association of good devotees, that love
is revealed. As stated in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.107):

nitya-siddha-krsna-prema ‘sadhya’ kabhu naya
Sravanadi-suddha-citte karaye udaya
Dormant devotional service to Krsna is within everyone. Simply by associating
with devotees, hearing their good instructions and chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra, dormant love for Krsna is awakened. In this way one acquires the seed of
devotional service. CGuru-krsna-prasade pdya bhakti-lata-bija.
TEXT 152
মালী कग) করে সেই বীজ আরোপণ।
অবণ-কীর্তন-জলে FACH সেচন ॥ Se ॥
mali 0383 kare sei bija 3/70/03703
Sravana-kirtana-jale karaye secana
SYNONYMS

mali haha —becoming a gardener; kare—does; sei—that; bija—seed of devo-
tional service; aropana—sowing; sravana—of hearing; kirtana—of chanting;
jale—with the water; karaye—does; secana—sprinkling.

TRANSLATION

“When a person receives the seed of devotional service, he should take
care of it by becoming a gardener and sowing the seed in his heart. If he
waters the seed gradually by the process of $ravana and kirtana [hearing and
chanting], the seed will begin to sprout.

PURPORT

To live with devotees or to live in a temple means to associate with the sra-

vana-kirtana process. Sometimes neophyte devotees think that they can continue


--- Page 336 ---
334 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
the sravana-kirtana process without worshiping the Deity, but the execution of
Sravana-kirtana is meant for highly developed devotees like Haridasa Thakura,
who engaged in the sravana-kirtana process without worshiping the Deity.
However, one should not falsely imitate Haridasa Thakura and abandon Deity
worship just to try to engage in sravana-kirtana. This is not possible for neophyte
devotees.

The word guru-prasada indicates that the spiritual master is very merciful in
bestowing the boon of devotional service upon the disciple. That is the best
possible gift the spiritual master has to offer. Those with a background of pious life
are eligible to receive life's supreme benefit, and to bestow this benefit, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead sends His representative to impart His mercy.
Endowed with the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the spiritual
master distributes the mercy to those who are elevated and pious. Thus the
spiritual master trains his disciples to render devotional service unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is called guru-krpa. It is krsna-prasada, Krsna's mercy,
that He sends a bona fide spiritual master to the deserving disciple. By the mercy
of Krsna, one meets the bona fide spiritual master, and by the mercy of the
spiritual master, the disciple is fully trained in the devotional service of the Lord.

Bhakti-lata-bija means “the seed of devotional service.” Everything has an
original cause, or seed. For any idea, program, plan or device, there is first of all the
contemplation of the plan, and that is called bija, or the seed. The methods, rules
and regulations by which one is perfectly trained in devotional service constitute
the bhakti-lata-bija, or seed of devotional service. This bhakti-lata-bija is received
from the spiritual master by the grace of Krsna. Other seeds are called any-
abhilasa-bija, karma-bija and jiiana-bija. If one is not fortunate enough to receive
the bhakti-lata-bija from the spiritual master, he instead cultivates the seeds of
karma-bija, jAiana-bija, or political and social or philanthropic bija. However, bhak-
ti-lata-bija is different from these other bijas. Bhakti-lata-bija can be received only
through the mercy of the spiritual master. Therefore one has to satisfy the spiritual
master to get bhakti-lata-bija (yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah). Bhakti-lata-
bija is the origin of devotional service. Unless one satisfies the spiritual master, he
gets the bija, or root cause, of karma, jiana and yoga without the benefit of devo-
tional service. However, one who is faithful to his spiritual master gets the bhakti-
lata-bija. This bhakti-lata-bija is received when one is initiated by the bona fide
spiritual master. After receiving the spiritual master’s mercy, one must repeat his
instructions, and this is called sravapa-kirtana—hearing and chanting. One who
has not properly heard from the spiritual master or who does not follow the
regulative principles is not fit for chanting (kirtana). This is explained in Bhagavad-
gita (2.41): vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana. One who has not
listened carefully to the instructions of the spiritual master is unfit to chant or
preach the cult of devotional service. One has to water the bhakti-lata-bija after
receiving instructions from the spiritual master.


--- Page 337 ---
Text 153] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 335
TEXT 153
উপউজিয়। বাড়ে লতা “ত্রহ্মাগু' তভেদি” TR ।
“বিরজা”, “ত্রহ্মলোক'” ভেদি” “পরবে্যোম” পায় ॥১৫৩॥
upajiya bade lata ‘brahmanda’ bhedi’ yaya
‘viraja’, ‘brahma-loka’ bhedi’ ‘para-vyoma’ paya
SYNONYMS

upajiya—being cultivated; bade—increases; latai—the creeper of devotional
service; brahmanda—the whole universe; bhedi’—penetrating; yadya—goes;
viraja—the river between the spiritual world and the material world; brahma-
loka—the Brahman effulgence; bhedi’—penetrating; para-vyoma—the spiritual
sky; pdya—attains.

TRANSLATION

‘“As one waters the bhakti-lata-bija, the seed sprouts, and the creeper
gradually increases to the point where it penetrates the walls of this universe
and goes beyond the Viraja River between the spiritual world and the material
world. It attains brahma-loka, the Brahman effulgence, and, penetrating
through that stratum, it reaches the spiritual sky and the spiritual planet
Goloka Vrndavana.

PURPORT

A creeper generally takes shelter of a big tree, but the bhakti-lata, being the
creeper of spiritual energy, cannot take shelter of any material planet, for there is
no tree on any material planet that the bhakti-lata creeper can utilize for shelter.
In other words, devotional service cannot be utilized for any material purpose.
Devotional service is meant only for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Some-
times men with a poor fund of knowledge maintain that bhakti can be applied to
material things also. In other words, they say that devotional service can be ren-
dered to one’s country or to the demigods, but this is not a fact. Devotional ser-
vice is especially meant for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and it is beyond
this material range. There is a river, or causal ocean, between the spiritual and ma-
terial natures, and this river is free from the influence of the three modes of ma-
terial nature; therefore it is called Viraja. The word vi means vigata (completely
eradicated), and rajah means “the influence of the material world.” On this plat-
form, a living entity is completely free from material entanglement. For the jAanis
who want to merge into the Brahman effulgence, there is brahma-loka. Bhakti-
lata, however, has no shelter in the material world, nor has it shelter in brahma-
loka, although brahma-loka is beyond the material world. The bhakti-lata in-
creases until it reaches the spiritual sky, where Goloka Vrndavana is situated.


--- Page 338 ---
336 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 154
তবে যায় তদুপরি “গোলোক-বৃন্দাবন”।
“কৃষ্ণচরণ-কল্পবৃক্ষে করে আরোহণ ॥ ১৫৪ ॥
(966 yaya tad-upari ‘goloka-vrndavana’
‘krsna-carana’-kalpa-vrkse kare arohana
SYNONYMS
tabe —thereafter; ydya—goes; tat-upari—to the top of that (the spiritual sky);
goloka-vrndavana—to the planet known as Coloka Vrndavana where Krsna lives;
krsna-carana—of the lotus feet of Lord Krsna; kalpa-vrkse—on the desire tree;
kare arohana—climbs.
TRANSLATION
‘‘Being situated in one’s heart and being watered by $ravana-kirtana, the
bhakti creeper grows more and more. In this way it attains the shelter of the
desire tree of the lotus feet of Krsna, who is eternally situated in the planet
known as Goloka Vrndavana in the topmost region of the spiritual sky.
PURPORT
In Brahma-sarnhita (5.37) it is said:
ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
tabhir ya eva nija-rapataya kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhato
govindam adi-purusam tam aharin bhajami
“1 worship Govinda, the primeval Lord. He resides in His own realm, Goloka, with
Radha, who resembles His own spiritual figure and who embodies the ecstatic
potency [hladinil. Their companions are Her confidantes, who embody exten-
sions of Her bodily form and who are imbued and permeated with ever-blissful
spiritual rasa.” In the spiritual world, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
has expanded Himself in His spiritual potency. He has His eternal form of bliss and
knowledge (sac-cid-ananda-vigraha). Everything in the Coloka Vrndavana planet
is a spiritual expansion of sac-cid-ananda. Everyone there is of the same poten-
cy —ananda-cinmaya-rasa. The relationship between the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and His servitor is cinmaya-rasa. Krsna and His entourage and parapher-
nalia are of the same cinmaya potency. When the cinmaya-rasa potency goes
through the material potency, it becomes all-pervading. Although the Supreme


--- Page 339 ---
Text 155] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 337
Personality of Godhead exists on His own planet Coloka Vrndavana, He is present
everywhere. Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham. He is present within all
universes, although they are innumerable. He is present within the atom. I$varah
sarva-bhatanari hrd-dese ‘rjuna tisthati: He is also present within the heart of all
living entities. This is His all-pervasive potency.

Goloka Vrndavana is the highest planet in the spiritual world. In order to go to
the spiritual world after penetrating the cover of the material universe, one must
penetrate brahma-loka, the spiritual effulgence. Then one can come to the
Goloka Vrndavana planet. There are also other planets in the spiritual world called
Vaikuntha planets, and on these planets Lord Narayana is worshiped with awe
and veneration. On these planets the santa-rasa is prevalent, and some of the
devotees are also connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
dasya-rasa, the mellow of servitorship. As far as the mellow of fraternity is con-
cerned, the Vaikuntha rasa is represented by gaurava-sakhya, friendship in awe
and veneration. The other fraternity rasa is exhibited as visrambha (friendship in
equality), and this is found in the Goloka Vrndavana planet. Above that is service
to the Lord in vatsalya-rasa (paternal love), and above all is the relationship with
the Lord in the madhurya-rasa (conjugal love). These five rasas are fully exhibited
in the spiritual world in one’s relationship with the Lord. Therefore in the spiritual
world the bhakti-lata creeper finds its resting place at the lotus feet of Krsna.

TEXT 155
তাহ বিস্তারিত ङश ফলে প্রেম-ফল |
दिदे] মালী সেচে নিত্য শ্রবণাদি জল ॥ ১৫৫ ॥
tahan vistarita hana phale prema-phala
ihan mali sece nitya sravanadi jala
SYNONYMS

tahan—there in the spiritual world (in the Coloka Vindavana planet); vistarita—
expanded; hana —becoming; phale —produces; prema-phala—the fruit known as
love of Godhead; iharn—in the material world, where the devotee is still present;
mali—exactly like a gardener; sece—sprinkles; nitya—regularly, without fail; sra-
vana-adi jala—the water of sravana, kirtana and so on.

TRANSLATION

‘The creeper greatly expands in the Goloka Vrndavana planet, and there it
produces the fruit of love for Krsna. Although remaining in the material world,
the gardener regularly sprinkles the creeper with the water of hearing and
chanting.


--- Page 340 ---
338 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
In Goloka Vrndavana the devotees have very intimate relationships with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The devotee engages in the Lord's service in
great ecstatic love. Such love was exhibited personally by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in His teachings to the people of the material world. The fruit of the
devotional creeper is pure desire to serve and please the senses of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Krspendriya-priti-iccha dhare ‘prema’ nama. (Cc.
Adi. 4.165) In the spiritual world one has no desire other than to please the
senses of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The conditioned soul within the
material world can neither understand nor appreciate how the devotee in the ma-
terial world can render confidential service to the Lord out of feelings of ecstatic
love and always engage in pleasing the Supreme Lord's senses. Although seen
within this material world, the pure devotee always engages in the confidential
service of the Lord. An ordinary neophyte devotee cannot realize this; therefore it
is said, vaispavera kriya-mudra vijidaneha na bujhaya. The activities of a pure
Vaisnava cannot be understood even by a learned scholar in the material world.
Every living entity is wandering within this universe in different species and on
different planetary systems according to his fruitive activities. Out of many
millions of living entities, one may be fortunate enough to receive the seed of
bhakti-lata, the creeper of devotional service. By the grace of the spiritual master
and Krsna, one nourishes the bhakti-lata by regularly sprinkling it with the water
of Sravana-kirtana, hearing and chanting. In this way the seed of bhakti-lata
sprouts and grows up and up through the whole universe until it penetrates the
covering of the material universe and reaches the spiritual world. The bhakti-lata
continues to grow until it reaches the topmost planetary system, Goloka
Vrndavana, where Krsna lives. There the creeper takes shelter at the lotus feet of
the Lord, and that is its final destination. At that time the creeper begins to grow
the fruits of ecstatic love of God. It is the duty of the devotee who nourishes the
creeper to be very careful. It is said that the watering of the creeper must con-
tinue: ihan mali sece nitya sravapadi jala. It is not that at a certain stage one can
stop chanting and hearing and become a mature devotee. If one stops, one cer-
tainly falls down from devotional service. Although one may be very exalted in
devotional service, he should not give up the watering process of sravana-kirtana.
If one gives up that process, it is due to an offense. This is described in the follow-
ing verse.
TEXT 156

যদি বৈষ্ণব-অপরাধ উঠে হাতী মাতা।

উপাড়ে বা fers, তার थिः যায় পাতা ॥ ১৫৬ ॥

yadi vaispava-aparadha uthe hati mata

upade va chinde, tara sukhi’ yaya pata


--- Page 341 ---
Text 157] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 339
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; vaispava-aparadha—an offense at the feet of a Vaisnava; uthe—
arises; hati—an elephant; mata —mad; upade —uproots; va—or; chinde —breaks;
tara—of the creeper; sukhi’—shriveling up; ydya—goes; pata—the leaf.
TRANSLATION
“If the devotee commits an offense at the feet of a Vaisnava while cultivat-
ing the creeper of devotional service in the material world, his offense is com-
pared to a mad elephant that uproots the creeper and breaks it. In this way the
leaves of the creeper are dried up.
PURPORT
One's devotional attitude increases in the association of a Vaisnava.
tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa
janame janame haya, ei abhilasa
By his personal example, Narottama dasa Thakura stresses that a devotee must al-
ways remember to please his predecessor acarya. The Gosvamis are represented
by one's spiritual master. One cannot be an dcarya (spiritual master) without
following strictly in the disciplic succession of the 4caryas. One who is actually
serious in advancing in devotional service should desire only to satisfy the pre-
vious acaryas. Ei chaya gosani yara, mui tara dasa. One should always think of
oneself as a servant of the servant of the acaryas, and thinking this, one should live
in the society of Vaisnavas. However, if one thinks that he has become very
mature and can live separate from the association of Vaisnavas and thus gives up
all the regulative principles due to offending a Vaisnava, one’s position becomes
very dangerous. Offenses against the holy name are explained in Adi-lila (Chap-
ter Eight, verse 24). Giving up the regulative principles and living according to
one’s whims are compared to a mad elephant, which by force uproots the bhakti-
lata and breaks it to pieces. In this way the bhakti-lata shrivels up. Such an offense
is especially created when one disobeys the instructions of the spiritual master.
This is called guru-avajia. The devotee must therefore be very careful not to com-
mit offenses against the spiritual master. As soon as one is deviated from the
spiritual master, the uprooting of the bhakti-lata begins, and gradually all the
leaves dry up.
TEXT 157
তাতে মালী बद्ध করি' করে আবরণ!
অপরাধ-হস্তীর যৈছে না হয় উদগম ॥ ১৫৭ ॥


--- Page 342 ---
340 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
tate mali yatna kari’ kare avarana
aparadha-hastira yaiche na haya udgama
SYNONYMS

tate—therefore; mali—the gardener devotee; yatna kari’—with great atten-
tion; kare—makes; dvarapna—protective fencing; aparadha—of offenses;
hastira—of the elephant; yaiche—so that; na—not; haya—there is; udgama—
birth.

TRANSLATION

‘The gardener must defend the creeper by fencing it all around so that the

powerful elephant of offenses may not enter.
PURPORT

While the bhakti-lata creeper is growing, the devotee must protect it by fenc-
ing it all around. The neophyte devotee must be protected by being surrounded
by pure devotees. In this way he will not give the maddened elephant a chance to
uproot his bhakti-lata creeper. When one associates with nondevotees, the mad-
dened elephant is set loose. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said: asat-sarga-
tyaga, — ei vaisnava-acara. The first business of a Vaisnava is to give up the com-
pany of nondevotees. A so-called mature devotee, however, commits a great
offense by giving up the company of pure devotees. The living entity is a social
animal, and if one gives up the society of pure devotees, he must associate with
nondevotees (asat-sanga). By contacting nondevotees and engaging in nondevo-
tional activities, a so-called mature devotee will fall victim to the mad elephant
offense. Whatever growth has taken place is quickly uprooted by such an offense.
One should therefore be very careful to defend the creeper by fencing it in—that
is, by following the regulative principles and associating with pure devotees.

If one thinks that there are many pseudo devotees or nondevotees in the Krsna
Consciousness Society, one can keep direct company with the spiritual master,
and if there is any doubt, one should consult the spiritual master. However, unless
one follows the spiritual master’s instructions and the regulative principles
governing chanting and hearing the holy name of the Lord, one cannot become a
pure devotee. By one’s mental concoctions, one falls down. By associating with
nondevotees, one breaks the regulative principles and is thereby lost. In the
Upadesamrta of Srila Rapa Gosvami, it is said:

atyaharah praydasas ca
prajalpo niyamagrahah

jana-sangas ca laulyam ca
sadbhir bhaktir vinasyati


--- Page 343 ---
Text 159] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 341
“One's devotional service is spoiled when he becomes too entangled in the
following six activities: (1) eating more than necessary or collecting more funds
than required, (2) overendeavoring for mundane things that are very difficult to
attain, (3) talking unnecessarily about mundane subject matters, (4) practicing the
scriptural rules and regulations only for the sake of following them and not for the
sake of spiritual advancement, or rejecting the rules and regulations of the scrip-
tures and working independently or whimsically, (5) associating with worldly-
minded persons who are not interested in Krsna consciousness, and (6) being
greedy for mundane achievements.”
TEXT 158
কিন্তু যদি লতার অঙ্গে উঠে छनन ।
ভুক্তি-মুক্তি-বাঞ্ছ, যত অসংখ্য তার লেখা! ॥ ১৫৮ ॥
kintu yadi latara sange 0106 ‘upasakha’
bhukti-mukti-vancha, yata asarikhya tara lekha
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; yadi—if; latara—the creeper of devotional service; sarige—with;
0106 —arise; upasakha—unwanted creepers; bhukti—for material enjoyment;
mukti—for liberation from the material world; vaAchda—the desires; yata—as
many as there are; asankhya—unlimited; tara—of those unwanted creepers;
lekha—the writing.
TRANSLATION
‘’Sometimes unwanted creepers, such as the creepers of desires for material
enjoyment and liberation from the material world, grow along with the
creeper of devotional service. The varieties of such unwanted creepers are un-
limited.
TEXT 159
“নিষিদ্ধাচার”, FORD, 'জীবহিংসন” ৷
“লাভ” “পুজা” “প্রতিষ্ঠাদি” যঙ উপশাখাগগণ ॥ ১৫৯ ॥
‘nisiddhacara’, ‘kutinati’, 1৮3-01753/737
‘labha’, ‘paja’, ‘pratisthadi’ yata upasakha-gana
SYNONYMS
nisiddha-acara—behavior not to be exhibited by a person desiring to become
perfect; kutinati—diplomacy; jiva-himsana—unnecessarily killing animals or the


--- Page 344 ---
342 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
soul; labha—profit according to material calculations; pdja—adoration achieved
by satisfying mundane people; pratistha-adi—becoming an important man in ma-
terial calculations, and so on; yata—all these; upasakha-gana—unnecessary
creepers.

TRANSLATION

‘Some unnecessary creepers growing with the bhakti creeper are the
creepers of behavior unacceptable for those trying to attain perfection,
diplomatic behavior, animal killing, mundane profiteering, mundane adora-
tion and mundane importance. All these are unwanted creepers.

PURPORT

There is a certain pattern of behavior prescribed for those actually trying to be-
come perfect. In our Krsna consciousness movement we advise our students not
to eat meat, not to gamble, not to engage in illicit sex and not to indulge in
intoxication. People who indulge in these activities can never become perfect;
therefore these regulative principles are for those interested in becoming perfect
and going back to Godhead. Kutinati, or diplomatic behavior, cannot satisfy the
atma, the soul. It cannot even satisfy the body or the mind. The culprit mind is al-
ways suspicious; therefore our dealings should always be straightforward and ap-
proved by Vedic authorities. If we treat people diplomatically or duplicitously, our
spiritual advancement is obstructed. Jiva-hiriisana refers to the killing of animals
or to envy of other living entities. The killing of poor animals is undoubtedly due
to envy of those animals. The human form is meant for the understanding of Krsna
consciousness (athato brahma-jijiasa), for inquiring about the Supreme Brahman.
In the human form, everyone has a chance to understand the Supreme Brahman.
The so-called leaders of human society do not know the real aim of human life
and are therefore busy with economic development. This is misleading. Every
state and every society is busy trying to improve the quality of eating, sleeping,
mating and defending. This human form of life is meant for more than these four
animal principles. Eating, sleeping, mating and defending are problems found in
the animal kingdom, and the animals have solved their problems without dif-
ficulty. Why should human society be so busy trying to solve these problems?
The difficulty is that people are not educated to understand this simple philoso-
phy. They think that advancement of civilization means increasing sense gratifica-
tion.

There are many religious propagandists who do not know how the ultimate
problems of life can be solved, and they also try to educate people in a form of
sense gratification. This is also jiva-himsana. Real knowledge is not given, and
religionists mislead the general populace. As far as material profits are concerned,
one should know that whatever material profit one has must be abandoned at the


--- Page 345 ---
Text 160] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 343
time of death. Unfortunately people do not know that there is life after death;
therefore mundane people waste their time amassing material profit which has to
be left behind at the time of death. Such profit has no eternal benefit. Similarly,
adoration by mundane people is valueless because after death one has to accept
another body. Material adoration and title are decorations that cannot be carried
over to the next body. In the next life, everything is forgotten.

All these obstructions have been described in this verse as unwanted creepers.
They simply present obstacles for the real creeper, bhakti-lata-bija. One should be
very careful to avoid all these unwanted things. Sometimes these unwanted
creepers look exactly like the bhakti-lata creeper. They appear to be of the same
size and the same species when they are packed together with the bhakti-lata
creeper, but in spite of this, the creepers are called upasakha. A pure devotee can
distinguish between the bhakti-lata creeper and a mundane creeper, and he is
very alert to distinguish them and keep them separate.

TEXT 160
সেকজল পাঞ। উপশাখা বাড়ি' যায়।
স্তব্ধ হঞ। Foi বাড়িতে না পায় ॥ ১৬০ ॥
seka-jala pana upasakha badi’ yaya
stabdha hana mala-sakha badite na paya
SYNONYMS

seka-jala—sprinkling water; pana—getting; upasakha—the unwanted
creepers; badi’ yaya—grow luxuriantly; stabdha hafia—becoming stopped; mala-
sakha—the chief creeper; badite—to increase; na paya—is not able.

TRANSLATION

‘If one does not distinguish between the bhakti-lata creeper and the other
creepers, the sprinkling of water is misused because the other creepers are
nourished while the bhakti-lata creeper is curtailed.

PURPORT

If one chants the Hare Krsna mantra while committing offenses, these un-
wanted creepers will grow. One should not take advantage of chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra for some material profit. As mentioned in verse 159:

‘nisiddhacara’, ‘kutinati’, jiva-hirhsana’
‘labha’, ‘paja’, ‘pratisthadi’ yata upasakha-gana


--- Page 346 ---
344 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
The unwanted creepers have been described by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura. He states that if one hears and chants without trying to give up offenses,
one becomes materially attached to sense gratification. One may also desire
freedom from material bondage like the Mayavadis, or one may become attached
to the yoga-siddhis and desire wonderful yogic powers. If one is attached to won-
derful material activities, one is called siddhi-lobhi, greedy for material perfection.
One may also be victimized by diplomatic or crooked behavior, or one may asso-
ciate with women for illicit sex. Others may make a show of devotional service
like the prakrta-sahajiyas, or one may try to support his philosophy by joining
some caste or identifying himself with a certain dynasty, claiming a monopoly on
spiritual advancement. Thus with the support of family tradition, one may be-
come a pseudo guru or so-called spiritual master. One may become attached to
the four sinful activities —illicit sex, intoxication, gambling and meat eating, or one
may consider a Vaisnava to belong to a mundane caste or creed. One may think,
“This is a Hindu Vaisnava, and this is a European Vaisnava. A European Vaisnava is
not allowed to enter the temples.” In other words, one may consider Vaisnavas in
terms of birth, thinking one a brahmana Vaisnava, a sadra Vaisnava, a mleccha
Vaisnava and so on. One may also try to carry out a professional business while
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra or reading Srimad-Bhagavatam, or one may try to
increase his monetary strength by illegal means. One may also try to be a cheap
Vaisnava by chanting in a secluded place for material adoration, or one may desire
mundane reputation by making compromises with nondevotees, compromising
one’s philosophy or spiritual life, or one may become a supporter of a hereditary
caste system. All these are pitfalls of personal sense gratification. just to cheat
some innocent people, one makes a show of advanced spiritual life and becomes
known as a sadhu, mahatma or religious person. All this means that the so-called
devotee has become victimized by all these unwanted creepers and that the real
creeper of bhakti-lata-bijahas been stunted.
TEXT 161

প্রথমেই উপশাখার FACT ছেদন |

তবে মুলশাখা AE যায় বৃন্দাবন ॥ ১৬১ ॥

prathamei upasakhara karaye chedana

tabe mala-sakha badi’ yaya vrndavana

SYNONYMS
prathamei—from the very beginning; upasakhara—of the unwanted creepers;

karaye —does; chedana—the cutting away; tabe—then only; midila-sakha—the


--- Page 347 ---
Text 163] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 345
chief creeper; badi’—increasing; ydya—goes; vrndavana—to the lotus feet of
Lord Sri Krsna in Vindavana.
TRANSLATION
“As soon as an intelligent devotee sees an unwanted creeper growing
beside the original creeper, he must cut it down instantly. Then the real
creeper of bhakti-lata-bija grows nicely, returns home, back to Godhead, and
seeks shelter under the lotus feet of Krsna.
PURPORT
If one is misled by unwanted creepers and is victimized, he cannot make
progress back to Godhead. Rather, he remains within the material world and
engages in activities having nothing to do with pure devotional service. Such a
person may be elevated to the higher planetary systems, but because he remains
within the material world, he is subjected to the threefold material miseries.
TEXT 162
“প্রেমফল” পাকি” পড়ে, মালী আস্বাদয় ।
नङ] WIFE মালী “কল্পবৃক্ষ” পায় ॥ ১৬২ ॥
‘prema-phala’ paki’ pade, mali asvadaya
lata avalambi’ mali ‘kalpa-vrksa’ paya
SYNONYMS
prema-phala—the fruit of love of God; paki’—becoming mature; pade—falls
down; mali—the gardener; dsvadaya—tastes; lata avalambi’—taking advantage
of the growing bhakti-lata; mali—the gardener; kalpa-vrksa paya—reaches the
desire tree in Coloka Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
“When the fruit of devotional service becomes ripe and falls down, the gar-
dener tastes the fruit and thus takes advantage of the creeper and reaches the
desire tree of the lotus feet of Krsna in Goloka Vrndavana.
TEXT 163
তাই সেই কল্পবৃক্ষের TACH ८मवन |
FCA প্রেমফল-রস করে আস্বাদন ॥ ১৬৩ ॥


--- Page 348 ---
346 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
tahan sei kalpa-vrksera karaye sevana
sukhe prema-phala-rasa kare asvadana
SYNONYMS
tahan—there (in Goloka Vrndavana); sei kalpa-vrksera—of the lotus feet of
Krsna, which are compared to a desire tree; karaye sevana—engages in the ser-
vice; sukhe—in transcendental bliss; prema-phala-rasa—the juice of the fruit of
devotional service; kare —does; asvadana—tasting.
TRANSLATION
‘There the devotee serves the lotus feet of the Lord, which are compared to
a wish-fulfilling tree. With great bliss he tastes the juice of the fruit of love and
becomes eternally happy.
PURPORT
The word tahan indicates that in the spiritual world one can taste the juice of
the fruit of devotional service and thus become blissful.
TEXT 164
এইত পরম-ফল “পরম-পুকু্ার্থ্।
খার আগে তৃণ-তুল্য চারি পুকুষার্থ ॥ ১৬৪ ॥
eita parama-phala ‘parama-purusartha’
yanra age trpa-tulya cari purusartha
SYNONYMS
eita—this; parama-phala—the supreme goal of life; parama—supreme; purusa-
artha—interest of the living being; yarnra age—in the presence of which; trpa-
tulya—very insignificant; cari—four; purusa-artha—the different types of human
interests.
TRANSLATION
“To taste the fruit of devotional service at Goloka Vrndavana is the highest
perfection of life, and in the presence of such perfection, the four material
perfections —religion, economic development, sense gratification and libera-
tion—are very insignificant achievements.
PURPORT
The highest achievement attained by the jAanis or impersonalists is becoming
one with the Supreme, generally known as moksa, liberation. The highest


--- Page 349 ---
Text 165] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 347
achievements of the yogis are the eight material perfections such as anima,
laghima and prapti. Yet these are nothing compared to the eternal bliss of the
devotee who returns back to Godhead and tastes the fruit of devotional service
to the lotus feet of the Lord. The material perfections up to the point of liberation
are very insignificant in comparison; therefore the pure devotee is never in-
terested in such things. His only interest is in perfecting his devotional service to
the Lord. The pleasure of the impersonalist monist philosophers is condemned in
the following verse, whichis also found in Srila Rapa Gosvami's Lalita-madhava.
TEXT 165
খদ্ধ। সিদ্ধিত্রজ-বিজ য়িতা সত্যধর্ম। সমাধি-
TWAT গুরুরপি চমৎকারয়ত্যেব তাবৎ ।
যাবৎ প্রেম্ণাং মধুরিপু-বশীকার-সিদ্ধৌষধীনাং
গন্ধোহপ্যস্তঃকরণসরণী-পান্থতাং न প্রযাতি ॥ ১৬৫
10003 siddhi-vraja-vijayita satya-dharma samadhir
brahmanando gurur api camatkarayaty eva tavat
yavat premnarh madhu-ripu-vasikara-siddhausadhinarh
gandho ‘py antah-karana-sarani-panthatam na prayati
SYNONYMS
rddha—excellent; siddhi-vraja—of the groups of material perfections of the
yogis (anima, laghima, prapti and so on); vijayita—the victory; satya-dharma —the
religious principles of perfection (satya, sama, titiksa and so on); samadhih—the
yogic perfection of meditation; brahma-anandah—the spiritually blissful life of
the monist; guruh—very high in material considerations; api—although;
camatkarayati—they appear very important; eva—only; tavat—that long; yavat—
as long as; premnam—of love of Krsna; madhu-ripu—of Krsna, the enemy of the
Madhu demon; vasikara—in the controlling; siddha-ausadhinam—which 15 like
perfect herbs that can control snakes; gandhah—a light fragrance; api—even; an-
tah-karana-sarani-panthatam—a traveler on the path of the heart; na prayati—
does not become.
TRANSLATION
‘As long as there is not the slightest fragrance of pure love of Krsna, which
is the perfected medicinal herb for controlling Lord Krsna within the heart,
the opulences of material perfection —known as the siddhis, the brahminical
perfections [satya, ama, titiksa and so on], the trance of the yogis and the
monistic bliss of Brahman—all seem wonderful for men.


--- Page 350 ---
348 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
There are different types of material perfection known as siddhi-vraja,
brahminical qualifications, yogic trance and merging into the Supreme. All these
are certainly very attractive for a mundane person, but their brilliance exists only
as long as one does not take to devotional service. Devotional service can control
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme controller of all univer-
sal affairs. The five rasas (mellows) in the transcendental world are practiced by
the inhabitants of Goloka Vindavana in neutrality, servitorship, friendship, pater-
nal affection and conjugal love. All these please the Lord so much that He is con-
trolled by the devotees. For instance, mother Yasoda was so advanced in devo-
tional service that Krsna agreed to be controlled by her stick. In other words, the
five principal mellows are so great and glorious that they are able to control the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the material world, however, the so-called
siddhis, or perfections, manifest their brightness only as long as one is not in-
terested in devotional service. In other words, the perfection of the karmis, jAanis,
yogis and others remains attractive only as long as one does not come to the
point of devotional service, which is so great and significant that it can control the
supreme controller, Krsna.
TEXT 166
“শুদ্ধভক্তি” হৈতে হয় CAA’ উৎপন্ন ।
অতএব ESET কহিয়ে “লক্ষণ” ॥ ১৬৬ ॥
‘suddha-bhakti’ haite haya ‘prema’ utpanna
ataeva suddha-bhaktira kahiye ‘laksana’
SYNONYMS
Suddha-bhakti—pure devotional service without material contaminations;
haite—from; haya—is; prema—Ilove of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ut-
panna—produced; ataeva—therefore; suddha-bhaktira—of pure devotional ser-
vice; kahiye—let me explain; laksana—the symptoms.
TRANSLATION
“When one is situated in pure devotional service, he develops love of God-
head; therefore let me describe some of the symptoms of pure devotional ser-
vice.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (18.55) it is said: bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tat-
tvatah. One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in truth un-
less he takes to devotional service.


--- Page 351 ---
Text 167] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 349
TEXT 167
অন্যাভিলাযিতা-শূন্যং জ্ঞান-কর্মাছ্ধনাবুতম্‌ ।
আচ্কুলো্যেন ক্বষ্ণান্ুশীলনং ভক্তিরুত্তম| ॥ ১৬৭ ॥
anyabhilasita-sanyarn
jAana-karmady-anavrtam
anukdalyena krsnanu-
Silananir bhaktir uttama
SYNONYMS
anya-abhilasita-stinyam—without desires other than those for the service of
Lord Krsna, or without material desires (such as those for meat-eating, illicit sex,
gambling and addiction to intoxicants); jiiana—by the knowledge of the philoso-
phy of the monist Mayavadis;* karma—by fruitive activities; adi—by artificially
practicing detachment, by the mechanical practice of yoga, by studying the
Sankhya philosophy, and so on; anavrtam—uncovered; anukalyena— favorable;
krsna-anusilanam—cultivation of service in relationship to Krsna; bhaktih ut-
tama—first-class devotional service.
TRANSLATION
“When first-class devotional service develops, one must be devoid of all
material desires, knowledge obtained by monistic philosophy, and fruitive ac-
tion. The devotee must constantly serve Krsna favorably, as Krsna desires.
PURPORT
This verse is also found in Srila Rapa Gosvami's Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11).
As we can understand from Bhagavad-gita (9.34 and 18.65), the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead wants everyone to think of Him always (man-mana bhava
mad-bhaktah). Everyone should become His devotee, not the devotee of a
demigod. Everyone should engage in devotional service or arcana Deity worship
in the temple. Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji marin namaskuru. Everyone
should offer obeisances, from moment to moment, to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. These are the desires of the Supreme Lord, and one who fulfills His
desires favorably is actually a pure devotee. Krsna wants everyone to surrender
unto Him, and devotional service means preaching this gospel all over the world.
The Lord says openly in Bhagavad-gita (18.69): na ca tasman manusyesu kascin
me priya-krttamah. One should preach the gospel of Bhagavad-gita for the benefit
*Here jana does not refer to perfect knowledge in devotional service. One has to learn the path of
devotional service with full knowledge of the Vedas (bhaktya sruta-grhitayd—Bhag. 1.2.12).


--- Page 352 ---
350 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
of all. Bhagavad-gita is spoken by the Lord so that human society can be perfectly
organized from all angles of vision—politically, socially, economically, philosophi-
cally and religiously. From any point of view, human society can be reformed by
the Krsna consciousness movement; therefore one who spreads this philosophy
of Krsna consciousness for the benefit of all conditioned souls in the universe is
perfect in pure devotional service.

The criterion is that a devotee must know what Krsna wants him to do. This can
be achieved through the medium of the spiritual master who is a bona fide repre-
sentative of Krsna. Srila Rapa Gosvami advises, adau gurv-asrayam. One who is
serious in wanting to render pure devotional service to the Lord must take shelter
of the spiritual master who comes in the disciplic succession from Krsna. Evari
parampara-praptam imarn rajarsayo viduh. Without accepting a bona fide spiritual
master coming in the disciplic succession, one cannot find out the real purpose of
devotional service. Therefore one has to accept the shelter of a bona fide spiritual
master and agree to be directed by him. The first business of a pure devotee is to
satisfy his spiritual master, whose only business is to spread Krsna consciousness.
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah: if one can satisfy the spiritual master, Krsna is
automatically satisfied. This is the success of devotional service. This is the mean-
ing of the word anukalyena—that is, favorable devotional service to the Lord. A
pure devotee has no plans other than those for the Lord's service. He is not in-
terested in attaining success in mundane activities. He simply wants success in the
progress of devotional service. For a devotee, there cannot be worship of others
or demigod worship. A pure devotee does not engage himself in such pseudo-
devotional service. He is interested only in satisfying Krsna. If one lives only for the
satisfaction of Krsna, he does not have to accept this order or that order. One's
only business should be to satisfy Krsna. This process is completely manifest in the
activities of the Krsna consciousness movement. It has been actually proved that
the entire world can accept devotional service without failure. One simply has to
follow the instructions of the representative of Krsna.

TEXT 168
खक्र-वां&), অন্য-পুজ। ছাড়ি' ‘Wi, “কর্ম” ।
আনমুকুলোয ACA fees কৃষ্ণান্ছুলীলন ॥ ১৬৮ ॥
anya-vancha, anya-paja chadi’ ‘jnana’, ‘karma’
anukalye sarvendriye krsnanusilana
SYNONYMS

anya-vancha—other desires; anya-paja—other types of worship; chadi’—giv-

ing up; jAana—material knowledge; karma—material activities; anukalye—


--- Page 353 ---
Text 169] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 351
favorably; sarva-indriye—with all the senses; krsna-anusilana—cultivation of
Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
“A pure devotee must not cherish any other desire than to serve Krsna. He
should not offer worship to the demigods or to mundane personalities. He
should not cultivate artificial knowledge, which is devoid of Krsna conscious-
ness, and he should not engage himself in anything other than Krsna con-
scious activities. One must engage all one’s purified senses in the service of
the Lord. This is the favorable execution of Krsna conscious activities.
TEXT 169
এই “শুদ্ধতক্তি-_ইহ। হৈতে “প্রেম” হয়।
পঞ্চরাত্রে, ভাগবতে এই লক্ষণ কয় ॥ ১৬৯ ॥
ei ‘Suddha-bhakti’—iha haite ‘prema’ haya
paicaratre, bhagavate ei laksana kaya
SYNONYMS
ei—this; suddha-bhakti—pure devotional service; iha haite—from which;
prema —unalloyed love of Krsna; haya—there is; pancaratre—in the Vedic
literature known as the Pancaratras; bhagavate —also in the Srimad-Bhagavatam;
ei—these; laksana—symptoms; kaya—are described.
TRANSLATION
“These activities are called suddha-bhakti, pure devotional service. If one
renders such pure devotional service, he develops his original love for Krsna
in due course of time. In Vedic literatures like the 23703131139 and Srimad-
Bhagavatam, these symptoms are described.
PURPORT
One has to develop his devotional service under the directions of a pure devo-
tee, the spiritual master, and in accordance with the Vedic directions given in the
Pancaratra and Bhagavatam systems. The Pancaratra system includes methods of
temple worship, and the Bhagavatam system includes the spreading of Krsna con-
scious philosophy through the recitation of Srimad-Bhagavatam and the discus-
sion of philosophy with people who are interested. Through discussion, one can
create an interest and understanding of the Paficaratra and Bhagavatam systems.


--- Page 354 ---
352 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 170
সবোপাধিবিনিমুক্তিৎ তৎপরত্বেন निर्बलम्‌ ।
হৃযীকেণ হৃষীঁকেশ-সেবনং ভক্তিরুচ্যতে ॥ ১৭০
53/৮০/003001-17/111701/(3/77
tat-paratvena nirmalam
hrsikena hrsikesa-
sevanarm bhaktir ucyate
SYNONYMS
sarva-upadhi-vinirmuktam—free from all kinds of material designations, or free
from all desires except the desire to render service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tat-paratvena—by the sole purpose of serving the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; nirmalam—uncontaminated by the effects of speculative philo-
sophical research or fruitive activity; hrsikena—by purified senses freed from all
designations; hrsikesa—of the master of the senses; sevanam—the service to
satisfy the senses; bhaktih—devotional service; ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Bhakti, or devotional service, means engaging all our senses in the ser-
vice of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all the
senses. When the spirit soul renders service unto the Supreme, there are two
side effects. One is freed from all material designations, and, simply by being
employed in the service of the Lord, one’s senses are purified.
PURPORT
This verse quoted from the Narada-pancaratra is found in Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu (1.1.12).
TEXT 171
মদ্‌গ্ডণশ্রুতিমাত্রেণ ময়ি সর্বগুহ।শয়ে |
মনোগতির বিচ্ছিন্ন! যথ। গঙ্গান্তসোইস্কুধৌ ॥ ১৭১ ॥
mad-guna-sruti-matrena
mayi sarva-guhasaye
manogatir avicchinna
yatha gangambhaso ‘mbudhau


--- Page 355 ---
Text 173] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 353
SYNONYMS
mat—of Me; guna—of the qualities; sruti-matrena—only by hearing; mayi—to
Me; sarva-guha—in all hearts; asaye—who am situated; manah-gatih—the
movement of the mind; avicchinna—unobstructed; yatha—just as; gariga-
ambhasah —of the celestial waters of the Canges; ambudhau—to the ocean.
TRANSLATION
‘“‘Just as the celestial waters of the Ganges flow unobstructed into the
ocean, so when My devotees simply hear of Me, their minds come to Me. |
reside in the hearts of all.
PURPORT
This verse and the following three verses quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam
(3.29.11-14), were spoken by Lord Krsna in the form of Kapiladeva.
TEXT 172
नक्रनेः ভক্তিযোগসশ্ত নিগুণিস্ত g rigs!
অহৈতুক্যব্যবহিতা য। ভক্তিঃ পুরুষোত্তমে ॥ ১৭২ ॥
laksanari bhakti-yogasya
nirgunasya hy udahrtam
ahaituky avyavahita
yd bhaktih purusottame
SYNONYMS
laksanam—the symptom; bhakti-yogasya—of devotional service; nir-
gunasya—beyond the three modes of nature; hi—certainly; udahrtam—is cited;
ahaituki—causeless; avyavahita—uninterrupted; ya—which; bhaktih—devo-
tional service; purusottame—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘These are the characteristics of transcendental loving service to Purusot-
tama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: it is causeless, and it cannot be
obstructed in any way.
TEXT 173
সালোক্যসাষ্টিসামীপ্য-সারূপ্যৈকত্বমপুযুত।
দীয়মানং न গৃহ্ুস্তি বিনা মংসেবনং জনাঃ ॥ ১৭৩ ॥


--- Page 356 ---
354 कात Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
salokya-sarsti-samipya-
sardpyaikatvam apy uta
diyamanan na grhnanti
vina mat-sevanam janah
SYNONYMS
salokya—being on the same planet as Me; sarsti—having opulence equal to
Mine; samipya—having direct association with Me; saripya—having the same
form as Me; ekatvam—oneness with Me; api—even; uta—or; diyamanam—
being given; na—not; grhnanti —accept; vina—without; mat-sevanam—My ser-
vice; janah—the devotees.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘My devotees do not accept saloka, sarsti, saripya, samipya or oneness
with Me —even if | offer these liberations—in preference to serving Me.
TEXT 174
স এব ভক্তিযোগাথ্য আত্যস্তিক উদাহৃতঃ 1
যেনাতিত্রজ্য ত্রিগুণং মত্তাবায়োপপছাতে ॥ ১৭৪ ॥
sa eva bhakti-yogakhya
atyantika udahrtah
yenativrajya trigunari
mad-bhavayopapadyate
SYNONYMS
sah—that (having the above symptoms); eva—certainly; bhakti-yoga-
akhyah—called bhakti-yoga; atyantikah—the ultimate goal of life; udahrtah —de-
scribed as; yena—by which; ativrajya—transcending; tri-gunam—the three
modes of material nature; mat-bhavaya—for direct touch with Me, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and My nature; upapadyate —one becomes qualified.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Bhakti-yoga, as described above, is the ultimate goal of life. By rendering
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one transcends the
modes of material nature and attains the spiritual position on the platform of
direct devotional service.’
TEXT 175
ङूकि-गूकछि खांकि-व) €] যদি মনে হয়।
সাধন করিলে প্রেম Besta না হয় ॥ ১৭৫ ॥


--- Page 357 ---
Text 176] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 355
bhukti-mukti adi-varicha yadi mane haya
sadhana karile prema utpanna na haya
SYNONYMS
bhukti—material enjoyment; mukti—to become liberated from material bon-
dage; adi—and so on; varicha—desires; yadi—if; mane —in the mind; haya—are;
sadhana karile—even executing devotional service according to the regulative
routine; prema—real love of Krsna; utpanna—awakened; na—not; haya—is.
TRANSLATION
“If one is infected with the desire for material enjoyment or material libera-
tion, he cannot rise to the platform of pure loving service unto the Lord, even
though he may superficially render devotional service according to the rou-
tine regulative principles.
PURPORT
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura mentions that if one maintains within
his heart the desire to enjoy the result of good work, or, being embarrassed by the
material world, the desire to get out of material entanglement, one will never be
able to attain the transcendental mellows of devotional service. In other words,
one must not desire material profit when rendering devotional service. Even if one
follows all the sixty-four regulative principles, he cannot attain pure devotional
service with a contaminated heart.
TEXT 176
তুক্তি-মুক্তি-স্পৃহ। যাবৎ পিশাচী হৃদি বর্ততে।
তাবস্তক্তিস্থথস্যাত্র কথমহ্থ্যদয়ে SCR ॥ ১৭৬ ॥
bhukti-mukti-sprha yavat
pisaci hrdi vartate
tavad bhakti-sukhasyatra
katham abhyudayo bhavet
SYNONYMS
bhukti—for material enjoyment; mukti—and for liberation from material exis-
tence; sprha—desire; yavat—as long as; pisaci—the witches; hrdi—within the
heart; vartate—remain; tavat—that long; bhakti—of devotional service;
sukhasya—of the happiness; atra—here; katham—how; abhyudayah —awaken-
ing; bhavet—can there be.


--- Page 358 ---
356 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
“The material desire to enjoy the material world and the desire to become
liberated from material bondage are considered to be two witches, and they
haunt one like ghosts. As long as these witches remain within the heart, how
can one feel transcendental bliss? As long as these two witches remain in the
heart, there is no possibility of enjoying the transcendental bliss of devotional
service,
PURPORT
This verse is found in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.22).
TEXT 177
সাধনভক্তি হৈতে হয় “রতি'র উদয় |
রতি গাঢ় হৈলে তার “প্রেম নাম কয় ॥ ১৭৭ ॥
sadhana-bhakti haite haya ‘rati’ra udaya
rati 83003 haile tara ‘prema’ nama kaya
SYNONYMS
sadhana-bhakti—the process of regularly rendering devotional service; haite —
from; haya—there is; ratira—of attachment; udaya—the awakening; rati—such
attachment; gadha haile—becoming thick; tara—of this; prema—Ilove of God-
head; nama—the name; kaya—is said.
TRANSLATION
“By regularly rendering devotional service, one gradually becomes at-
tached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When that attachment is in-
tensified, it becomes love of Godhead.
PURPORT
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.2) gives the following information about sadhana-
bhakti:
krti-sadhya bhavet sadhya-
bhava sa sadhanabhidha
nitya-siddhasya bhavasya
prakatyam hrdi sadhyata
The process of devotional service—beginning with chanting and hearing —is
called sadhana-bhakti. This includes the regulative principles that are intended to


--- Page 359 ---
Text 178] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 357
awaken one to devotional service. Devotional service is always dormant in every-
one's heart, and by the offenseless chanting of the holy names of the Lord, one’s
original dormant Krsna consciousness is awakened. This awakening to Krsna con-
sciousness is the beginning of sadhana-bhakti. This can be divided into many dif-
ferent parts, including faith, association with devotees, initiation by the spiritual
master, engagement in devotional service under the instructions of a spiritual
master, steadiness in devotional service and the awakening of a taste for devo-
tional service. In this way, one can become attached to Krsna and His service, and
when this attachment is intensified, it results in ecstatic love for Krsna. The word
rati is explained in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.3.41) as follows:
vyaktam masrpatevantar-
laksyate rati-laksanam
mumuksu-prabhrtinam ced
bhaved esa ratir na hi
“When a tenderness of the heart is manifest, there is rati, or attachment. Those
who are interested in being liberated from material bondage must manifest this
tenderness called rati.” This attachment is not like material attachment. When one
is liberated from material contamination, the awakening of attachment for Krsna’s
service is called rati. In the material world there is attachment for material enjoy-
ment, but this is not rati. Transcendental rati can be awakened only on the
spiritual platform. Ecstatic love for Krsna (prema) is described in the Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu (1.41) as follows:
samyan masrnita-svanto
mamatvatisayarkitah
bhavah sa eva sandratma
budhaih prema nigadyate
“When the heart is completely softened and devoid of all material desires and
when one’s emotional feelings become very strong, one becomes very much at-
tached to Krsna. Such purified emotion is known as pure love.”
TEXT 178
প্রেম বৃস্ধিক্রমে নাম - (सङ्‌, गान, প্রণয় |
রাগ, FATA, ভাব, ARIST হুয় ॥ ১৭৮ ॥
prema vrddhi-krame nima——sneha, mana, pranaya
raga, anuraga, bhava, mahabhava haya


--- Page 360 ---
358 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
prema —ecstatic love for God; vrddhi-krame—in terms of progressive increase;
nama—named; sneha—affection; mana—abhorrence; pranaya—love; raga—at-
tachment; anuraga—further attachment; bhava —ecstasy; maha-bhava—great
ecstasy; haya—are.
TRANSLATION
“The basic aspects of prema, when gradually increasing to different states,
are affection, abhorrence, love, attachment, further attachment, ecstasy and
great ecstasy.
PURPORT
In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, (3.2.84) sneha (affection) is described as follows:
sandras citta-dravari kurvan
prema ‘sneha’ itiryate
ksanikasyapi neha syad
vislesasya sahisputa
“That aspect of prema in which the melting of the heart for the lover is concen-
trated is called sneha, or affection. The symptom of such affection is that the lover
cannot for a moment remain without the association of the beloved.” A descrip-
tion of mana can be found in Madhya-lila (Chapter Two, verse 66). Similarly, a de-
scription of pranaya is also there. As far as raga is concerned, Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu says (3.2.87) says:
snehah sa rago yena syat
sukharn duhkham api sphutam
tat-sambandha-lave ‘py atra
pritih prana-vyayair api
“That stage at which affection for the beloved converts unhappiness into happi-
ness is called raga, or attachment. When one has such attachment for Krsna, he
can give up his own life to satisfy his beloved Krsna.” Anuraga, bhava and
mahabhava are described in the Sixth Chapter of Madhya-lila, verse 13. The pur-
port to that verse explains adhiradha-mahabhava.
TEXT 179
যৈছে বীজ, ইক্ষু, রস, @F, খণ্ড-সার |
শর্করা, जिर], মিছরি, উত্তম-মিছরি আর ॥ ১৭৯ ॥


--- Page 361 ---
Text 180] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 359
yaiche bija, iksu, rasa, guda, khanda-sara
Sarkara, sita, michari, uttama-michari ara
SYNONYMS
yaiche —just like; bija—the seed; iksu—the sugarcane plant; rasa—the juice;
guda—molasses; khanda-sara—dry molasses; sarkara—sugar; sita—candy;
michari—rock candy; uttama-michari—lozenges; ara—and.
TRANSLATION
“The gradual development of love may be compared to different states of
sugar. First there is the seed of the sugarcane, then sugarcane and then the
juice extracted from the cane. When this juice is boiled, it forms a liquid
molasses, then a solid molasses, then sugar, candy, rock candy and finally
lozenges.
TEXT 180
এই जव কৃষ্ণভক্তি-রসের স্থাগ়িভাব ।
স্থায়িভাবে মিলে যদি বিজাব, खखरी ॥ ১৮০ ॥
ei saba krsna-bhakti-rasera sthayibhava
sthayibhave mile yadi vibhava, anubhava
SYNONYMS
ei saba—all these; krsna-bhakti—of devotional service toKrsna; rasera—of the
mellows; sthayi-bhava—continuous existence; sthayi-bhave —in this continuous
existence; mile—one meets; yadi—if; vibhava—special ecstasy; anubhava—
subecstasy.
TRANSLATION
“All these stages combined are called sthayibhava, or continuous love of
Godhead in devotional service. In addition to these stages, there are vibhava
and anubhava.
PURPORT
Attachment for Krsna never wanes; it increases more and more as one attains
different stages. All the stages together are called sthayibhava, or continuous exis-
tence. The nine forms of devotional service are $/3৮303/7 kirtanarh vispoh
smaranam pada-sevanam arcanarn vandanam dasyan sakhyam atma-nivedanam.
When continuous love of Godhead is mixed with the processes of devotional ser-


--- Page 362 ---
360 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
vice, it is called vibhava, anubhava, sattvika and vyabhicari. The devotee thus en-
joys a variety of transcendental bliss. In his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya, Srila Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura states that anubhava can be divided into thirteen categories: (1)
dancing, (2) rolling on the ground, (3) singing, (4) yelling, (5) jumping, (6) making
loud noises, (7) yawning, (8) heavy breathing, (9) not caring for public opinion,
(10) discharging saliva, (11) roaring laughter, (12) unsteadiness and (13) hiccup-
ping. These are the symptoms of anubhava. Thus the transcendental mellows are
experienced in different stages. Similarly, there are many other forms of expres-
sion that have been analytically studied by the Gosvamis. In Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu, Rapa Gosvami gives each and every symptom a particular name.
TEXT 181
সাত্ধিক-ব্যভিচারি-ভাবের মিলনে ।
কৃষ্ণতক্তি-রস হয় অস্ত আস্বাদনে ॥ ১৮১ ॥
sattvika-vyabhicari-bhavera milane
krspa-bhakti-rasa haya amrta asvadane
SYNONYMS
sattvika-vyabhicari-bhavera—of sattvika and vyabhicari with sthayibhava;
milane—by mixing; krspa-bhakti-rasa—the transcendental mellows of devotional
service to the Lord; haya—become; amrta—nectarean; dsvadane—in tasting.
TRANSLATION
“When the higher standard of ecstatic love is mixed with the symptoms of
sattvika and vyabhicari, the devotee relishes the transcendental bliss of loving
Krsna in a variety of nectarean tastes.
TEXT 182
'যৈছে कथि, fas), श्च, মরীচ, करू ।
মিলনে “রসালা' হয় DHS মধুত্ন ॥ ১৮২ ॥
yaiche dadhi, sita, ghrta, marica, karptira
milane ‘rasala’ haya amrta madhura
SYNONYMS
yaiche—just as; dadhi—yogurt; sita—sugar candy; ghrta—clarified butter;
marica—black pepper; karpara—camphor; milane—in mixing together; rasala—
very tasteful; haya—becomes; amrta—nectarean; madhura—and sweet.


--- Page 363 ---
Text 184] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 361
TRANSLATION
“These tastes are like a combination of yogurt, sugar candy, ghee [clarified
butter], black pepper and camphor and are as palatable as sweet nectar.
TEXTS 183-184
ভক্তভেদে রতি-ভেদ পঞ্চ পরকার |
শাস্তরতি, দাস্তরতি, সখ্যরতি আর ॥ ১৮৩ ॥
বাৎসল্যরতি, মধুররতি,-_-এ পঞ্চ বিভেদ |
রতিভেদে কৃষ্ণতক্তিরসে পঞ্চ ভেদ ॥ ১৮৪ I
bhakta-bhede rati-bheda (220८2 parakara
santa-rati, dasya-rati, sakhya-rati ara
vatsalya-rati, madhura-rati, — ei (22762 vibheda
rati-bhede krsna-bhakti-rase parca bheda
SYNONYMS
bhakta-bhede —according to varieties of devotees; rati-bheda—the different
attachments; paiica parakara—five categories; santi-rati—neutral appreciation;
dasya-rati—attachment in a service attitude; sakhya-rati—attachment by friendly
appreciation; dra—also; vatsalya-rati—attachment by paternal affection;
madhura-rati—attachment by conjugal love; ei—these; paica—five; vibheda—
divisions; rati-bhede—by attachment on different platforms; krsna-bhakti-rase —
in mellows derived from devotional service to Krsna; parfica—five; bheda—
varieties.
TRANSLATION
‘According to the devotee, attachment falls within the five categories of
§anta-rati, dasya-rati, sakhya-rati, vatsalya-rati and madhura-rati. These five
categories arise from the devotees’ different attachments to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The transcendental mellows derived from devotional
service are also of five varieties.
PURPORT
Santa-rati is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.5.16, 17, 18) as follows:
manase nirvikalpatvarih
sama ity abhidhiyate


--- Page 364 ---
362 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
“When one is completely free from all doubts and material attachments, he at-
tains the neutral position called santa.”
vihdya visayonmukhyarin
nijananda-sthitir yatah
atmanah kathyate so ‘tra
svabhavah sama ity asau
prayah sama-pradhananari
mamata-gandha-varjita
paramatmataya krsne
jata santa-ratir mata
The $anta-rati realization of Krsna is in the neutral stage between the conception
of impersonalism and personalism. This means that one is not very strongly at-
tached to the personal feature of the Lord. An appreciation of the greatness of the
Lord is called santa-rati. This is attachment not to the personal feature but to the
impersonal feature. Generally, one in this stage is attached to the Paramatma
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
is$varah sarva-bhatanam
hrd-dese ‘rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhatani
yantraradhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the
wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the ma-
terial energy.” (Bg. 18.61)

On the strength of this statement from Bhagavad-gita, we can understand that
in the $anta-rasa, a devotee sees the Lord's representation everywhere. Dasya-rati
is explained in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.5.27) thus:

svasmad bhavanti ye nyanas
te ‘nugrahya harer matah
aradhyatvatmika tesar
ratih pritir itirita
tatrasaktikrd anyatra
priti-sarharini hy asau
When the Supreme Lord in His localized aspect is appreciated and a great devo-
tee understands his subordinate position, not only does he surrender to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but, due to his subordinate position, he wishes


--- Page 365 ---
Text 184] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 363
to render some service and thus become favored by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. A devotee in the santa-rati is not very much willing to render service to
the Lord, but a devotee in the dasya-rati voluntarily wants to render service. Due
to this attitude, the devotee in the dasya-rati realizes the Supreme Personality of
Godhead more fully than a devotee in the santa-rati. He considers the Lord to be a
worshipable object, and this means that his attachment for the Lord increases. On
the dasya-rati platform a devotee is attached to rendering service to the Lord, and
he is detached from material activities. The santa-rati is neither material nor
spiritual, but the dasya-ratiis actually on the spiritual platform. There is no attach-
ment for material things on the spiritual platform. A devotee in dasya-rati has no
attachment for anything but Krsna’s service.
Sakhya-rati is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.5.30) as follows:
ye syus tulya mukundasya
te sakhayah satam matah
samyad visrambha-rapaisam
ratih sakhyam ihocyate
According to the opinion of advanced devotees and learned scholars, a devotee
in sakhya-rati feels equal to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is a rela-
tionship in friendship. Due to having a friendly relationship with the Lord, not only
is one free from material attachment, but one believes in equal dealings with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called sakhya-rati. The sakhya-rati devo-
tee is so advanced that he treats the Lord on an equal level and even exchanges
joking words. Although one is never equal to the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the sakhya-rati devotee feels equal to the Lord, and he does not feel guilty
because of this. Actually it is offensive to consider oneself equal to the Lord. The
Mayavadis consider themselves equal to the Lord, but such feelings entail
bereavement because they are material. The sakhya-rati, however, is a feeling ex-
perienced in the mind by a pure devotee, and he is eternally related with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in that feeling.
Vatsalya-rati is described as follows in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.5.33):
guravo ye harer asya
te pajya iti visrutah
anugrahamayi tesam
ratir vatsalyam ucyate
ida lalana-bhavyasis
cibuka-sparsanadi-krt
When a living entity is situated on the platform of vatsalya-rati, he thinks of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His childhood feature. In this feature, the Lord


--- Page 366 ---
364 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
has to be protected by the devotee, and at this time the devotee takes the posi-
tion of being worshiped by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The feelings of
paternal love are called vatsalya-rati. When the devotee is situated on this plat-
form, he wants to maintain the Lord like a son, and he desires all good fortune for
the Lord. He offers blessings to the Lord by touching His feet and head.
Madhura-rati, or attachment in conjugal love, is described as follows:
mitho harer mrgaksyas ca
sambhogasyadi-karanam
madhurapara-paryaya
priyatakhyodita ratih
asyam kataksa-bhraksepa-
priya-vani-smitadayah
The conjugal relationship is experienced between the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the young damsels of Vrajabhami, and due to their conjugal love
they continuously exist in eight kinds of remembrances called madhura-rati. This
intimate relationship brought about by conjugal love produces movements of the
eyebrows, glancing, sweet words and exchanges of joking words.
TEXT 185
শান্ত, FID, সখ্য, বাৎসল্য, মধুর-রস नोन |
কৃষ্ণভক্তি-রস-মধ্যে এ পঞ্চ প্রধান ॥ ১৮৫ ॥
santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, madhura-rasa nama
krsna-bhakti-rasa-madhye € parca pradhana
SYNONYMS
santa—neutrality; dasya—servitude; sakhya—friendship; vatsalya—paternal
affection; madhura-rasa—conjugal love; nama—different names; krspa-bhakti—
of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rasa—the mellows;
madhye —among; e—these; parica—five; pradhana—chief.
TRANSLATION
“The chief transcendental mellows experienced with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead are five —s$anta, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhura.
TEXT 186
হাস্তযোইভুতস্তথ। বীরঃ করুণে৷ রৌদ্র ইত্যপি ।
ভয়ানকঃ স বীভ২ংস ই তি Coles সপ্তধা ॥ ১৮৬ ॥


--- Page 367 ---
Text 187] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 365
hasyo ‘dbhutas tatha virah
karuno raudra ity api
bhayanakah sa bibhatsa
iti gaunas ca saptadha
SYNONYMS
hasyah—laughter; adbhutah—wonder; tatha—then; virah—chivalry;
karunah —compassion; raudrah—anger; iti—thus; api—also; bhayanakah—fear;
sah—that; bibhatsah—disaster; iti—thus; gaunah—indirect; ca—also; sapta-
dha—seven kinds.
TRANSLATION
‘Besides the five direct mellows, there are seven indirect mellows, known
as laughter, wonder, chivalry, compassion, anger, disaster and fear.
PURPORT
This verse is found in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.5.116).
TEXT 187
६
হাস্ত, TES, বীর, করুণ, রৌদ্র, বীভৎস, ভয়।
পঞ্চবিধ-ভক্তে গৌণ সপ্তরস হয় ॥ ১৮৭ ॥
hasya, adbhuta, vira, karuna, raudra, bibhatsa, bhaya
paiica-vidha-bhakte gauna sapta-rasa haya
SYNONYMS
hasya—laughter; adbhuta—wonder; vira—chivalry; karuna—pathetic feeling;
raudra—anger; bibhatsa—disaster; bhaya—fearfulness; panca-vidha-bhakte —in
five kinds of devotees; gauna—indirect; sapta-rasa—seven kinds of mellows;
haya—there are.
TRANSLATION
‘In addition to the five direct mellows, there are seven indirect mellows,
known as laughter, wonder, chivalry, compassion, anger, disaster and fear.
PURPORT
Santa-bhakti-rasa is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (3.1.4, 5, 6)as follows:
vaksyamanair vibhavadyaih
saminam svadyatam gatah
sthayi santi-ratir dhiraih
santa-bhakti-rasah smrtah


--- Page 368 ---
366 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
prayah svasukha-jatiyar
sukham syad atra yoginam
kintv atma-saukhyam aghanarn
ghanam tv isam ayam sukham
tatrapisa-svarapanubhavasyaivoru-hetuta
dasadi-van-mano-jfiatva-lilader na tatha mata
When $anta-rati (neutral attraction) is continuously existent and mixed with
ecstatic emotion, and when the devotee relishes that neutral position, it is called
$anta-bhakti-rasa. Santa-bhakti-rasa devotees generally relish the impersonal
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since their taste of transcenden-
tal bliss is incomplete, it is called aghana, or not concentrated. A comparison is
made between ordinary milk and concentrated milk. When the same devotee
goes beyond the impersonal and tastes the service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His original form as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, the taste is called con-
centrated (ghana) transcendental bliss. Sometimes the devotees in the santa-rasa
relish transcendental bliss after meeting the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
this is not comparable to the transcendental bliss relished by the devotees situ-
ated in dasya-rasa, the transcendental mellow in which one renders service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Dasya-rasa, or dasya-bhakti-rasa, is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
(3.2.4,5) as follows:
atmocitair vibhavadyaih
pritir asvadaniyatam
nita cetasi bhaktanam
priti-bhakti-raso matah
anugrahyasya dasatval
lalyatvad apy ayam dvidha
bhidyate sambhrama-prito
gaurava-prita ity api
When according to the desires of the spirit soul the living entity develops love for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this beginning of love is called dasya-bhak-
ti-rasa. Dasya-bhakti-rasa is divided into two categories called sambhrama-dasya
and gaurava-dasya. In the sambhrama-dasya, the devotee renders respectful ser-
vice to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but in the more advanced gaurava-
dasya, his service takes the form of giving protection to the Lord.
Sakhya-bhakti-rasa is described as follows in Bhakti-rasamrta sindhu (3.3.1):
sthayibhavo vibhavadyaih
sakhyam atmocitair iha


--- Page 369 ---
Text 187] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 367
nitas citte satam pustim
rasah preyanudiryate
“According to one’s original consciousness, ecstatic emotions are exhibited as
continuously existing in eternity. When this stage of Krsna consciousness is
mature, it is called preyo-rasa or sakhya-bhakti-rasa.”
Vatsalya-bhakti-rasa is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (3.4.1) as follows:
vibhavadyais tu vatsalyam
sthayi pustim upagatah
esa vatsala-namatra
prokto bhakti-raso budhaih
“When eternally existing love of Godhead transforms into paternal love and is
mixed with corresponding emotions, that stage of spiritual existence is described
by learned devotees as vatsalya-bhakti-rasa.”
Madhura-bhakti-rasa is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (3.5.1) as follows:
atmocitair vibhavadyaih
pustim nita satam hrdi
madhurakhyo bhaved bhaktir
aso ‘sau madhura ratih
“If in accordance with one’s own natural development in Krsna consciousness
one’s attraction leans toward conjugal love within the heart, that is called attach-
ment in conjugal love, or madhura-rasa.”

Similarly, hasya, adbhuta, vira, karuna, raudra, bhaya and bibhatsa—the seven
indirect mellows —are explained in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. The hasya-bhakti-rasa,
laughing devotion, is explained as follows (B.r.s. 4.1.6):

vaksyamanair vibhavadyaih
pustim hasa-ratir gata
hasya-bhakti-raso nama
budhair esa nigadyate
“When through devotional service a laughing attachment to Krsna is developed, it
is called hasya-bhakti-rasa by learned scholars.”

Similarly, adbhuta-rasa is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (4.2.1):

atmocitair vibhavadyaih
svadyatvam bhakta-cetasi

sa vismaya-ratir nitad-
bhuto-bhakti-raso bhavet


--- Page 370 ---
368 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
“When one’s general attachment is fixed in wonder, it is called adbhuta-bhakti-
rasa.”
Vira-bhakti-rasa is described (B.r.s. 4.3.1):
saivotsaha-ratih sthayi
vibhavadyair nijocitah
aniyamana svadyatvam
vira-bhakti-raso bhavet
yuddha-dana-daya-dharmais
caturdha-vira ucyate
“When attachment to Krsna mixes with the bellicose tendency, the charitable
tendency or the merciful tendency in the heart of the devotee, such devotion is
called vira-bhakti-rasa.”
Karuna-bhakti-rasa is described as follows (B.r.s. 4.4.1):
atmocitair vibhavadyair
nita pustim satam hrdi
bhavec choka-ratir bhakti-
raso hi karunabhidhah
“When one’s devotional attitude and attachment for Krsna is mixed with lamenta-
tion, it is called karupa-bhakti-rasa.”
Similarly, raudra-bhakti-rasa is described as follows (B.r.s. 4.5.1):
nita krodha-ratih pustim
vibhavadyair nijocitaih
hrdi bhakta-janasyasau
raudra-bhakti-raso bhavet
“When devotion is mixed with anger in the heart of the devotee, the taste is
called raudra-bhakti-rasa.”
Bhayanaka-bhakti-rasa is described as follows (B.r.s. 4.6.1):
vaksyamanair vibhavadyaih
pustim bhaya-ratir gata
bhayanakabhidho bhakti-
raso dhirair udiryate
“When devotion is mixed with fear, it is called bhayanaka-bhakti-rasa.”
Bibhatsa-bhakti-rasa is described as follows (B.r.s. 4.7.1):


--- Page 371 ---
Text 189] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 369
pustiri nija-vibhavadyair
jugupsa-ratir agata
asau bhakti-raso dhirair
bibhatsakhya itiryate
“When one’s attachment for Krsna develops in an abominable way, and the devo-
tee enjoys it, that is called bibhatsa-bhakti-rasa.”

In conclusion, when a pure devotee is situated in any of the five principal
mellows (santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhura), and the mellow is mixed
with the seven indirect bhakti-rasas (hasya, adbhuta, vira, karunpa, raudra,
bhayanaka and bibhatsa), the indirect mellows become prominent.

TEXT 188
পঞ্চরস “স্থায়ী” ব্যাপী রহে ভক্ত-মনে |
[इ
সপ্ত গৌণ “আগন্তক” পাইয়ে কারণে ॥ ১৮৮ ॥
pafica-rasa ‘sthayi’ vyapi rahe bhakta-mane
sapta gauna ‘agantuka’ paiye karane
SYNONYMS

panca-rasa—five direct transcendental mellows; sthayi—permanently existing;
vyapi—expanded; rahe —remain situated; bhakta-mane—in the heart of a devo-
tee; sapta gauna—seven indirect mellows; agantuka—accidental; paiye —appear-
ing; karane—under certain conditions.

TRANSLATION

“The five direct transcendental mellows of devotional service are perma-
nently situated in the heart of the devotee, whereas the seven indirect emo-
tions appear suddenly under certain conditions and appear more powerful.

TEXT 189
শান্তভক্ত _মনব-যোগেল্দ্র, সনকাদি আর ।
ঢাস্যযভাব-ভক্ত- সর্বত্র সেবক অপার ॥ ১৮৯ ॥
santa-bhakta——nava-yogendra, sanakadi ara
dasya-bhava-bhakta—sarvatra sevaka apara
SYNONYMS

$anta-bhakta—the neutral devotees; nava—nine; yogendra—saintly persons;

sanaka-adi ara—and the four Kumaras, headed by Sanaka; dasya-bhava-bhakta—


--- Page 372 ---
370 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
devotees in dasya-rasa; sarvatra sevaka apara—similar innumerable servants
everywhere.
TRANSLATION
‘“Examples of $anta-bhaktas are the nine Yogendras and the four Kumaras.
Examples of devotees in dasya-bhakti are innumerable, for such devotees ex-
ist everywhere.
PURPORT
The nine Yogendras are Kavi, Havi, Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana,
Avirhotra, Dravida (Drumila), Camasa and Karabhajana. The four Kumaras are
Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanat-kumara and Sanatana. The servant devotees in Gokula
are Raktaka, Citraka, Patraka and so on. In Dvaraka there are servants like Daruka,
and in the Lord's pastimes in the material world there are servants like Hanuman.
TEXT 190
সখ্য-ভক্ত'_ Fiat, পুরে ভীমাজুনে ।
বাৎসল্য-ভক্ত _মনাতা পিত) যত গুরুজন ॥ ১৯০ ॥
sakhya-bhakta—sridamadi, pure bhimarjuna
vatsalya-bhakta— mata pita, yata guru-jana
SYNONYMS
sakhya-bhakta—devotees in fraternity; sridama-adi—of Sridama and others;
pure —in Dvaraka; bhima-arjuna—Bhima and Arjuna; vatsalya-bhakta—devotees
in parental love; mata pita—the mother and father; yata guru-jana—all other
similarly superior persons.
TRANSLATION
“In Vrndavana, examples of devotees in fraternity are Sridama and Sudama;
in Dvaraka the Lord's friends are Bhima and Arjuna; in Vrndavana the devo-
tees in parental love are mother Yasoda and father Nanda Maharaja, and in
Dvaraka the Lord's parents are Vasudeva and Devaki. There are also other
superior persons who are devotees in parental love.
TEXT 191
মধুর-রসে ভক্তমুখ্য-_ত্রজে গোপীগণ ।
মহিযীগণ, লজ্জমীগণ, অসংখ্য গণন ॥ ১৯১ ॥


--- Page 373 ---
Text 193] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 371
madhura-rase bhakta-mukhya——vraje gopi-gana
mabhisi-gana, laksmi-gana, asarikhya ganana

SYNONYMS
madhura-rase—in the mellow of conjugal love; bhakta-mukhya—the chief
devotees; vraje—in Vindavana; gopi-gana—the gopis; mahisi-gana—the queens
in Dvaraka; laksmi-gana—the goddesses of fortune in Vaikuntha; asankhya
ganana—of innumerable reckoning.
TRANSLATION
“The chief devotees in conjugal love are the gopis in Vrndavana, the queens
in Dvaraka and the goddesses of fortune in Vaikuntha. These devotees are in-
numerable.
TEXT 192
পুনঃ কৃষ্ণরতি হয় দুইত প্রকার।
এশ্ব্যজ্ঞানমিশ্র) কেবলা-ভেদ আর ॥ ১৯২ ॥
punah krsna-rati haya duita prakara
aisvarya-jiidna-misra, kevala-bheda ara
SYNONYMS
punah—again; krsna-rati—attachment for Krsna; haya—becomes; duita—
twofold; prakara—varieties; aisvarya-jiana-misra—knowledge of Krsna mixed
with a reverential attitude; kevala—pure attachment; bheda—division; ara—
other.
TRANSLATION
‘’Attachment for Krsna is divided into two categories. One is attachment
with awe and reverence, and the other is pure attachment without reverence.
TEXT 193
(भो क्टन “কেবলা” রতি এশ্বর্যজ্ঞানহীন।
পুরীদ্ধয়ে, বৈকুণ্টাত্ে এঁশ্বর্য-প্রবীণ ॥ ১৯৩ ॥
gokule ‘kevala’ 131/---3/$৮/31%3-/83/773-0173
puri-dvaye, vaikunthadye —aisvarya-pravina


--- Page 374 ---
372 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
gokule—in Cokula Vrndavana; kevala rati—flawless attachment; aisvarya-
jAdna-hina—without reverential considerations; puri-dvaye—in two puris,
namely Mathura Puri and Dvaraka Purl; vaikuntha-adye—in the Vaikuntha
planets; aisvarya-pravina—prominence of awe and reverence.
TRANSLATION
‘Pure attachment without reverence is found in Goloka Vrndavana. Attach-
ment in which awe and reverence are prominent is found in the two cities
Mathura and Dvaraka and in Vaikuntha.
TEXT 194
এশ্বর্যজ্ঞানপ্রাধান্থ্যে gos AS |
দেখিয়া না মানে এঁশ্বর্য-_-কেবলার রীতি ॥ ১৯৪ ॥
3/$৮3/%৭-/৭3/773-0/30/73/7%//5 sarikucita priti
dekhiya na mane aisvarya——kevalara riti
SYNONYMS
aisvarya-jiana-pradhanye—in the predominance of awe and veneration;
sankucita—crippled; priti—love; dekhiya—seeing; na mane—does not care;
aisvarya—opulence; kevaldra riti—that is the symptom of pure devotional ser-
vice.
TRANSLATION
“When opulence is very prominent, love of Godhead is somewhat crippled.
According to kevala devotion, however, even though the devotee sees the un-
limited potency of Krsna, he considers himself equal with Him.
TEXT 195
শান্ত-দাস্তয-রসে এঁশ্বর্ধ কাই উদ্দীপন |
বাছসল্য-সখ্য-মধুরে ত” করে সঙন্ধোচন ॥ ১৯৫ ॥
santa-dasya-rase aisvarya kahan uddipana
vatsalya-sakhya-madhure ta’ kare sarkocana
SYNONYMS
santa-dasya-rase—in the transcendental mellows of neutrality and servitude;
aisvarya—opulence; kahan—somewhere; uddipana—manifested; vatsalya-


--- Page 375 ---
Text 197] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 373
sakhya-madhure—in fraternal love, paternity and conjugal love; ta’—certainly;
kare—does; sarikocana—minimizing.
TRANSLATION
“On the transcendental platform of neutrality and service, sometimes the
opulence of the Lord is prominent. However, in the transcendental mellows of
fraternal, paternal and conjugal love, the opulence is minimized.
TEXT 196
বস্ুদেব-দেবকীর কৃষ্ণ চরণ वन्निन |
এশ্বর্যত্ঞানে দু'হার মনে ভয় হৈল ॥ ১৯৬ ॥
vasudeva-devakira krspa carana vandila
aisvarya-jiane dunhara mane bhaya haila
SYNONYMS
vasudeva-devakira—of Vasudeva and Devaki; krsna—Lord Krsna; carana—to
the lotus feet; vandila—offered prayers; aisvarya-jiane —because of knowledge
of the opulence; dunhara—of both of them; mane —in the minds; bhaya haila—
there was fear.
TRANSLATION
“When Krsna offered prayers at the lotus feet of His mother and father,
Vasudeva and Devaki, they both felt awe, reverence and fear due to knowl-
edge of His opulences.
TEXT 197
(दकौ বসুদেবশ্চ বিজ্ঞায় জগদীশ্বরৌ ।
कृङमश्वन्तघ्नौ পুত্রৌ সমস্বজাতে न শঙ্কিতেী ॥ ১৯৭ ॥
devaki vasudevas ca
vijidya jagad-isvarau
krta-sarvandanau putrau
sasvajate na sankitau
SYNONYMS
devaki—Devaki; vasudevah—Vasudeva; ca—and; vijAidya—understanding;
jagat-isvarau—the two Lords of the universe; krta-sarhvandanau—having paid
obeisances; putrau—the two sons Krsna and Balarama; sasvajate —embraced;
na—not; sarikitau—being frightened.


--- Page 376 ---
374 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘When Devaki and Vasudeva understood that their two sons Krsna and
Balarama, who had paid obeisances to them, were the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they became fearful and did not embrace Them.’
PURPORT
This verse quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.44.51) refers to the killing of
Karhsa by Krsna and Balarama. Vasudeva and Devaki saw their son kill the power-
ful demon Karhsa, and after this they were immediately released from their
shackles. Balarama and Krsna then offered respects to Devaki and Vasudeva. Both
father and mother wanted to embrace their sons, but they understood that Krsna
and Balarama were the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they therefore hesi-
tated to embrace Them. Their parental love for Krsna and Balarama was therefore
hampered and decreased by awe and reverence.
TEXT 198
কৃষ্ণের বিশ্বরূপ দেখি” অজুনের হৈল ভয় ।
সখ্যভাবে HIRT ক্ষমাপয় করিয়। বিনয় ॥ ১৯৮ ॥
krsnera visva-rapa dekhi’ arjunera haila bhaya
sakhya-bhave dharstya ksamapaya kariya vinaya
SYNONYMS
krsnera—of Lord Krsna; visva-rapa—the universal form; dekhi’—seeing;
arjunera—of Arjuna; haila bhaya—there was fear; sakhya-bhave—as a friend;
dharstya—impudence; ksamapaya—begs pardon for; kariya—showing; vinaya—
submission.
TRANSLATION
“When Krsna manifested His universal form, Arjuna became reverent and
fearful, and he begged forgiveness for his past impudence toward Krsna as a
friend.
TEXTS 199-200
AAS AR প্রসভং যদুও'ং
হে কৃষ্ণ হে যাদব হে সখেতি।
অজানত। মহিমানং Bran
ময়। প্রমাদাৎ প্রণয়েন বাপি ॥ ১৯৯ ॥


--- Page 377 ---
Text 200] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 375
যচ্চাবহাসার্থম সতৎ্্বৃতোই নি
বিহার-শয্যাসন-ভোজনেযু |
GF श्य्‌ বাপ্যচু্যুত छर ममच्छर
छर ক্ষাময়ে ত্বামহমপ্রমেয়মূ॥ ২০০
sakheti matva prasabhari yad uktarn
he krsna he yadava he sakheti
ajanata mahimanam tavedam
maya pramadat pranayena vapi
yac cavahasartham asat-krto 5/
vihara-sayyasana-bhojanesu
eko 'thavapy acyuta tat-samaksam
tat ksamaye tvam aham aprameyam
SYNONYMS
sakha—friend; iti—thus; matva—thinking; prasabham—forcibly; yat—that
which; uktam—was said; he krsna—O Krsna; he yadava—O descendant of Yadu;
he sakha—O my dear friend; iti—thus; ajanata—without knowing;
mahimanam —greatness; tava—Your; idam—this; maya—by me; pramadat—out
of ignorance; pranayena—out of affection; va—or; api—certainly; yat—what-
ever; ca—and; avahasa-artham—for the matter of joking; asat-krtah —insulted;
asi—You are; vihara—while enjoying; sayya-asana—sitting or lying on the bed;
bhojanesu—while eating together; ekah—alone; athava—or; api—certainly;
acyuta—O my dear Krsna; tat-samaksam—in the presence of others; tat—all
those; ksamaye —ask pardon; tvam—unto You; aham—I; aprameyam —who are
unlimited.
TRANSLATION
^“ ८1 have in the past addressed You as “O Krsna,” “0 Yadava,” “0 my
friend’” without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever | have done in
madness or in love. | have dishonored You many times while we were relaxing,
lying on the same bed or eating together, sometimes alone and sometimes in
front of many friends. Please excuse me for all my offenses.’
PURPORT
This is a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (11.41-42). In this verse, Arjuna is ad-
dressing Krsna, who was exhibiting His universal form on the Battlefield of Kuru-
ksetra.


--- Page 378 ---
376 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 201
কৃষ্ণ যদি क्रञ्चिनीटन् কৈল। পরিহাস ।
“কৃষ্ণ ছাড়িবেন”- करानि, রুক্মিণীর হৈল ত্রাস ॥২০১॥
krsna yadi rukminire kaila parihasa
‘krsna chadibena’——jani’ rukminira haila trasa
SYNONYMS
krsna—Lord Krsna; yadi—although; rukminire —unto Rukminy, the first queen;
kaila—did; parihasa—joking; krsna—Lord Krsna; chadibena—will give me up;
jani’—thinking; rukminira—of Rukmini; haila—there was; trasa—shock.
TRANSLATION
‘Although Krsna was joking with Queen Rukmini, she was thinking that He
was going to give up her company, and she was therefore shocked.
TEXT 202
ङः ऋ एरध्यञग्र-८५] क-विने-वृट्क-
হুঁস্তাচ্ছ থদ্বলয়তো AFA পপাত |
দেহশ্চ বিক্লবধিয়ঃ সহসৈব मृन्‌
রস্তেব বাতবিহত। थविकीर् কেশান্‌॥ ২০২ ॥
tasyah suduhkha-bhaya-soka-vinasta-buddher
hastac chlathad-valayato vyajanarih papata
dehas ca viklava-dhiyah sahasaiva muhyan
rambheva vata-vihata pravikirya kesan
SYNONYMS
tasyah—of her; su-duhkha-bhaya—due to great distress and fear; soka—and
lamentation; vinasta—lost; buddheh—whose intelligence; hastat—from the
hand; slathat—being loose; valayatah—bangles; vyajanam—the fan; papata—fell
down; dehah—body; ca—also; viklava—paralyzed by fear; dhiyah—whose
understanding; sahasa eva—suddenly; muhyan—fainting; rambha iva—like a
banana tree; vata-vihata—dashed by a high wind; pravikirya—scattering;
kesan—the hair.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘While Krsna was joking with Rukmini in Dvaraka, she was full of distress,
fear and lamentation. She had also lost her intelligence. She dropped her hand


--- Page 379 ---
Text 204] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 377
bangles and the fan she was using to fan the Lord. Her hair became disarrayed,
and she fainted and fell suddenly, appearing like a banana tree knocked down
by high winds.’
PURPORT
This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.60.24) refers to Krsna's speaking to
Rukmint in His bedroom. Just to test her sincerity, He began to joke with her, pre-
senting Himself as poor, incapable and unfit to be her lover. Not understanding
that He was joking, Rukmini took Him seriously and thought that He wanted to
leave her company. This misunderstanding made her very unhappy, and her
whole body was affected. Her fan and bangles fell to the floor, and she also fell
down like a banana tree knocked down by high winds.
TEXT 203
“কেবলা'র VERT এঁশ্বর্য না জানে |
এশ্বয দেখিলেও নিজ-সম্বদ্ধ সে মানে ॥ ২০৩ ॥
1062৮313713 suddha-prema ‘aisvarya’ na jane
aisvarya dekhileo nija-sambandha se mane
SYNONYMS
kevalara—of unmixed attraction for Krsna; suddha-prema—unalloyed love;
aisvarya—opulence; na jane —does not know; aisvarya—opulence; dekhileo—in
spite of experiencing; nija-sambandha—one’s own relationship with Krsna; se
mane—he takes very seriously.
TRANSLATION
“In the stage of kevala [unalloyed devotion] a devotee does not consider
the unlimited opulence of Krsna, even though he experiences it. He takes
seriously only his own relationship with Krsna.
PURPORT
When a devotee reaches the stage of pure unalloyed devotion, especially in
friendship with Krsna, he forgets the Lord's opulences, although he sees them, and
he considers himself equal to Krsna. There is no question of actually comparing
oneself to Krsna, but because the devotee is so advanced in Krsna consciousness,
he is able to behave with Krsna as he would with an ordinary man.
TEXT 204
ত্রয্যা চোপনিষত্তি'চ সাংখ্যযোগৈশ্চ সাত্বতৈঃ |
উপগীয়মানমাহাত্ম্যং হরিং ARTISTAS ॥ ২০৪ ॥


--- Page 380 ---
378 Sri Caitanya-caritaimrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
trayya copanisadbhis ca
sankhya-yogais ca satvataih
upagiyamana-mahatmyarm
harirh sa ‘manyatatmajam
SYNONYMS
trayya—by followers of three Vedas who perform great sacrifices (like the
demigod Indra); ca—also; upanisadbhih —by the followers of the Upanisads, the
most exalted portion of Vedic knowledge (as Brahman); ca—also; sankhya —by
the philosophers who analytically study the universe (as the purusa); yogaih—by
mystic yogis (as the Paramatma situated everywhere); ca—and; satvataih—by
devotees who follow the method of worship mentioned in the Pasicaratra and
other Vedic literature (as Bhagavan); upagiyamana—being sung; mahatmyam—
whose glories; harim—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sa—she
(mother Yasoda); amanyata—considered; atma-jam—as her own son, born of her
body.
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘When mother Yasoda saw all the universes within Krsna’s mouth, she was
astonished for the time being. The Lord is worshiped like Indra and other
demigods by the followers of the three Vedas, who offer Him sacrifices. He is
worshiped as impersonal Brahman by saintly persons who understand His
greatness through studying the Upanisads, as the purusa by great philoso-
phers who analytically study the universe, as the all-pervading Supersoul by
great yogis, and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotees.
Nevertheless, mother Yasoda considered the Lord her own son.’
PURPORT
This verse is quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.8.45). Those who are
spiritually advanced forget Krsna's opulence by the mercy of yogamaya. For in-
stance, mother Ya$oda considered Krsna an ordinary child.
TEXT 205
তং মসত্বাত্মজমব!ক্তৎ মর্ত্যলিঙ্গমধোক্ষজম্‌ |
গোপিক্োলুখলে দায় ববন্ধ «ATF যথ। ॥ ২০৫
tam matvatmajam avyaktam
martya-lingam adhoksajam
gopikolakhale damna
babandha prakrtar yatha


--- Page 381 ---
Text 206] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 379
SYNONYMS
tam —Him (Krsna); matva—considering; atmajam—own son; avyaktam—un-
manifested; martya-lingam—manifested as if perishable; adhoksajam—beyond
the perception of the senses; gopika —mother Yasoda; uldkhale —to the mortar;
damna—with rope; babandha —bound; prakrtam—an ordinary child; yatha—like.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Although Krsna is beyond sense perception and is unmanifest to human
beings, he takes up the guise of a human being with a material body. Thus
mother Yasoda thought Him to be her son, and she bound Lord Krsna with
rope to a wooden mortar, as if He were an ordinary child.’
PURPORT
This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.9.14) is in reference to Lord Krsna’s ex-
hibiting Himself like an ordinary child before mother Yasoda. He was playing like a
naughty boy stealing butter and breaking butter pots. Mother Yasoda became dis-
turbed and wanted to bind the Lord to a mortar used for pounding spices. In other
words, she considered the Supreme Personality of Godhead an ordinary child.
TEXT 206
উবাই ক্বষ্ণে। ভগবান্‌ विष म्‌ान९ পরাজিতঃ ।
IS ভদ্র সেনস্থ ATK] CARATS ॥ ২০৬
uvaha krsno bhagavan
Sridamanarn parajitah
vrsabham bhadrasenas tu
pralambo rohini-sutam
SYNONYMS
uvaha—carried; krspah—Lord Krsna; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sridimanam —Sridama; pardjitah—being defeated; vrsabham—
Vrsabha; bhadrasenah—Bhadrasena; tu—and; pralambah—Pralamba; rohini-
sutam —Balarama.
TRANSLATION
‘ ‘When Krsna was defeated by Sridama, He had to carry him on His
shoulders. Similarly, Bhadrasena carried Vrsabha, and Pralamba carried
Balarama, the son of Rohini.’


--- Page 382 ---
380 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
PURPORT
This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.18.24). When all the cowherd boys
were playing in the forest of Vindavana, the demon Pralambasura appeared to
kidnap Krsna and Balarama. The asura appeared disguised in the form of a
cowherd boy, but Krsna could understand his trick. Krsna therefore divided all the
cowherd boys into two parties. One party belonged to Balarama, and the other
party belonged to Krsna Himself. Ultimately Krsna was defeated in this play, and
according to the wager, the defeated party had to carry the victorious party on
their shoulders. Krsna had to carry Sridama on His shoulders, and Bhadrasena had
to carry Vrsabha. The demon Pralambasura had to carry Balarama, and when
Balarama mounted his shoulders, the demon ran far away. Finally the demon
began to expand his body to a gigantic size, and Balarama understood that he in-
tended to kill Him. Balarama immediately struck the demon’s head with His strong
fist, and the demon fell down dead as if he were a snake whose head had been
smashed.
TEXTS 207-209
সা ए মেনে তদাত্মানং বরিষ্ঠাং সর্বযোষিতাম্‌ ।
হিত্ব। গোপীঃ কামযান। মামসৌ ভজতে Faraz ॥२०१॥
ততো গত্বা বনোদ্দেশং দৃপ্ত। কেশবমত্রবীৎ |
न পারয়েইহৎ চলিতুং নয় মাং यल (ऊ मनः ॥ ২০৮ ॥
এবমুক্তঃ প্রিয়ামাহ স্কন্ধমারুহ্তামিতি |
ততশ্চান্তর্দধে FR: সা বধূরসন্বতপ্যত ॥ ২০৯ ॥
sa ca mene tadatmanam
varistham sarva-yositam
hitva gopih kamayana
mam asau bhajate priyah
tato gatva vanoddesarn
drpta kesavam abravit
na paraye ‘ham calitum
naya mam yatra te manah
evam uktah priyam aha
skandham aruhyatam iti
tatas cantardadhe krsnah
sa vadhar anvatapyata


--- Page 383 ---
Text 210] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 381
SYNONYMS
sa—Srimati Radharani; ca—also; mene —considered; tada—at that time; at-
manam—Herself; varistham—the most glorious; sarva-yositaim—among all the
gopis; hitva—giving up; gopih—all the other gopis; kamayanah—who were
desiring the company of Krsna; mam—Me; asau—that Sri Krsna; bhajate —wor-
ships; priyah—the most dear; tatah —thereafter; gatva—going; vana-uddesam—
to the deep forest; drpta—being very proud; kesavam—unto Krsna; abravit—
said; na paraye—am unable; aham—I; calitum—to walk; naya—just carry;
mam—Me; yatra—wherever; te —Your; manah—mind; evam uktah —thus being
ordered by Srimati Radharani; priyam—to this most dear gopi; aha—said;
skandham—My shoulders; aruhyatam—please get on; iti—thus; tatah—
thereafter; ca—also; antardadhe —disappeared; krspnah—Lord Krsna; sa —Srimati
Radharani; vadhah—the gopi; anvatapyata—began to lament.
TRANSLATION
“^ ^ “My dearmost Krsna, You are worshiping Me and giving up the company
of all the other gopis who wanted to enjoy themselves with You.” Thinking
like this, Srimati Radharani considered Herself Krsna’s most beloved gopi.
She had become proud and had left the rasa-lila with Krsna. In the deep forest
She said, “My dear Krsna, | cannot walk any more. You can take Me wherever
You like.” When Srimati Radharani petitioned Krsna in this way, Krsna said,
“Just get up upon My shoulders.” As soon as Srimati Radharani began to do
so, He disappeared. Srimati Radharani then began to grieve over Her request
and Krsna’s disappearance.’
PURPORT
These three verses are quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.30.37-39).
TEXT 210
गेडिकूडात्रग्रय।ङ्वांकव।-
নতিবিলঙ্ঘ্য তেইস্ত্যচ্যুতাগতাঃ |
গতিবিদপস্তবোদগীতমো হিতাঃ
কিতব যোষিতঃ কন্তাজেন্সিশি ॥ ২১০
pati-sutanvaya-bhratr-bandhavan
ativilanghya te ‘nty acyutagatah
gatividas tavodgita-mohitah
kitava yositah kas tyajen nisi


--- Page 384 ---
382 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
pati—husbands; suta—sons; anvaya—family; bhratr—brothers; bandhavan—
friends; ativilanighya—without caring for; te —Your; anti—dear shelter; acyuta—
O infallible one; agatah—have come; gati-vidah—who know everything of our
activities; tava—of You; udgita—by the singing flute; mohitah—being attracted;
kitava—O great cheater; yositah—beautiful women; kah—who; tyajet—would
give up; nisi—in the dead of night.
TRANSLATION
^ ‘Dear Krsna, neglecting the order of our husbands and sons, family,
brothers and friends and leaving their company, we gopis have come to You.
You know everything about our desires. We have only come because we are
attracted by Your supremely musical flute. However, You are a great cheater.
Who else would give up the company of young girls like us in the dead of
night?’
PURPORT
This verse, quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.16), describes how the
gopis exposed themselves for Krsna’s enjoyment in the dead of night. The gopis
approached Krsna to enjoy themselves with Him in the rasa dance. Krsna knew
this very well, but He was superficially trying to avoid them. He is therefore ad-
dressed by the gopis as kitava, a great cheater, because He first attracted them to
come dance with Him, and yet when they actually came, neglecting the orders of
their friends and relatives, He tried to avoid them by giving them good instruc-
tions. These cunning instructions were too much for the gopis to tolerate; they
therefore had a right to address Krsna as kitava, a great cheater. They were all
young girls, and they had come to Him to be enjoyed. How could He avoid them?
The gopis therefore expressed great disappointment in this verse. They came
voluntarily, but Krsna was so cunning that He wanted to avoid their company.
The gopis’ lamentation was certainly very appropriate, and in this way Krsna
tested their sincerity.
TEXT 211
শাস্তরসে- च्छक्रन वटक কুষ্ণেকনিষ্ঠতা”।
“arm मरि) gow ইতি জীমুখ-গাথা ॥ ২১১ ॥
$anta-rase— ‘svarapa-buddhye krsnaika-nisthata’
“samo man-nisthata buddheh” iti $ri-mukha-gatha
SYNONYMS
$anta-rase—on the stage of santa-rasa, or neutrality; svardpa-buddhye—by
self-realization; krspa-eka-nisthata—fully devoted to the lotus feet of Krsna;


--- Page 385 ---
Text 212] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 383
Samah —equilibrium; mat—to Me; nisthata—the quality of attachment; bud-
dheh—of the mind; iti—thus; $ri-mukha—from the mouth of the Supreme Lord;
gatha—a verse.
TRANSLATION
“When one is fully attached to Krsia’s lotus feet, one attains the samata
stage. The word $samata is derived from the word sama; therefore $anta-rasa,
the position of neutrality, means being fully attached to the lotus feet of
Krsna. This is the verdict from the mouth of the Supreme Personality of God-
head Himself. This state is called self-realization.
PURPORT
The word sama is explained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
following verse.
TEXT 212
শমো মপ্লিষ্ঠত। বুদ্ধেরিতি Assis: |
তনিষ্টা 7951 বুদক্ধেরেতাং শান্তরতিং বিনা ॥ ২১২ ॥
samo man-nisthata buddher
iti $ri-bhagavad-vacah
tan-nistha durghata buddher
etam santa-ratirh vina
SYNONYMS
Samah —equality or neutrality; mat-nisthata—being fixed in My lotus feet; bud-
dheh—of the intelligence; iti—thus; $ri-bhagavat-vacah—words of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tat-nistha—attachment or attraction for Him; durghata—
very difficult to achieve; buddheh —of intelligence; etam—thus; santa-ratim—at-
tachment on the platform of $anta-rasa; vina—without.
TRANSLATION
“These are the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: ‘When one’s
intelligence is fully attached to My lotus feet but one does not render practical
service, one has attained the stage called $anta-rati, or Sama. Without $anta-
rati, attachment to Krsna is very difficult to achieve.’
PURPORT
This verse is found in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (3.1.47).


--- Page 386 ---
384 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 213
म्म) মন্লিষ্ঠতা বুদ্ধের্দম ইন্দ্রিয়সংযমঃ ৷
তিতিক্ষ। দুঃখনংম্ষে। জিহেবপস্থজরে। gfe: ॥ ২১৩ ॥
$amo man-nisthata buddher
dama indriya-samyamah
titiksa duhkha-sammarso
jihvopastha-jayo 00100
SYNONYMS

Samah —neutrality; mat-nisthata—attachment for Me; buddheh—of intelli-
gence; damah—self-control; indriya-sariiyamah —controlling the activities of the
senses; titiksa—tolerance; duhkha—of unhappiness; sammarsah—endurance;
jihva—tongue; upastha—and the urge of the genitals; jayah—conquering;
dhrtih —control.

TRANSLATION

^“ ‘The word sama or $anta-rasa indicates that one is attached to the lotus
feet of Krsna. Dama means controlling the senses and not being deviated from
the Lord’s service. Endurance of unhappiness is titiksa, and dhrti means con-
trolling the tongue and the genitals.”

PURPORT

This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.19.36). The conditioned soul under
the clutches of maya, the material energy, is very much agitated by the urges of
the tongue and the genitals. Control of the urges of the tongue, the belly and the
genitals (which are situated in a straight line) is called dhrti. Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura says, tara madhye jihva ati, lobhamaya sudurmati. Among the senses, the
tongue is the most formidable enemy of the conditioned soul. Urged by the
tongue, one commits many sinful activities. Although Krsna has given human
beings nice food, people still commit sins by killing poor animals for the satisfac-
tion of the tongue. Not being able to control the tongue, the conditioned soul
eats more than he needs. Of course, everyone must eat to keep the body fit for
the Lord's service, but when one cannot control the senses, he falls victim to the
dictations of the tongue and the belly. Naturally, genital agitation follows, and
one seeks illicit sex. However, if one is fixed at the lotus feet of Krsna, he can con-
trol the tongue. Bhaktivinoda Thakura further states, krsna bada dayamaya,
karibare jihva jaya, sva-prasada-anna dila bhai: in order to conquer the tongue,
Krsna has been very merciful and has given us nice food that has been offered to
Him. When a person is attached to Krsna's lotus feet, he does not eat anything not


--- Page 387 ---
Text 215] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 385
offered to Krsna. Sei annamrta khao, radha-krsna-guna gao, preme daka caitanya-
nitai. Since a devotee only eats prasada, he conquers the dictations of the tongue,
belly and genitals. One can control the dictates of the senses when situated in the
position of santa-rasa. Then one’s advancement in Krsna consciousness is assured.
TEXT 214
কৃষ্ণ বিনা তৃষ্ণা-ত্যাগ- তার কার্য मनि ।
অতএব “শান্ত কৃষ্ণভক্ত এক জানি ॥ ২১৪ ॥
krsna vina trsna-tyaga——tara karya mani
ataeva ‘santa’ krsna-bhakta eka jani
SYNONYMS
krsna vina—without Krsna; trsna-tyaga—giving up all desires; tara—of santa-
rasa; karya—the business; mani—I accept; ataeva—therefore; santa—the posi-
tion of equilibrium; krspa-bhakta—a devotee of Krsna; eka—only; jani—I know.
TRANSLATION
‘Giving up all desires not connected with Krsna is the business of one who
is in the $anta-rasa. Only > devotee of Krsna can be situated on that platform.
He is thus called > $anta-rasa-bhakta.
PURPORT
In this position, one is freed from all material enjoyment. When one is not agi-
tated or disturbed, he can immediately realize his relationship with Krsna. A santa-
rasa devotee is therefore always fixed in realization. This instruction was given by
the Lord Himself to Uddhava. The beginning of pure devotional service is called
anyabhilasita-siinya. When one is situated on the platform of neutrality, he is
freed from the material platform and fully situated in spiritual life. The word dama
used in verse 213 means indriya-sarityama—curbing one’s senses. The word dama
can also mean curbing one’s enemies. A king has to take steps to curb the criminal
activities of his citizens. Great rajarsis, devotee kings, used to control undesirable
elements in their states, and this also may be called dama. However, dama here
refers to the conditioned soul who must control his senses. Real dama means con-
trolling the undesirable activities of the senses.
TEXT 215
স্বর্গ, মোক্ষ PST 'নরক” করি” মানে |
কৃষ্ণনিষ্ঠ॥ তৃষ্ণা-ত্যাগ- শাস্তের “তুই” গুণে ॥ ২১৫ ॥


--- Page 388 ---
386 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta {Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
svarga, moksa krsna-bhakta ‘naraka’ kari’ mane
krspa-nistha, trspna-tyaga——santera ‘dui’ gune
SYNONYMS

svarga—the heavenly kingdom; moksa—liberation from material bondage;
krsna-bhakta—a devotee of Lord Krsna; naraka kari” mane—considers as good as
hell; krsna-nistha—being fixed at the lotus feet of Krsna; trspa-tyaga—giving up
all material desires; santera—of one on the neutrality platform; dui gune—two
transcendental qualities.

TRANSLATION

“When a devotee is situated on the platform of §anta-rasa, he desires
neither elevation to the heavenly planets nor liberation. These are the results
of karma and jiiana, and the devotee considers them no better than hell. A
person situated on the $anta-rasa platform manifests the two transcendental
qualities of detachment from all material desire and full attachment to Krsna.

TEXT 216
নারায়ণপরাঃ সর্বে न কুতশ্চন विखाखि।
স্বর্গাপবর্গনরক্েঘণপি তুল্যার্থদণিনঃ ॥ ২১৬ ॥
narayana-parah sarve
na kutascana bibhyati
svargapavarga-narakesv
api tulyartha-darsinah
SYNONYMS

nardyana-parah —persons who are attached to the Supreme Personality of
Codhead; sarve—all; na—not; kutascana—from any quarter; bibhyati—are
afraid; svarga—in heavenly planets; apavarga—in liberation; narakesu—or in hell;
api—although; tulya-artha—results as equal; darsinah—who see.

TRANSLATION

‘““‘A person who is devoted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Narayana, is not afraid of anything. Elevation to the heavenly kingdom, con-
demnation to hell and liberation from material bondage all appear the same to
a devotee.’

PURPORT

This verse is quoted from S$rimad-Bhagavatam (6.17.28). Elevation to the

heavenly planets, liberation from material bondage, and condemnation to hell are


--- Page 389 ---
Text 218] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 387
all equal to the devotee. The devotee’s only desire is to be attached to the lotus
feet of Krsna and to engage in His transcendental loving service.
TEXT 217
এই দুই গুণ ব্যাপে जव ভক্তজনে।
আকাশের “শব্দ”-গুণ যেন ভুতগণে ॥ ২১৭ ॥
ei dui guna vyape saba bhakta-jane
akasera ‘Sabda-guna yena bhata-gane
SYNONYMS
ei dui—these two; guna—transcendental qualities; vyape—expand; saba
bhakta-jane—in the lives of all devotees; akasera—of the sky; $abda-guna—the
quality of sound; yena—like; bhata-gane —other material elements.
TRANSLATION
“These two qualities of the $§anta stage spread through the lives of all devo-
tees. They are like the quality of sound in the sky. Sound vibration is found in
all material elements.
PURPORT
The qualities of santa-rasaare present in all kinds of devotees, whether they are
in the dasya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vatsalya-rasa or madhura-rasa. The example of
sound is given herein. Sound not only exists in the sky, or ether, but it is also pres-
ent in air, fire, water and earth. This is a scientific explanation of devotional ser-
vice. Just as sound is present in all material elements, santa-rasa is present in all
devotees, whether they are on the platform of dasya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vatsalya-
rasa or madhura-rasa.
TEXT 218
শান্তের স্বভাব-কৃষ্ণে মমতা-গন্ধহীন |
“পরংত্রন্ম'-পরমাত্ম।-ভ্ঞান প্রবীণ ॥ ২১৮ ॥
$antera svabhava——krsne mamata-gandha-hina
‘param-brahma’-‘paramatma’-jiiana pravina
SYNONYMS
santera sva-bhava—the characteristic of santa-rasa; krsne—in Krsna; mamata-
gandha-hina—not even the smallest quantity of intimacy; param-brahma—im-


--- Page 390 ---
388 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
personal Brahman; paramatma—the localized situation of the Lord; jAana—
knowledge; pravina—prominence.
TRANSLATION
“It is the nature of $anta-rasa that not even the smallest intimacy exists.
Rather, knowledge of impersonal Brahman and localized Paramatma is promi-
nent.
PURPORT
Because of an impersonal impression of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a
devotee in the santa-rasa relationship worships the impersonal Brahman or
localized aspect of the Absolute Truth (Paramatma). He does not develop a per-
sonal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.
TEXT 219
কেবল “স্বকরূপ-ড্ত।ন” হুয় শাস্ত-রসে |
“পূণৈথ্ধরপ্রভু-ভ্ঞান” অধিক হুয় wiley ॥ ২১৯ ॥
kevala ‘svardpa-jiana’ haya santa-rase
‘parnaisvarya-prabhu-jiana’ adhika haya dasye
SYNONYMS
kevala—only; svardpa-jiiana—knowledge of the constitutional position of
one’s self; haya—there is; santa-rase—in the mellow of neutrality; /20/03-
aisvarya-prabhu-jiana—knowledge of the full opulences of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; adhika—greater; haya—becomes; dasye—in the transcen-
dental mellow of servitude.
TRANSLATION
‘On the platform of $anta-rasa, one only realizes his constitutional posi-
tion. However, when one is raised to the platform of dasya-rasa, he better
understands the full opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 220
६
ঈশ্বরজ্ঞ।ন, সম্তম-গৌরব প্রচুর |
“সেবা” করি' কৃষ্ণে সুখ দেন FATA ॥ ২২০॥
iSvara-jiiana, sambhrama-gaurava pracura
‘seva’ kari’ krsne sukha dena nirantara


--- Page 391 ---
Text 222] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 389
SYNONYMS
isvara-jiana—knowledge of the supreme controller; sambhrama-gaurava—
awe and veneration; pracura—abundant; seva—service; kari’—performing;
krsne—unto Lord Krsna; sukha—happiness; dena—gives; nirantara—constantly.
TRANSLATION
“On the dasya-rasa platform, knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is revealed with awe and veneration. By rendering service unto Lord
Krsna, the devotee in dasya-rasa gives constant happiness to the Lord.
TEXT 221
শাস্তের গুণ फोट আছে, অধিক- “(जवनः |
অতএব দাস্য'রসের এই “দুই” গুণ ॥ ২২১ ॥
$antera guna dasye ache, adhika— ‘sevana’
ataeva dasya-rasera ei ‘dui’ guna
SYNONYMS
santera—of the platform of santa-rasa; gupa—the qualities; dasye—on the
platform of servitude; ache —are; adhika—additional; sevana—serving; ataeva—
therefore; dasya-rasera—of the platform of dasya-rasa; ei dui guna—these two
qualities (namely santa and dasya).
TRANSLATION
“The qualities of $anta-rasa are also present in dasya-rasa, but service is ad-
ded. Thus the dasya-rasa platform contains the qualities of both santa-rasa
and dasya-rasa.
TEXT 222
শাস্তের গুণ, দাস্ত্যের সেবন-_সখ্য্যে 22 হয় ।
দাস্ঠের'সম্জম-গৌরব-সেবা, সখ্যে “বিশ্বাস-ময় ॥९२२॥
Santera guna, dasyera sevana—sakhye dui haya
dasyera ‘sambhrama-gaurava’-seva, sakhye ‘visvasa’-maya
SYNONYMS
santera guna—qualities of santa-rasa; dasyera sevana—the service of the
dasya-rasa; sakhye—on the platform of fraternity; dui—two qualities; haya—
there are; dasyera—of the dasya platform; sambhrama-gaurava—with awe and
veneration; seva—service; sakhye —on the platform of fraternity; visvasa-maya—
spread with confidence.


--- Page 392 ---
390 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
“The qualities of $anta-rasa and the service of dasya-rasa are both present
on the platform of sakhya-rasa. On the platform of fraternity, the qualities of
dasya-rasa are mixed with the confidence of fraternity instead of awe and
veneration.
TEXT 223
कटक চড়ে, कोटक চড়ায়, করে ক্রীড়া-রণ |
কৃষ্ণে সেবে, কৃষ্ণে করায় আপন-সেবন | ২২৩ ॥
kandhe cade, kandhe cadaya, kare krida-rana
krsne seve, krsne kardya apana-sevana!
SYNONYMS
kandhe—on the shoulders; cade —gets up; kandhe cadaya—sometimes takes
on his own shoulders; kare —performs; krida-rana—mock fighting; krsne seve—
serves Krsna; krspe—from Krsna; kardya—causes; dpana-sevana—his own ser-
vice.
TRANSLATION
“On the sakhya-rasa platform, the devotee sometimes offers the Lord ser-
vice and sometimes makes Krsna serve him in exchange. In their mock fight-
ing, the cowherd boys would sometimes climb on Krsna’s shoulders, and
sometimes they would make Krsna climb on their shoulders.
TEXT 224
বিশ্বস্ত-প্রধান সখ্য -(शौतव-गह्नम-डौन |
অতএব সখ্য-রসের “তিন” গুণ श्छ 1 ২২৪ ॥
visrambha-pradhana sakhya——gaurava-sambhrama-hina
ataeva sakhya-rasera ‘tina’ guna——cihna
SYNONYMS
visrambha-pradhana sakhya—on the platform of fraternity, in which confi-
dence is prominent; gaurava-sambhrama—awe and veneration; hina—without;
ataeva—therefore; sakhya-rasera—of the platform of fraternity; tina guna—three
qualities, namely santa, dasya and sakhya; cihna—the symptom.
TRANSLATION
“Since the platform of fraternity is predominated by confidential service,
awe and veneration are absent. Therefore sakhya-rasa is characterized by
three qualities.


--- Page 393 ---
Text 227] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 391
TEXT 225
“মমতা” অধিক, FCA আত্মসম জ্ঞান |
অতএব সখ্যরসের বশ ভগবান্‌ ॥ ২২৫ ॥
‘mamata’ adhika, kisne atma-sama {03/79
ataeva sakhya-rasera vasa bhagavan
SYNONYMS
mamata—intimacy; adhika—increase; krsne—with Krsna; atma-sama {72/22 --
the notion of equality; ataeva—therefore; sakhya-rasera—by the mellow of fra-
ternity; vasa—subjected; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
“On the platform of sakhya-rasa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
obliged to the devotees who are intimate with Krsna and think themselves
equal to Him.
TEXT 226
বাৎসলো্যে শাস্তের গুণ, দাস্টের जवन |
সেই সেই সেবনের BE] নাম-“পালন” ॥ ২২৬ ॥
vatsalye santera guna, dasyera sevana
sei sei sevanera ihan nama—‘palana’
SYNONYMS
vatsalye—on the platform of parental love; santera guna—the qualities of san-
ta-rasa; dasyera sevana—the service of dasya-rasa; sei sei sevanera—the service
of santa-rasa, dasya-rasa and sakhya-rasa; iharr—on this platform; nama—named;
palana—maintenance.
TRANSLATION
“On the platform of parental love, the qualities of $anta-rasa, dasya-rasa
and sakhya-rasa are transformed into a form of service called maintenance.
TEXT 227
ATT গুণ — SACHS, 'অগৌরব' সার |
মমতা ধিকে্যে তাড়ন-ভৎ-সন-ব্যবহার ॥ २२१ ॥


--- Page 394 ---
392 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
sakhyera gunpa— ‘asankoca’, ‘agaurava’ sara
mamatadhikye tadana-bhartsana-vyavahara
SYNONYMS
sakhyera guna—the quality of fraternity; asarikoca—without any formality;
agaurava—without any veneration; sara—the essence; mamata-adhikye—on ac-
count of greater intimacy; tadana—of chastisement; bhartsana—of rebuking;
vyavahara—behavior.
TRANSLATION
“The essence of fraternal love is intimacy devoid of the formality and
veneration found in the dasya-rasa. Due to a greater sense of intimacy, the
devotee functioning in paternal love chastises and rebukes the Lord in an
ordinary way.
TEXT 228
আপনারে “পালক” জ্ঞান, FCP “न]न?-उडोन |
চারি” গুণে বাৎসল্য রস -_-অনৃত-সমান ॥ ২২৮ ॥
apandre ‘palaka’ jana, krsne ‘palya’-jaiana
‘cari’ gune vatsalya rasa——amrta-samana
SYNONYMS
apanare —unto himself; palaka jiiana—the notion of a caretaker; krsne —in Lord
Krsna; palya—as object of protection; jAana—notion; cari—four; gune—in
qualities; vatsalya rasa—the mellow of parental love; amrta-samana—like nectar.
TRANSLATION
‘On the platform of paternal love, the devotee considers himself the Lord’s
maintainer. Thus the Lord is the object of maintenance, like a son, and
therefore this mellow is full of the four qualities of §anta-rasa, dasya-rasa, fra-
ternity and parental love. This is more transcendental nectar.
PURPORT
In his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives us a short sum-
mary of this complicated description of the different rasas. He states that by be-
coming firmly fixed in the Lord's service, one is devoid of all material desires.
There are two transcendental qualities on the santa-rasa platform. In all the ma-
terial elements, sound vibration is found. Similarly, santa-rasa is spread over all the
other transcendental mellows, which are known as dasya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vat-


--- Page 395 ---
Text 229] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 393
salya-rasa and madhura-rasa. Although there is attachment for Krsna in awe and
veneration in the santa-rasa along with two valuable transcendental qualities —at-
tachment for Krsna and detachment from material desires —nonetheless the sense
of intimacy is lacking. Therefore in the santa-rasa, attachment for impersonal Brah-
man and localized Paramatma is prominent. The sense of intimacy is lacking. By
that intimacy one thinks of Krsna as one’s only shelter and only friend. In the san-
ta-rasa one accepts Krsna as the impersonal Param Brahma or the localized
Paramatma. This is based on the speculative knowledge of the jAani. However,
when this knowledge is further developed, one is convinced that Paramatma, the
Supreme Lord, is master and that the living entity is His eternal servant. One then
attains the platform of ddsya-rasa. In dasya-rasa the Lord is accepted with awe
and veneration. However, although in the santa-rasa there is no active service, in
the dasya-rasa active service is prominant. Thus in the dadsya-rasa, the qualities of
$anta-rasa and service are predominantly visible. Similarly, when this same rasa is
developed into fraternity (sakhya-rasa), a friendly intimacy is added. There is no
awe or veneration in the sakhya-rasa.The sakhya-rasa is invested with three
qualities — santa, dasya, and sakhya. Similarly, on the platform of parental love, the
qualities of santa-rasa and dasya-rasa are fully developed in another form—the
sense of maintaining the Lord. Therefore on the platform of parental love there
exists a combination of four transcendental qualities— santa, dasya, sakhya, and
the qualities of paternity, which put the devotee in the position of a maintainer.
Thus on the platform of parental love the four qualities of transcendental love are
present.
TEXT 229

সে অন্বৃতানন্ছে ভক্ত সহ एटवन AAR |

“কৃষ্ণ ভক্তবশ” গুণ কহে এঁশ্বর্য-জ্ঞানিগণে ॥ ২২৯ ॥

se amrtanande bhakta 5303 dubena apane

‘krsna——bhakta-vasa’ guna kahe aisvarya-jiani-gane

SYNONYMS
se—that Lord Krsna; amrta-anande—in spiritual happiness; bhakta—the devo-
tee; saha—with; dubena—plunges; apane—Himself; krsna—Krsna; bhakta-
vasa—of being subjugated by the devotee; gupa—the quality; kahe—say;
aisvarya-jiani-gane —learned scholars knowing the opulence of Krsna.
TRANSLATION
“The exchange of spiritual happiness between Krsna and His devotee, in

which Krsna is controlled by His devotee, is compared to an ocean of nectar
into which the devotee and Krsna plunge. This is the verdict of learned schol-
ars who appreciate Krsna’s opulence.


--- Page 396 ---
394 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 230
ইতীযদুক্স্বলীলাভিরানন্দকুণ্ডে
স্বঘোষং নিমজ্জস্তমাথ্যাপয়ন্তম্‌ ৷
তদীয়েশিতজ্েযু ভক্তৈজিতত্বং
পুনঃ প্রেমতাস্তং শতাবুত্তি বন্দে ॥ ২৩০
itidrk-svalilabhir ananda-kunde
svaghosar nimajjantam akhyapayantam
tadiyesita-jhiesu bhaktair jitatvar
punah prematas tari satavrtti vande
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; idrk-sva-lilabhih—by this Damodara in His transcendental pastimes;
ananda-kunde—in the ocean of transcendental bliss; sva-ghosam—His personal
associates; nimajjantam—plunging; akhyapayantam—declaring; tadiya—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; isita-jfiesu—among learned scholars expert in
the knowledge of the opulences; bhaktaih —by the devotees; jitatvam—the sub-
jugation; punah—again; prematah—with love; tam—unto Him; sata-avrtti—
hundreds of times; vande—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
^“ ‘Again let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. O my Lord, | offer my obeisances hundreds and thou-
sands of times with all affection because by Your personal pastimes You
plunge the gopis into an ocean of nectar. Appreciating Your opulence, devo-
tees generally declare that You are always subjugated by their feelings.’
PURPORT
This verse is from the Damodarastaka in the Padma Purana. Attachment for
Krsna in santa-rasa, rendering service to the Lord in dasya-rasa, rendering relaxed
service in fraternity, and serving in parental love with feelings of maintenance all
combine on the platform of conjugal love when the devotee wants to serve the
Lord by offering Him his personal body. Thus the qualities of the other rasas com-
bine to form the nectar of conjugal love. On this platform, all the different feelings
of a devotee are amalgamated.
TEXT 231
মধুর-রসে-_কৃষ্ণনিষ্টা, সেবা অতিশয় |
সখ্যের TACKLE, লালন-মমতাধিক্য হুয়॥ ২৩১ ॥


--- Page 397 ---
Text 233] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 395
madhura-rase—krsna-nistha, seva atisaya
sakhyera asankoca, lalana-mamatadhikya haya
SYNONYMS
madhura-rase—on the platform of conjugal love; krsna-nistha—attachment for
Krsna; seva atisaya—an improved rendering service; sakhyera—of the platform of
fraternity; asankoca—relaxation; lalana—maintenance; mamata-adhikya—in-
crease of intimacy; haya—there is.
TRANSLATION
“On the platform of conjugal love, attachment for Krsna, rendering service
unto Him, the relaxed feelings of fraternity and the feelings of maintenance all
increase in intimacy.
TEXT 232
क) खट्व নিজাঙ্গ निश्च করেন সেবন |
অতএব মঞধুবু-রসের হয় “পঞ্চ গুণ ॥ ২৩২ ॥
kanta-bhave nijanga diya karena sevana
ataeva madhura-rasera haya ‘pafica’ guna
SYNONYMS
kanta-bhave —on the platform of conjugal love; nija-ariga—own body; diya—
offering; karena—executes; sevana—service; ataeva—therefore; . madhura-
rasera—of the mellow of conjugal love; haya—there are; parica guna—five kinds
of transcendental qualities.
TRANSLATION
“On the platform of conjugal love, the devotee offers his body in the ser-
vice of the Lord. Thus on this platform all five transcendental qualities are
present.
TEXT 233
SUFI গুণ যেন পর পর छट |
এক-দুই-তিন-চারি व्कटम পঞ্চ পৃথিবীতে ॥ ২৩৩ ॥
akasadi guna yena para para bhate
eka-dui-tina-cari krame parca prthivite


--- Page 398 ---
396 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
SYNONYMS
akasa-adi—beginning with the sky; guna—qualities; yena—as; para para—one
after another; bhate—in the material elements; eka—one; dui—two; tina—
three; cari—four; krame—in this way; panca—all five qualities; prthivite—in
earth.
TRANSLATION
‘All the material qualities evolve one after another in the material elements,
beginning from ether. By gradual evolution, first one quality develops, then
two qualities develop, then three and four, until all five qualities are found in
earth.
TEXT 234
এইমত মধুরে जव ভাব-সমাহার |
অতএব আস্বাদাধিক্যে করে চমৎকার ॥ ২৩৪ ॥
ei-mata madhure saba bhava-samahara
ataeva asvadadhikye kare camatkara
SYNONYMS
ei-mata—in this way; madhure—on the platform of conjugal love; saba—all;
bhava-samahara—amalgamation of the feelings; ataeva—therefore; asvada-
adhikye—from the increase of tasting by the devotees; kare camatkara—is cer-
tainly wonderful.
TRANSLATION
‘Similarly, on the platform of conjugal love, all the feelings of the devotees
are amalgamated. The intensified taste is certainly wonderful.”
TEXT 235
এই ভক্তিরসের किल, किन দরশন |
ইহার বিস্তার মনে করিহ ভাবন ॥ २७८ ॥
ei bhakti-rasera karilana, dig-darasana
ihara vistara mane kariha bhavana
SYNONYMS
ei—this; bhakti-rasera—of the feelings of devotional service; karilana—| have
described; dik-darasana—general survey; ihara—of this; vistara—expansion;
mane —within the mind; kariha—you should do; bhavana—consideration.


--- Page 399 ---
Text 237] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 397
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then concluded: “I have simply given a general
survey describing the mellows of devotional service. You can consider how to
adjust and expand this.
TEXT 236
ভাবিতে ভাবিতে = স্ফুরয়ে awa |
কৃষ্ণকূপায় অজ্ঞ পায় রসসিজ্জু-পারে ॥ ২৩৬ ॥
bhavite bhavite krsna sphuraye antare
krsna-krpaya 2/78 pdya rasa-sindhu-pare
SYNONYMS
bhavite bhavite—in this way when one is strictly in thought; krsna—Lord
Krsna; sphuraye antare —manifests within; krsna-krpaya—by the mercy of Krsna;
ajiia—one not expert in knowledge; paya—reaches; rasa-sindhu-pare—the shore
of the ocean of transcendental mellows.
TRANSLATION
““When one thinks of Krsna constantly, love for Him is manifest within the
heart. Even though one may be ignorant, one can reach the shore of the ocean
of transcendental love by Lord Krsna’s mercy.”
TEXT 237
এত वलिः প্রভু ত।রে কৈল। আলিঙ্গন |
বারাণসী চলিবা৷রে প্রভুর হৈল মন ॥ ২৩৭ ॥
eta bali’ prabhu tanre kaila alingana
varanasi calibare prabhura haila mana
SYNONYMS
eta bali’—saying this; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tirnre—unto Rapa
Gosvami;  kaila—did; alingana—embracing; varanasi—toward Benares;
calibare—to go; prabhura—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; haila—was;
mana—the mind.
TRANSLATION
After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced Srila Ripa Gosvami.
The Lord then decided to go to the city of Benares.


--- Page 400 ---
398 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 238
প্রভাতে উঠিয়। যবে করিল গমন |
তবে SIA পদে রূপ করে নিবেদন ॥ ২৩৮ ॥
prabhate uthiya yabe karila gamana
tabe tanra pade rapa kare nivedana
SYNONYMS
prabhate —in the morning; uthiya—getting up; yabe—when; karila—made;
gamana—departure; tabe—at that time; tanra—His; pade—at the lotus feet;
rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; kare—does; nivedana—submission.
TRANSLATION
The next morning, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arose and prepared to
leave for Varanasi [Benares], Srila 003 Gosvami made the following state-
ment at the Lord’s lotus feet.
TEXT 239
“আজ্ঞা হয়, আসি Yaw Asad-ace |
সহিতে না পারি गू বিরহ-তরঙ্গে ॥” ২৩৯ ॥
‘aja haya, asi muni Sri-carana-sange
sahite na pari muni viraha-tarange’
SYNONYMS
ajna haya —if there is permission; asi—may come; muni—I; Sri-carana-sange —
with Your Lordship; sahite—to tolerate; na pari—not able; muni—l; viraha-
tarange —the waves of separation.
TRANSLATION
“If You give me permission, | shall go with Your Lordship. It is not possible
for me to tolerate the waves of separation.’
TEXT 240
প্রভু कटर _ তোমার কর্তব্য, আমার বচন |
নিকটে আসিয়াছ তুমি, যাহ বৃন্দাবন ॥ ২৪০ ॥
prabhu kahe, —tomara kartavya, amara vacana
nikate asiyacha tumi, yaha vrndavana


--- Page 401 ---
Text 242] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 399
SYNONYMS
prabhu kahe—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied; tomara kartavya—your duty;
amdra vacana—My order; nikate asiyicha—have come near; tumi—you; ydha—
80; vrndavana—to Vrndavana.
TRANSLATION
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, “Your duty is to carry out My order. You
have come near Vrndavana. Now you should go there.
TEXT 241
বৃন্দাবন হৈতে তুমি গৌড়দেশ wal |
আমারে মিলিব৷ নীলাচলেতে আসিয়া! ॥ ২৪১ ॥
vrndavana haite tumi gauda-desa diya
amare miliba nilacalete asiya
SYNONYMS
vindavana haite—from Vindavana; tumi—you; gauda-desa diya—by way of
Bengal; amare —Me; miliba—will meet; nilacalete—at Jagannatha Puri; asiya—
coming.
TRANSLATION
‘/Later, you can go from Vrndavana to Jagannatha Puri through Bengal
[Gauda-desal. There you will meet Me again.”
TEXT 242
তরে আলিঙ্গিয়া প্রভু নৌকাতে চড়িলা |
মুচ্ছিত হঞ। ভেঁহে। ङयि পড়িল ॥ ২৪২ ॥
tanre alingiya prabhu naukate cadila
marcchita hana tenho tahani padila
SYNONYMS
tanre—him; alingiya—embracing; prabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; nauk-
ate—in a boat; cadila—got aboard; marcchita hana —fainting; tenho—he (Srila
Rapa Gosvami); tahani—on the spot; padila—fell.
TRANSLATION
After embracing Ripa Gosvami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got into a boat.
Rapa Gosvami fainted and fell down on the spot.


--- Page 402 ---
400 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 243
দাক্ষিণাত্য-বিপ্র তারে ঘরে aswel গেলা ।
তবে তুই ভাই বৃন্দাবনেরে एलिन। ॥ ২৪৩ ॥
daksinatya-vipra tanre ghare lana gela
tabe dui bhai vrndavanere calila
SYNONYMS
daksinatya-vipra—the brahmana from Deccan; tarre—him (Rapa Gosvami);
ghare lana—taking to his home; geli—went; tabe—thereafter; dui bhai —the
two brothers; vrndavanere—toward Vrndavana; calila—departed.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana from Deccan took Riipa Gosvami to his home, and thereafter
the two brothers departed for Vrndavana.
TEXT 244
মহাপ্রভু চলি” চলি” আইলা বারাণসী।
চন্দ্রশেখর মিলিল। গ্রামের বাহিরে আসি” ॥ ২৪৪ ॥
mahaprabhu cali’ cali’ aila varanasi
candrasekhara milila gramera bahire asi’
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; cali’ cali’—walking and walking;
aila—arrived; varanasi—at Varanasi; candrasekhara—Candrasekhara; milila—He
met; gramera—of the village; bahire —outside; asi’—coming.
TRANSLATION
After walking and walking, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu finally arrived at
Varanasi, where He met Candrasekhara, who was coming out of the city.
TEXT 245
রাত্রে তেঁহো স্বপ্ন দেখে, — প্রভু আইল ঘরে |
প্রাতঃকালে আসি' রহে গ্রামের বাহিরে ॥ ২৪৫ ॥
13076 tenho svapna dekhe, —prabhu aila ghare
pratah-kale asi’ rahe gramera bahire


--- Page 403 ---
Text 247] The Lord Instructs Srila Ripa Gosvami 401
SYNONYMS
ratre—at night; tenho—he (Candrasekhara); svapna—a dream; dekhe —saw;
prabhu --6 Caitanya Mahaprabhu; aila—has come; ghare —to his home; pratah-
kale —in the morning; asi’—coming; rahe —he remained; gramera bahire —out-
side the city.
TRANSLATION
In a dream Candrasekhara had seen that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had
come to his home; therefore in the morning Candrasekhara went outside the
city to receive the Lord.
TEXT 246
আচন্দিতে প্রভু দেখি” চরণে পড়িলা।
আনন্দিত ₹9 নিজ-গৃহে লঞ। গেলা ॥ ২৪৬ ॥
acambite prabhu dekhi’ carane padila
anandita hana nija-grhe lana gela
SYNONYMS
dcambite—suddenly; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; dekhi’—seeing;
carane—at His feet; padila—he fell; anandita hana —becoming very glad; nija-
grhe—to his own place; lana—taking; gela—went.
TRANSLATION
While Candrasekhara was waiting outside the city, he suddenly saw Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrive, and he fell down at the Lord’s feet. Being very
happy, he took the Lord to his home.
TEXT 247
তপনমিশ্র শুনি” আসি' eg Hie |
RAND করি” दत्र নিমন্ত্রণ কৈল। ॥ ২৪৭ ॥
tapana-misra Suni’ asi’ prabhure milila
ista-gosthi kari’ prabhura nimantrana kaila
SYNONYMS
tapana-misra—Tapana Misra; suni’—hearing; dsi’—coming; prabhure milila—
met the Lord; ista-gosthi kari’—conversing; prabhura—to Lord ज Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; nimantrana—invitation; kaild—made.


--- Page 404 ---
402 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Tapana Misra also heard news of the Lord’s arrival in Varanasi, and he went
to Candrasekhara’s house to meet Him. After talking, he invited the Lord to
take lunch at his place.
TEXT 248
নিজ ঘরে न! প্রভুরে fowl করাইল |
ভট্টাচার্যে চন্দ্রশেখর নিমন্ত্রণ কৈল ॥ ২৪৮ ॥
nija ghare lana prabhure bhiksa karaila
bhattacarye candrasekhara nimantrana kaila
SYNONYMS
nija ghare—to his own place; lana—taking; prabhure—to the Lord; bhiksa
karaila—offered lunch; bhattacarye—unto Balabhadra Bhattacarya; candra-
sekhara—Candraéekhara; nimantrana—invitation; kaila—made.
TRANSLATION
Tapana Misra took Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his own house and gave Him
lunch. Candrasekhara invited Balabhadra Bhatticarya to take lunch at his
home.
TEXT 249
ভিক্ষা কর।ঞা মিশ্র কহে প্রভু-পায় ধরি”।
এক ভিক্ষা মাগি, মোরে দেহ” Fl করি” ॥ ২৪৯ ॥
bhiksa karana misra kahe prabhu-paya dhari’
eka bhiksa magi, more deha’ krpa kari’
SYNONYMS
bhiksa kararia—after offering the lunch; misra—Tapana Misra; kahe—said;
prabhu—of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; paya—the lotus feet; dhari’—touch-
ing; eka bhiksa—one favor; magi—I beg; more —unto Me; deha’—kindly deliver;
krpa kari’—by Your causeless mercy.
TRANSLATION
After offering lunch to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Tapana Misra begged a
favor from the Lord and requested Him to reward him mercy.


--- Page 405 ---
Text 252] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 403
TEXT 250
যাবৎ তোমার হয় কাশীপুরে fale |
মোর चन्न বিনা fom না করিব कडि ॥ ২৫০ ॥
ydvat tomara haya kasi-pure sthiti
mora ghara vina bhiksa na kariba kati
SYNONYMS
yavat—as long as; tomara—Your; haya—there is; kasi-pure—at Varanasi;
sthiti—stay; mora ghara—my place; vina—except; bhiksa—lunch; na kariba—
kindly do not take; kati—anywhere.
TRANSLATION
Tapana Misra said, “As long as Your Lordship stays in Varanasi, please do
not accept an invitation from anyone but me.”
TEXT 251
প্রভু ज।टनन-- দিন পঁচ-সাত সে রহিব।
FIAT সঙ্গে ভিক্ষা কাই। al করিব ॥ ২৫১ ॥
prabhu janena——dina parca-sata se rahiba
sannyasira sarge bhiksa kahan na kariba
SYNONYMS
prabhu —$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; janena—knows; dina—days; parica-sata—
five days or at the most a week; se—that; rahiba—I| shall stay; sannyasira
sange—with other Mayavadi sannyasis; bhiksa—lunch; kahan—at any time; na
kariba—I shall not take.
TRANSLATION
It was known to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that He would remain there only
five or seven days. He would not accept any invitation that involved Mayavadi
sannyasis.
TEXT 252
এত जानि, তার छक्का टेकल। অঙ্গীকার |
বাসা-লিষ্ঠা কৈল৷ চন্দ্রশেখরের ঘর ॥ ২৫২ ॥


--- Page 406 ---
404 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
eta jani’ tanra bhiksa kaila angikara
vasa-nistha kaila candrasekharera ghara
SYNONYMS
eta jani’—on this understanding; tarira—his; bhiksa—lunch; kaila angikara—He
accepted; vasa-nistha—residence; kailai—made; candrasekharera ghara—the
house of Candrasekhara.
TRANSLATION
With this understanding, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu agreed to accept lunch
at the place of Tapana Misra. The Lord made His residence at the home of
Candrasekhara.
TEXT 253
মহারাষ্ট্রীয় বিপ্র আসি” তাহারে FEE)
প্রভু তারে স্নেহ করি” कृभे। প্রকাশিল। ॥ ২৫৩ ॥
maharastriya vipra asi’ tanhare milila
prabhu tanre sneha kari’ (1003 prakasila
SYNONYMS
maharastriya vipra—the Maharastriya brahmana; asi’—coming; tanhare —him;
milila—met; prabhu—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; tanre—to him; sneha kari’—
showing His affection; krpa prakasila—distributed His mercy.
TRANSLATION
The Maharastriya brahmana came, and the Lord met him. Out of affection,
the Lord bestowed His mercy upon him.
TEXT 254
মহাপ্রভু আইল। खनिः শিষ্ট শিষ্ট जन्‌ ।
ত্রাহ্মণ, ক্ষত্রিয় আসি” করেন দরশন ॥ ২৫৪ ॥
mahaprabhu aila suni’ Sista sista jana
brahmana, ksatriya asi’ karena darasana
SYNONYMS
mahaprabhu ila—S$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has arrived; suni’—hearing; Sista
Sista jana—all respectable persons; brahmana—belonging to the brahmana com-


--- Page 407 ---
Text 256] The Lord Instructs Srila Rapa Gosvami 405
munity; ksatriya—belonging to the ksatriya community; asi’—coming; karena
darasana—see.
TRANSLATION
Hearing that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had come, all the respectable mem-
bers of the brahmana and ksatriya communities came to see Him.
TEXT 255
ল্রীরূপ-উপরে শ্রভুর যত Fo হৈল।
অত্যন্ত विखांत्र-कथे। সংক্ষেপে কহিল ॥ ২৫৫ ॥
Sri-rapa-upare prabhura yata krpa haila
atyanta vistara-katha sanksepe kahila
SYNONYMS
“ srirupa-upare—upon Sri Rapa Gosvami;  prabhura—of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; yata—as much; krpa—mercy; haila—there was; atyanta—very
much; vistara-katha—elaborate topic; sariksepe—in brief; kahila—I have de-
scribed.
TRANSLATION
Much mercy was thus bestowed upon $ri Rapa Gosvami, and | have briefly
described all those topics.
TEXT 256
শ্রদ্ধা করি” এই কথা শুনে যেই জনে |
প্রেমভক্তি পায় সেই চৈতন্তয-চরণে ॥ ২৫৬ ॥
Sraddha kari’ ei katha sune ye jane
prema-bhakti pdya sei caitanya-carane
SYNONYMS
Sraddha kari’—with faith; ei katha—this description; Sune —hears; yei jane —
any person who; prema-bhakti—love of Godhead; paya—achieves; sei—that
person; caitanya-carane —at the lotus feet of जत Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TRANSLATION
Whoever hears this narration with faith and love certainly develops love of
God at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 408 ---
406 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Madhya-lila, Ch. 19
TEXT 257
ল্রীরূপ-রঘুনাথ-পদ্রে যার আশ |
চৈতন্যচরিতাম্বত কহে FRA ॥ ২৫৭ ॥
Sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
caitanya-caritamrta kahe krspadasa
SYNONYMS
$ri-rapa—Srila Rapa Gosvami; raghunatha—Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami;
pade —at the lotus feet; yara—whose; dsa—expectation; caitanya-caritamrta—
the book named Caitanya-caritamrta; kahe—describes; krspadasa—Siila
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
TRANSLATION
Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Ripa and Sri Raghunatha, always desiring
their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following in their
footsteps.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-
lila, Nineteenth Chapter, describing the Lord's instructions to Srila Rapa Gosvami
at Prayaga in the science of devotional service.


--- Page 409 ---
References
The statements of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta are all confirmed by standard Vedic
authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this book on the
pages listed. Numerals in bold type refer the reader to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
translations. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
Adi-varaha Purana, 158.
Amyta-pravaha-bhasya (Bhaktivinoda Thakura), 129, 245, 392-393.
Bhagavad-gita, 16, 49, 50, 55, 64, 74, 95, 99, 100, 103, 316, 318, 319, 320, 326, 328,
349, 350, 362, 375
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 48, 49, 73, 315, 316, 352, 356, 360,
361-364, 365, 366, 367, 383
Bhakti-ratnakara (Narahari Cakravarti), 142, 148, 157, 158, 162, 164, 165, 166
Bhakti-sandarbha (Jiva Gosvami), 189
Bhavartha-dipika (Sridhara Svami), 40, 188
Brahma-samhita, 26, 48, 298, 336
Brhan-naradiya Purana, 194
Caitanya-bhagavata (Vindavana dasa Thakura), 54
Caitanya-candrodaya (Kavi-karnapara), 307-308
Govinda-lilamrta (Krsnadasa Kaviraja), 117-120, 273
Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, 284
Hari-bhakti-vildsa (Sanatana Gosvami), 190, 270-271
Kasi-khanda, 41
Mahabharata, 106
Mathura-khanda, 148
Mathura-mahatmya, 60
407


--- Page 410 ---
408 ওলা Caitanya-caritamrta

Mundaka Upanisad, 254

Narada-pancaratra, 352

Padma Purana, 49, 70, 71, 134

Padyavali (Rapa Gosvami), 294-295, 300

Paricadasi Citradipa, 321

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 9, 21, 75, 78, 99-100, 102-103, 146, 163-164, 181, 195, 255,
283, 298, 327, 330, 331, 352-354, 377, 379, 382, 384, 386

Stavavali (Raghunatha dasa Gosvami), 142, 148

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 321

Upadesamrta (Rapa Gosvami), 298, 340-341

Visnu Purana, 318-319


--- Page 411 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya—one who teaches by his example.
Adbhuta-rasa—the indirect relationship of wonder.
Aghana—transcendental bliss that is incomplete, or not concentrated.
Ananta—unlimited.
Anima-siddhi—mystic power by which one can become so small that he can enter into
stone.
Anubhava—bodily symptoms manifested by a devotee in ecstatic love for Krsna.
Anukara—imitating.
Anusara—trying to follow in the footsteps.
Apara vidya—material knowledge.
Arcana—Deity worship.
Artha—economic development.
Aryans —civilized human beings who follow the Vedic principles.
Asat-sanga—the association of nondevotees.
Atma—the soul.
Avyakta—the unmanifested material energy.
B
Bhagavatam system —spreading of Krsna consciousness philosophy by recitation and discus-
sion of $rimad-Bhagavatam.
Bhavuka—sentimental; can also mean advanced in the knowledge of spiritual rasas.
Bhava—preliminary stage of love of God.
Bhakta-lata-bija—the seed of devotional service.
Bhakti —devotional service; engaging all the senses in the service of the master of the senses,
Krsna.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhagyavan—most fortunate.
Bhagavata-vidya—transcendental superior knowledge.
Bhayanaka-rasa—the indirect relationship of fear.
Bibhatsa-rasa—the indirect relationship of abomination.
Brahma-bhiata—the stage of spiritual realization when one becomes happy as a result of
being relieved from material conceptions.
Brahmanda—the universe.
Cc
Candala—dog-eater.
Cit-kana—a particle of spirit.
409


--- Page 412 ---
410 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
D
Dama —controlling the senses and not being deviated from the Lord's service.
Dasya-rasa—one of the direct relationships, servitude; condition when the living entity
develops love of God according to the desires of the spirit soul.
Dasya-rati—dasya-rasa; the platform on which a devotee is attached to rendering service to
Krsna.
Dharma —religion; actual dharma is devotional service to Krsna, the supreme occupation for
all humanity.
Dharmah kaitavah —cheating religions.
Dhrti—controlling the tongue and the genitals.
E
Evadat—offering prayers to the Supreme Person (Arabic).
G
Garuda—the eagle carrier of Lord Visnu.
Caurava-dasya—condition when the devotee takes the form of giving protection to the Lord;
category of dasya-rasa.
Caurava-sakhya—the mellow friendship in awe and veneration.
Chana —transcendental bliss that is complete, or concentrated.
Guru—spiritual master.
Guru-avajia —disobeying the instructions of the spiritual master.
Guru-krpa—the mercy of the spiritual master.
H
Hari—the name of Krsna which means He who takes away all miseries.
Hari bol—"Chant the holy name of Hari.”
Hasya-rasa—the indirect relationship of laughing.
Hiadini—the ecstatic potency of the Lord.
1
Indriya-sarhyama —curbing one’s senses.
Jangama-nardyana—moving Narayana.
Jiva—the living entity.


--- Page 413 ---
Glossary 411
Jiva-hirmsana—animal killing or envy of other living beings.
JAana—knowledge.
JAana-marga—the cultivation of knowledge.
1021175 —mental speculative philosophers.
K
Kama —sense gratification.
Karma —fruitive work and the resultant reactions.
Karma-vira—a successful fruitive worker.
Karmis—fruitive workers.
Karma-nistha—one who aspires to enjoy the results of his pious activities.
Karuna-rasa—the indirect relationship of compassion.
Kevala—devotional platform of seeing the unlimited potency of Krsna, but still considering
oneself equal with Him.
Kirtana—congregational chanting of the holy names of the Lord.
Kitava—a great cheater.
Klesa-ghni—description of devotional service indicating that it reduces or nullifies all kinds of
suffering.
Krsna-bhakta—a devotee of Krsna.
Kumbha-mela —a fair held every twelve years at Prayaga for spiritual upliftment; attended by
people from all over India.
Kutinati —diplomatic behavior.
Krsna-akarsini—description of devotional service indicating that it gradually attracts Krsna
toward the devotee.
L
Laghima-siddhi —mystic perfection of entering into the sun planet by using the rays of the
sunshine.
Loka-prataraka—a pretender.
M
Madhura-rasa—attachment in conjugal love when in accordance with one’s own natural
development in Krsna consciousness one’s attraction leans towards conjugal love
within the heart.
Madhurya-rati—madhura-rasa; devotional service to Krsna in the mood of conjugal love.
Magha-mela—a yearly fair held during the month of Magha at Prayaga for spiritual uplift-
ment.
Mahiabhava—stage of love of Krsna when ecstatic symptoms become most bright.
Mahajana—one who understands the Absolute Truth and throughout his life behaves likes a
pure devotee.


--- Page 414 ---
412 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Mahatma —great soul.

Maha-vadanya-avatara—Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the most munificent incarnation.

Majida—a mosque.

Mana—when the lover feels novel sweetness by exchanging hearty loving words but wishes
to hide his feelings by crooked means.

Maya —illusion; the external energy of Krsna.

Mleccha—one who does not strictly follow regulative principles.

Moksa—Iliberation.

Mrdarga—a double-headed drum used in kirtana.

Mukti—liberation.

N

Naiskarma —akarma; action for which one suffers no reaction because it is performed in
Krsna consciousness.

Narayana-pardyana—a devotee of Lord Narayana.

Nitya-siddha—devotee who is eternally on the transcendental platform.

P

Paricaratra system —method of temple worship.

Paramahamsa —one who does not live in the material world and who does not envy others.

Parampara—disciplic succession.

Para-vidya—transcendental knowledge.

Pasandi—a nondevotee who does not accept the Vedic conclusions; an atheist.

Prakrta-sahjiyas —materialistic so-called devotees who imagine that they are advanced in
confidential love of Krsna.

Prapaya—that mellow of love when there is a possibility to receive direct honor, but it is
avoided.

Prapti-siddhi —mystic perfection of aquisition by which the yogi can reach his hand any-
where and obtain whatever he likes.

Prasannatma—joyfulness attained when one is relieved from material conceptions.

Prema —pure love of Krsna, symptomized by a heart completely softened and devoid of ma-
terial desires, and by strong emotional feelings.

Prema-vatah—one who has great love for the spiritual master.

Purascarana—a preliminary ritualistic performance for the fulfillment of certain desires.

Purusa—Visnu, the incarnation of the Lord for material creation; the male or controlling prin-
ciple.


--- Page 415 ---
Glossary 413
R
Raga—attachment for Krsna, at which stage the beloved converts unhappiness into happi-
ness.
Raudra-rasa—one of the indirect relationships, anger.
Rajarsi—a devotee king.
Rasas—mellows of devotional service. See also: santa-, dasya-, sakhya-, vatsalya-, madhura-
rasas.
Rapanuga—one who follows in the footsteps of Rapa Gosvami.
5
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—Krsna's eternal form of bliss and knowledge.
Sadhaka—neophyte devotees who are advancing toward the perfectional platform.
Sadhava-bhakti—awakening to devotional service by following regulative principles.
Sadhana-siddha—devotee who is elevated to the transcendental platform by the execution
of devotional service.
Sadhu—an honest man.
Sakhya-rasa—the direct relationship of friendship.
Sakhya-rati—sakhya-rasa; relationship with Krsna on the platform of friendship.
Salagrama-sild—a stone Deity incarnation of Visnu.
Saloka—liberation of living on the same planet as the Lord.
Samata—stage when one is fully attached to Krsna’s lotus feet.
Sambhrama-dasya—one of the indirect relationships, respect.
Samipya—liberation of having the Lord's personal association.
Santa-rasa—the direct relationship of neutral love.
Santa-rati—santa-rasa; neutral position of realization of Krsna.
Sarsti—liberation of having equal opulences with the Supreme Lord.
Sarapya—liberation of having the same bodily features as the Lord.
Sastras—revealed scriptures.
Sattvika—endowed with the quality of goodness.
Siddhi-lobhi—one who is greedy for material perfection.
Siddhi-vraja—opulences of material perfection.
Smarta-brahmanas —brahmanas who are disciples of the Mayavada school.
Sneha—affection for Krsna, at which stage the lover cannot be without the beloved.
Snigdha —very peaceful.
Sravana—hearing.
Sruti-sastra-nindana—offense of blaspheming the Vedic literature.
Sthanu —unchangeable.
Stami-purusa—mistaking a dry tree without leaves for a person.
Sthayibhava—continuous love of Godhead in devotional service.
Subhada—description of devotional service indicating that it bestows all good fortune.


--- Page 416 ---
414 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Suddha-bhakti —pure devotional service.
Sadra-mahajana—a person born in a low family but raised to the platform of brahmana by
initiation.
Su-snigdha —affectionate.
Svarapa—original characteristics of a substance; for the jiva, service of Krsna.
T
Titiksa—tolerance; endurance of unhappiness.
Tulasi—a pure devotee in the form of a tree, the leaves of which are always offered to Krsna.
Triveni —confluence of three sacred rivers at Prayaga.
{1
Ucchrrikhala—whimsical.
Vv
Vaikuntha—(lit., without anxiety) the spiritual sky.
Vairagya —renunciation.
Vitsalya-rasa—the direct relationship of parental love.
Vatsalya-rati—vatsalya-rasa; the platform on which the devotee thinks of Krsna in His child-
hood feature.
Veda—knowledge.
Veda-vada-rata—karmis who become entangled in material activities disguised as spiritual
activities.
Vibhava—the cause or basis for relishing transcendental mellow.
Vira-rasa—one of the indirect relationships, chivalry.
Viraja River —the river between the material and spiritual natures.
Visrambha—the mellow of friendship in equality.
Vivarta-vada—the Mayavadi interpretation of Vedanta that the Supreme Lord becomes
changed when He expands.
Y
Yavana—meat-eater.
Yogamaya —Krsna's internal energy.
Yoga-siddhis —mystic perfections.
Yogis—those who practive the eight-fold mystic yoga process to gain mystic siddhis or
Paramatma realization.


--- Page 417 ---
Bengali Pronunciation Guide
BENGALI DIACRITICAL EQUIVALENTS AND PRONUNCIATION
Vowels
Ha खां 2 i ® i উদ खे a थै
Wr 4९ ॐ ai ও০ ॐ au
2 गो (anusvira) ® 11 ( candra-bindu) ও h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutterals: ६.2 ka q kha aS ga q gha 8 na
Palatals: চ ca ছু cha জজ ja ঝা jha এও fa
Cerebrals: ট ta 5 tha © da ® dha म्‌ na
Dentals: S ta 2 tha क्ति da ¥ dha & na
Labials: of pa pha बु ७३ छ bha q ma
Semivowels: खु ya | ra HA la वु va
Sibilants: =f Sa स्‌ sa A sa ङ्क ha
Vowel Symbols
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
~~
ta गि चै ay ৩৪ <r ६? Ge Tai © Yo ८१०८
For example: ककं. কিছ कैत Fru Fra Fr
7 ki क्‌ ke दक kai কো ko = kau
415


--- Page 418 ---
416 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
The letter a is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virama (~) indicates that there is no final vowel. 5d k
The letters above should be pronounced as follows:
a —like the © in hot; sometimes like the ০ in go; d —like the द in dawn.
final ৫ is usually silent. dh —like the dh in good-house.
a —like thea in far. n —like the 7 in ९२३५५.
i,T—like the ee in meet. t—as in ralk but with the tongue against the
u, u —like the u in rule. the teeth.
1 —like the ri in rim. th—as in hoz-house but with the tongue against
ঢ —like the ree in reed. the teeth.
e —like the ai in pain; rarely like e in bet. d—as in dawn but with the tongue against the
ai —like the oi in boil. teeth.
0 —like the ০ in go. dh—as in good-house but with the tongue
au —like the ow in owl. against the teeth.
™ —(anusvdra)like the ng in song. n—as in nor but with the tongue against the
h —(visarga) a final h sound like in Ah. teeth.
Nn —(candra-bindu) a nasal n sound p —like the p in pine.
like in the French word bon. ph —like the ph in philosopher.
k —like the k in kite. b —like the b in bird.
kh —like the kh in Eckhart. bh —like the bk in rub-hard.
8 —like the gin got. m —like the 772 in mother.
gh —like the git in big-house. y —like the j in jaw. य्‌
n —like the n in bank. y —like the y in year. §
© —like the ch in chalk. 7 —like the r in run.
ch —like the chh in much-haste. 1 like the / in Jaw
j like the in joy. v —like the b in bird or like the w in dwarf.
jh —like the geh in college-hall. §, s —like the ॐ in shop.
7 —like the n in bunch. s —like the s in sun.
চ like the 7 in zalk. h—like the / in home.
th —like the th in hot-house.

This is a general guide to Bengali pronunciation. The Bengali transliterations in this
book accurately show the original Bengali spelling of the text. One should note, however,
that in Bengali, as in English, spelling is not always a true indication of how a word is pro-
nounced. Tape recordings of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
chanting the original Bengali verses are available from the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness, 3764 Watseka Ave., Los Angeles, California 90034.


--- Page 419 ---
° °
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete alphabetical listing of the first and third line of each four-line
verse and both lines of each two-line verse in Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. In the first column the trans-
literation is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the chapter-verse references
and page number for each verse are to be found.
A (3/7 haya, si muni $ri-carana-sange 19.239 398
2/7 kara, —sarige caluka vipra eka-jana’ 17.12 6
abanhi cetana paibe, ha-ibe samvita 18.170 215 akarnya venu-ranitam saha-krsna-sarah 17.36 19
acambite eka gopa vamsi bajaila 18.161 212 akasadi guna yena para para bhate 19.233 395
adcambite gosani-sabhate kaila agamana 19.18 255  akasera ‘Sabda-guna yenabhata-gane 19.217 387
acambite prabhu dekhi’ carane padila 19.246 401
acarya ha-ila sei, tarila jagata 18.122 192 ‘akrtye’ tomare dekhi ‘vrajendra-nandana’ 18.118 191
akrarera loka aise prabhure dekhite 18.79 170
acetana 0373 prabhu bhamite padila 18.162 212 alaukika katha suni’ ke kare pratiti?” 17.114 60
acirdt ama-saha ha-ibe milana 19.57 274  alaukika-lila prabhura alaukika-riti 18.225 241
acirat paibare caitanya-carana 19.5 248 = alaukika ‘prakrti’ tomara—buddhi-agocara 18.120 192
adailera ghate nauka asi’ uttarila 19.83 288
adhama jiva mui, more ha-ila sadaya 17.77 38  alaukika sakti tomdara nd ydya kathana 18.124 193
alpa-svalpa-malya paile, ethdi veciba 17.145 79
adhama-kakere kaila garuda-samana 17.79 39  alpavayasatarnra, rajara kumara 18208 233
‘advaita-brahma-vada’ sei karila sthapana 18.187 223 ama-dunhara mane tabe bada ‘sukha’ haya 17.10 5
‘ddya eva paro rasah’—kahe upadhyaya 19.104 299 dmadra ye kichu karya, saba toma 1273 19.21 257
adyapiha tanhara seva ‘govardhane’ haya 17.168 91
adyopanta caitanya-lila—‘alaukika’ jana’ 18.226 241 amare miliba nilacalete asiya 19.241 399
‘ami —bada jiani’—ei gela abhimana 18.203 230
‘age kaha’ prabhu-vakye upadhyaya kahila 19.97 295  ami-dui-bhai calilanatanhare milite 19.33 263
ahaituky avyavahita 19.172 353 amli-talaya gosanire dek he acambite 18.83 172
aham iha 11211037 vande 19.96 294  ananda-kolahale loka bale ‘hari’ ‘hari’ 18.40 149
aho bata sva-paco ‘to gariyan 19.72 282
aiche hena prema ‘laukika’ kabhu naya 17.161 88  anandita—bandhu yena dekhe bandhu-gana 17.202 113
anandita haa bhatta dila divyasana 19.85 289
aiche lila kare prabhu sri-krsna-caitanya 18.213 235 anandita haa nija-grhe lana gela 19.246 401
aiche mleccha-bhaye gopala bhagebare-bare 18.31 144  anaruruksave sailam 18.25 141
aiche mohana-vidya— ye dekhe se mohe 17.118 62 aneka dekhinu muri mleccha-sastra haite 18.202 229
aiche vat kaha kene sannyasi hana 17.171 92
aiche yabe pai, tabe la-i ‘eka’ jana 17.14 7 “aniketa dunhe, vane yata vrksa-gana 19.127 311
ankura pulaka, madhu-asru varisane 17.200 112
aisvarya dekhileo nija-sambandhase mane 19.203 377 ‘annakata’-name grame gopalera sthiti 18.26 142
aisvarya-jiana-misra, kevala-bheda dra 19.192 371 antare gara-gara prema, nahe samvarana 19.64 278
aisvarya-jiiana-pradhanye sarkucita priti 19.194 372 antargatah svavivarena cakara tesam 17.142 77
aisvarya-jiane durhara mane bhaya haila 19.196 373
ajanata mahimanam tavedarn 19.199 375 anukalyena krsnanu- 19.167 349
anukalye sarvendriye krsnanusilana 19.168 350
ajani yan-mayam tad avimucya niyantr bhavet 19.143 322 anupama mallika, (९/2 nama—‘sri-vallabha’ 19.36 264
ajanu-lambita bhuja, kamala-nayana 17.108 57 anvesana kari’ phire vyakula hana 17.22 12
8/1 ami achilana uthailun prabhure 18.140 202 anyabhilasita-sanyarm 19.167 349
dji ratrye palaha, na rahiba eka-jana 18.28 143 anya-desa prema uchale ‘vrndavana’-name 17.228 125
13/75 deha’, yai’ kari krsna darasane!’ 1899 179 anyatha visva-moho ‘pi 17.216 120
417


--- Page 420 ---
418 Sri Caitanya-caritimrta
anya-vancha, anya-puja chadi’ ‘jana’, karma’ 19.168 350  atah sri-krspa-namadi 17.136 73
apana-icchaya prabhura nana seva kare 17.175 94 atmanam ca tad-alokad 18.1 130
dpana-prarabdhe vasi’ varanasi-sthane 17.95 48  atmaramas ca munayo 17.140 76
dpanara duhkha kichu kari’ nivedana 18.146 205  atmdramera mana hare tulasira gandhe 17.141 77
apanara ghare 2/1 bahu-dhana lana 19.6 248  atyanta vistara-katha sanksepe kahila 19.255 405
20201419 munde se pani pade vaja 18.227 241  ‘avajnad’te nama laya, suni’pai duhkhe 17.127 66
dpanare ‘palaka’ jana, krsne ‘palya’-jiana 19.228 392  avaruhyagireh krsno 18.25 141
30976 asiya bhrtye darasana dila 17.94 47  avasarana pdyaloka nimantrana dite 18.132 198
dpane bhatta karena prabhura pada- 19.90 291 avese tara gaye prabhura lagila carana 17.28 14
apane karila prabhura pada-praksalana 19.85 289
dpane svagrhe kare sastrera vicare 19.16 252 B
aparadha-hastira yaiche na haya udgama 19.157 340
aparimitd dhruvds tanu-bhrto yadi sarva-gatas 19.143 322  bahira hana prabhu dila darasana 17.188 106
apranasyeva dehasya 19.75 285  bahu tuli’ bale prabhu "hari-bola’-dhvani 17.189 107
dra dina ila prabhu dekhite ‘vindavana’ 18.71 167  bahya vikara nahi, premavista mana 18.156 209
dra dina gaudesvara, sange eka-jana 19.18 255  balabhadra-bhatticarya dekhe aparva-range 17.41 21
dra dine mahaprabhu kare nadi snana 17.30 15  balabhadra-bhattacarye paka karaila 17.89 45
ara eka-jana diya kara samadhana 19.23 258  balabhadra-bhattacarye sarge kari’ nila 17.20 11
ara eka pathana, tanra nama—‘vijuli-khanna’ 18.207 232  balagra-sata-bhagasya 19.141 321
rite radha-kunda-varta puche loka-sthane = 18.4 = 131  balya, pauganda, kaisore, sresthamana’ kaya? 19.103 298
‘arit'-grame si’ ‘bahya’ haila acambite 18.3 131  bandhu dekhi’ bandhu yena ‘bheta’ 1205 yaya 17.201 112
‘arya, sarala, tumi—vrddha brahmana 17.165 89  bhagavad-bhakti-hinasya 19.75 285
asi” prabhu-pade padi’ karena rodana 17.93 47  bhagavatavicarakarena sabhate vasiya 19.17 253
asi’ sabe bhattacarye kare nimantrana 17.60 31 bhagojivah sa vijiieya 19.141 321
asi’ tenho kaila prabhura carana vandana 19.93 293  bhakta-bhede rati-bheda parica parakara 18.183 361
‘asprsya pamara muri, na chuniha more’ 19.67 279  bhakta-gana-sange avasya kariba milana 17.71 36
asru-kampa-pulaka-preme sarira asthire 17.205 114  bhakta-gane 1203 tabe calilana range 17.73 36
asta-prahara krsna-bhajana, cari 03003 sayane 19.130 312  bhakta-gane sarge lana yaba 'vindavana’ 17.71 36
aste-vyaste bhattacarya uthaya dhariya 17.150 83  bhakta-iccha parite kahe madhura vacana 18.152 208
aste-vyaste mahaprabhura lana bahirvasa 17.220 121 bhala-bhala vipra-sthane sthapya rakhila 19.8 249
aste-vyaste sabe dhari’ prabhure uthaila 19.80 287  bhari bojha lana ailana, kemane lana yaba? 17.145 79
asvasthyera chadma kari’ rahe nija-ghare 19.15 252  bhattacarya asi’ prabhure dhari’ vasaila 18.180 220
ataeva dkarsaye atmaramera mana 17.139 75 bhattacarya asi’ tabe kahila prabhure 18147 205
ataeva asvadadhikye kare camatkara 19.234 396  bhattacarya bhiksa dibe kari’ bhiksatana 17.19 10
ataeva dasya-rasera ei ‘dui’ guna 19.221 389  bhattacarya ‘brahma-kunde’ paka yanakaila 18.21 140
ataeva ‘krspa-nama’ na aise tara mukhe 17.143 78  bhattacarya dui bhaiye nimantrana kaila 19.59 275
ataeva krsnera ‘nama’, ‘deha’, 1125०“ 17.134 71 bhattacarya-dvaramrttikasangekari’ laila 18.14 136
ataeva madhura-rasera haya ‘paica’ guna 19.232 395 bhattacarya ekera matra karena grahana 18.131 197
ataeva sakhya-rasera ‘tina’ guna—cihna 19.224 390 bhattacaryakahe,—cala, yai mahavana 18.156 209
ataeva sakhya-rasera vasa bhagavan 19.225 391  bhattacaryakole kari’ prabhure susthakaila = 17.222 122
ataeva ‘santa’ krspa-bhakta eka jani 19.214 385  bhattacarya paka kare vanya-vyanjana 17.61 32
ataeva suddha-bhaktira kahiye ‘laksana’ 19.166 348  bhattacaryapanditabisatrisa lana 19.17 253
ataeva tara mukhe na aise krspa-nama 17.130 68  bhattacarya—pandita, kahite na janena vat 18.217 237


--- Page 421 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 419
bhattacarya-sange kare prabhura santarpana = 17.219 121 = brahma-jiani akarsiya kare atma-vasa 17.137 73
bhattacarya, sei vipra 'krsna-nama’ gaya 17.224 123 brahma-kunde snana kari’ prabhu bhiksd kaila 18.21 140
bhattacarya seva kare, snehe yaiche ‘dasa’ 17.65 33 brahmana, ksatriya asi’ karena darasana 19.254 404
bhattacarya sighra asi’ prabhure uthaila 18.138 201  brahmananda haite parnananda krspa-guna = 17.139 75
bhattacarya sri-rape deoyaila ‘avasesa’ 19.89 29]  brahmananda haite parnananda lila-rasa 17.137 73
bhattacarya-sthane asi’ kare nimantrana 18130 197  brdhmana-sakala karena prabhura nimantrana 19.40 302
bhattacarya tabe kahe prabhura carane 18.99 179  bridhmana-vaisnave 03 tara ardha-dhane 19.7 249
bhattacarye alingiya tanhare kahila 17.76 38  brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva 19.151 331
bhattacarye candrasekharanimantranakaila 19.248 402
bhattacarye manya kari’ pakakaraila 19.87 290 C
bhattacaryera paja kaila kariya sammana 17.88 44
bhatta kahe, prabhura kichu ingita-bhangi (2001 19.70 = 281  ‘caitanya’ ‘caitanya’ kari’ kahe tina-bara 17.126 66
bhatta milibare yaya, dunhe palaya dare 19.67 279  caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa 17.234 127
bhatte dandavat kaila ati dina 9973 19.66 279  caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa 18.229 242
bhattera sankoce prabhu samvarana kaila 19.63 278  caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa 19.257 406
bhattera vismaya haila, prabhuraharsamana 19.68 280  caitanya-caritra ei—'amrtera sindhu’ 18.228 242
bhattere kahila prabhu tara vivarana 19.68 280 caitanya-katha sune, kare caitanya-cintana” 19.131 313
bhau-dhana diya dui brahmane varila 19.4 247  ‘caitanya’-nama tanra, bhavuka-gana lana 17.117 62
bhavakali vecite ami ailana kasipure 17.144 79  caitanyera gadha-lila bujhite sakti kara 17.54 28
bhavite bhavitekrsna sphuraye antare 19.236 397  caitanyera krpa rapa likhiyachena apane 19.133 314
bhaya nahi kare, sange yaya vate-vate 17.198 111 caitanyera krpa yanhe, tanhe ki vismaya? 19.132 313
bhayanakah sa bibhatsa 18.186 365  cala tumi ami sikddra-pasa yai 18.168 214
bhaya pana mleccha chadi’ dila cari-jana 18.179 219  candrasekhara kahe, — “prabhu, bada krpa 17.94 47
bhaya pana prabhu-paya padild brahmana 17.169 9]  candrasekhara 17113 gramera bahire asi’ 19.244 400
bhaye bhatta sange rahe, madhyahnakarana 19.84 289 ‘cari’ gune vatsalya rasa—amrta-samana 19.228 392
bhida dekhi’ dui bhai rahila nirjane 19.41 266 caturtha-divase gopala svamandire geld 18.39 149
bhiksa dite nija-ghare calila lana 19.77 286  caurasi-laksa yonite karaye bhramana 19.138 318
bhiksa kari’ bhiksa dibe, yabe patra vahi’ 17.11 6  cetana (0205 prabhu ya'na gadagadi 17.221 122
bhiksa karaila prabhure sasneha yatane 19.88 290 cetana pana punah gadagadi yaya 18.73 168
bhiksa karana misra kahe prabhu-paya dhari’ 19.249 402  citta ardra haila tanra prabhure dekhiya 18.186 222
bhik sa kari’ mahaprabhu karila sayana 17.90 46
bhiksa lagi’ bhattacarye karaila randhana 17.176 94 D
bhiksuka sannyasi, mora nahi kichu dhana 18.183 221
bhilla-praya loka tahan parama-pasanda 17.53 27  dahine-vame dhvani Suni’ ydya prabhu-sange 17.35 18
bhojana kari’ aila tenho prabhura carane 19.91 292  dainya-kari, kare mahaprabhura nimantrana 18.133 198
bhramite bhramite aila mathura-nagari 17.166 90  dainya kari’ sei vipra kahite lagila 17.181 97
bhagarbha-gosani, ara sri-jiva-gosari 18.50 155  daksinatya-vipra-sane ache paricaya 19.44 268
bhukti-mukti adi-vancha yadi mane haya 19.175 355  daksinatya-vipra tanre ghare lana gela 19.243 400
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kami—sakali ‘asanta’ 19.149 328  daksina ydite yaiche sak!i prakasila 18.221 238
bhukti-mukti-sprha yavat 19.176 355  danda-bandha lagi’ cauthi saricaya karila 19.8 249
bhukti-mukti-vanichd, yata asankhya tara lekhd 19.158 341  dandavat 1275 pade premavista hana 17.155 85
‘bol" ‘bol’ kari’ uthi’ karena nartana 17.223 123 darsanera karya achuka, ye tomara ‘nama’ sune18.123 193
‘brahma’, “atma’ ‘caitanya’ kahe niravadhi 17.129 68  dasa-dina trivenite makara-snanakaila 18222 239


--- Page 422 ---
420 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
dasa-sahasra mudra (9103 ache mudi-sthane 19.34 263  dunhara mukhe nirantara krsna-nama suni’ 19.70 281
disya-bhdva-bhakta—sarvatra sevaka apara 19.189 369  dunhe preme nrtya kari’ kare kolakuli 17.159 87
dasyera ‘sambhrama-gaurava’-seva, sakhye 19.222 389 dura haite (303 dekhi’ lokera haya ‘bhrama’ 18.105 183
deha-dehira, ndma-namira krsne nahi ‘bheda’ 17.132 69  ddrahaite tina-jane ghare pathaila 17.147 81
deha-kanti pitambara kaila dcchadana 18.118 191  durvara udbhata prema nahe samvarana 1982 288
‘dvadasa-aditya’ haite ‘kesi-tirthe aila 18.72 167
dehas ca viklava-dhiyah sahasaiva muhyan 19.202 376
dekhi’ bhattacaryera mane haya camatkara 17.33 17
dekhi’ bhattacaryera mane haya maha-bhaya 17.27 14 E
dekhi’ camatkara haila vallabha-bhattera mana 19.64 278
dekhi’krsnaddsakandi’ phukara karila 18.138 201  ebe yadi yai, ‘makare’gariga-snanapaiye 18.150 207
ei bhakti-rasera karilana, dig-darasana 19.235 396
dekhile se jani tanra ‘iSvarera riti’ 17.114 60 ei cari batoyara dhutara khaoyana 18.165 213
dekhi’ mahaprabhura‘vrndavana’-smrtihaila 17.38 = 20 ei cari daya kari’ karena palana 18.184 221
dekhi’ saba gramya-lokera vismaya hailamana18.6 = 132 ei cari mili’ tomdya dhutura khaoyana 18.182 221
dekhite utkantha haya, na cade govardhane 18.43 151  ei-dui ‘adhama’ nahe, haya ‘sarvottama’ 19.71 282
dekhi’ vallabha-bhatta mane camatkara haila 19.108 301 ei dui guna vyape saba bhakta-jane 19.217 387
dekhiya na mane aisvarya—kevaldra riti 19.194 372 ei ghate akrara vaikuntha dekhila 18.136 200
desa-patra dek hi’ mahaprabhu dhairya ha-ila 19.83 288 ei-kathasuni’ mahantera maha-sukha haya 19.132 313
dese dese grame grame bule nacana 17.117 62  ei-mata balabhadra karena stavana 17.81 40
devaki vasudevas ca 19.197 373  ei-mata cali’ prabhu ‘prayaga’ aila 18.222 239
dhanyah sma midha-matayo ‘pi harinyaeta 17.36 19  ei-mata dasa-dina prayage rahiya 19.135 315
dharmacari-madhye bahuta *karma-nistha’ 19.147 326 ei-matagopalerakaruna svabhava 18.42 150
dharma-sthapana-hetu sadhura vyavahara 17.185 100  ei-mata karpapara likhe sthane-sthane 19.122 308
dharmasya tattvarh nihitarn guhiyarn 17.186 105 ei-mata kata-dina ‘akrare’ rahila 18.128 196
dig-darasana kailun mudi 5073 kariya 18.224 240  ei-mata madhure saba bhava-samahara 19.234 39%
dina hana stuti kare vinaya acari’ 19.52 271  ei-mata mahaprabhu dui bhrtyera vase 17.100 52
dina kata rahi’ tara’ bhrtya dui-jane” 17.98 51  ei-mata mahaprabhu nacite nacite 18.3 131
diyamanarh na grhnanti 19.173 354  ei-matanana-sukhe prabhu aila ‘kasi’ 17.82 41
dubite lagila 2८4८2, jhalake bhare {2/2 19.81 287 ei-mataprati-dina karenavaricana 17.103 53
dubiya rahila prabhu jalera bhitare 18.137 200 ei-mata prema—yavat bhramila ‘bara’ vana 17.230 126
dui-bhai dara haite bhamite padiya 19.66 279  ei-mata stuti kare premavista 0983 18.13 136
dui bhai vasa kaila prabhu-sannidhana 19.60 275 ei-mata tina-dina gopale dekhila 18.38 149
dui-bhai visaya-tyagera updya stjila 194 247  ei-mata tina-dina prayage rahila 17.151 83
dui-cari dinera anna rakhena 52/70/1०61 17.62 32 ei-mata tina-ratri lokera gamana 18.96 178
dui dhanya-ksetre alpa-jale kaila snana 18.5 132 ei-mata ‘vaisnava’kaild saba desa-grama 18.220 238
dui-dike mata-pita pusta kalevara 18.60 161  ei-range sei-dina tatha gonaila 18.74 168
dui-guccha (103 dunhe dasane dhariya 19.46 268 ei 402 ami nariba karite sodhana 18.153 208
dui-jana kahe, —'tumi isvara ‘svatantra’ 17.8 5 ei-rape tan-sabare diyachena darasana 18.45 152
dui jane krsna-katha haila kata-ksana 19.62 277 eisaba krsna-bhakti-rasera sthayibhava 18.180 359
dui-netre asru vahe gariga-dhara-praya 17.111 59 ei saba mukhya-bhakta 1275 nija 59786 18.53 157
dui putra ani’ prabhura carane (02012 19108 301 eisaba rahu—krsna-carana-sambandhe 17.141 77
dui-sandhya agni-tapa kasthera apara 17.66 34 eislokapadi’ nace, haila dina-sesa 18.37 147
dui-sata turki ache, sateka kamane 18.173 217 ei ‘Suddha-bhakti’—iha haite ‘prema’ haya = 19.169 351
‘dunhara mukhe krsna-ndma kariche nartana 19.71 282  eita brahmanda bhari’ ananta jiva-gana 19.138 318


--- Page 423 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 421
eita’ mahima—tomara “(3135003-13/05303 18.126 195  etha tumi kaila mora sarva karya nasa 19.25 259
eita parama-phala ‘parama-purusartha’ 19.164 346  evam uktah priyam aha 19.209 380
ei yati—amara guru, ami—mathura brahmana 18.169 215
ei yati-pasa chila suvarpa apara 18.164 213
ei yati vyadhite kabhu hayena marcchita 18.170 215
eka bhiksa magi, more deha’ krpa kari’ 19.249 402 G
eka cauthi dhana dila kutumba-bharane 19.7 249
eka-dina akrarete loka pratah-kale 18.92 176  gabhi dekhi’ stabdha prabhu premera tarange 17.195 110
eka-dina ‘dasa’ ‘bisa’ aise nimantrana 18.131 197  gacchanvrndavanarh gauro 17.1 2
eka-dina pathe vyaghra kariyache sayana 17.28 14  gandha-puspa-dhapa-dipe maha-pajakaila 19.87 290
eka-dina sei akrara-ghatera upare 18.135 199  ganga-pathe mahdprabhure naukate 2578 19.43 303
eka-dui-tina-cari krame parica prthivite 19.233 395  ganga-tira-pathe kaila prayage prayana 18214 235
eka eka vrksera tale eka eka ratri sayana 19.127 311 ganga-tira-pathe sukha janaiha tanre 18.147 205
eka-jana asi’ ratre gramike balila 1827 143  ganga-tira-pathe yaibara vijfia dui-jana 18.158 210
eka-jane nile, anera mane duhkha ha-iba 17.13 7 ganga-tira-pathe yai, tabe sukha pai 18.143 203
ekaki yaiba, kahon sarge na la-iba 17.5 3 ganga-yamuna prayaga narila dubaite 1940 266
eka-masa darasana kaila mathuraya rahiya 1848 153  gatividas tavodgita-mohitah 19.210 381
eka-masarahi’gopala 8০13 nija-sthane 18.54 158  gauda, 89783, utkala, daksina-dese giya 17.52 27
eka-masa rahila viththalesvara-ghare 18.47 152  gaude rakhila mudra dasa-hajare 19.9 250
eka nivedana yadi dhara, dayamaya 17.10 ५  gaudiya—‘batapada’ nahe, tumi—'batapada’ 18.175 217
ekante ‘akrara-tirthe’ rahila asiya 1870 166  ‘gaudiyd’ thak ei kanpe dui-jana 18.172 216
“eka sannyasi aila jagannatha haite 17.106 56  ghare 1275 aila prabhuke anandita haia 17.87 44
‘eka sila’ alingiya ha-ila unmatta 18.16 137  ghoda-pida luti’ labe toma-saba mari’ 18174 217
ekatra likhilun, sarvatra na yaya varnana 17.230 126  ‘gokula’ dekhiya ila ‘mathura’-nagare 1869 166
eka vipra dekhi’ ila prabhura vyavahara 17.105 56  gokule 4८९५०३१ rati—aisvarya-jfiana-hina 19.193 371
eka-vipra pade prabhura carana dhariya 17.158 87  gopala mandire gela, prabhu rahila tale 18.41 150
ekhani asibe saba, ami yadi phuk ari 18.174 217  gopala prakata kari’ seva kaila ‘mahasaya’ 17.168 91
eko ‘thavapy acyuta tat-samaksari 19.200 375  gopala-rayera darasana kemane paiba?’ 18.23 140
eta bali’ jhanpa dila jalera upare 18.137 200 8০033 sange cali’ aila nrtya-gita kari’ 18.40 149
eta bali’ mahaprabhure naukaya vasana 18.157 210  gopalera saundarya dekhi’ prabhura avesa 18.37 147
eta bali’ pade mahaprabhura carane 18.204 230  go-pati-tanaya-kurije 19.98 295
eta bali’ prabhu lana karila gamana 19.42 303  gopikolakhale damna 19.205 378
eta bali’ prabhu tare kaila alingana 19.237 397  govardhana dekhi’ prabhu ha-ila dandavat 18.16 137
eta bali’ sei vipre atmasatha kari’ 17.146 81 govardhana dekhi’ prabhu 01797731513 1275 18.33 145
eta bali’ sloka pade gadgada-svare 19.105 299  govardhana-parikramaya karila prayana 18.32 145
eta bhavi’ gauda-dese karilun gamana 17.72 36  ‘govardhana-upare ami kabhu na cadiba 18.23 140
eta jani’ tanra bhiksa kaila angikara 19.252 404  ‘govinda’bhakta, ara vani-krsnadasa 18.52 156
eta likhi’ dui-bhai (2111 gamana 19.35 264  ‘govinda-kundadi’ tirthe prabhu kaila snana 18.35 146
eta mane kari’ prabhu mauna kari’ rahila 18.24 141  grahaka nahi, na vikaya, 1205 yaba ghare 17.144 79
eta suni’ gaudesvara uthi’ ghare gela 19.27 259  grama ujada haila, palaila sarva-jana 18.30 144
eta suni’ sei vipra maha-duhkha paila 17.122 64  gundli-sampat kavita ca rajate 17.212 118
etha nilacala haite prabhu calila vindavana 19.30 261 ‘guru’ haia ‘Sisye’ namaskara na yuyaya 17.170 92
etha sanatana-gosari bhave mane mana 19.13 25] guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija 19.151 331


--- Page 424 ---
422 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
H J
hantayam adrir abala hari-dasa-varyo 18.34 146  jagat anande bhasaya yara eka-bindu 18.228 242
*hari-bola’ bali’ prabhu kare ucca-dhvani 17.45 = 23 jagat bhasila caitanya-lilara pathare 17.233 127
harideva-age nace preme matta hafia 18.19 139  jagat-mangala tanra ‘krsna-caitanya’-nama 17.113 59
‘harideva’ dekhi’ tahan ha-ila pranama 18.17 138  jala-sekakare ange, vastrera vatasa 17.220 121
‘harideva’ nardyana—adi parakasa 18.18 138 = (>€ jala-keli kare, tire rasa-range 189 134
haridevera bhrtya prabhura karila satkara 1820 139 jaliyare madha-loka ‘krspa’ kari’ mane! 18.106 183
hari krsna kaha 00706 bale bahu tuli’ 17159 87  jarigame tiryak-jala-sthalacara-vibheda 19.144 323
hase, kande, nace, gaya, krsna-nama lana 17.162 88  janiya gopala kichu bhangi uthaila 18.24 141
hase, kande, nace, pade, uccaih-svare gaya 18.73 168  ‘janma-sthana’ dekhi’ rahe sei vipra-ghare 1869 166
hasti-vyaghra patha chade prabhure dekhiya 17.25 = 13 ‘janma-sthane’ ‘kesava dekhi’ karila prandma 17.156 85
hasya, adbhuta, vira, karuna, raudra, bibhatsa, 19.187 365 jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda 17.2 2
hasyo ‘dbhutas tatha virah 19.186 365 jayadvaita-candrajayagaura-bhakta-vinda 182 130
hena-kale aila raghupati upadhyaya 19.92 292 jayadvaita-candra jayagaura-bhakta-vrnda = 19.2 246
hena-kale aila vaisnava ‘krspadasa’ nama 18.82 171 jayajayagauracandra jaya nityananda 17.2 2
hena-kale gela raja udiya marite 19.28 260 jaya jayagauracandra jaya nityananda 182 130
hena-kale mahaprabhu ‘caitanya’ paila 18.176 218  jayajaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda 19.2 246
hena-kale tahan asoyara dasa aila 18.163 212 ‘jharikhande’ sthavara-jangama ache yata 17.46 23
hena-kale vyaghra tatha 5119 panca-sata 17.37 19  jiva-bahu mari’ kaila cakla saba nasa 19.25 259
hitva gopih kamayana 19.207 380 jivadhame ‘krsna’-jiana kabhu na kariba! 18.111 186
hladinya sarnvid-aslistah 18.114 188 jivah saksma-svarapo ‘yam 19.140 320
hrdi yasya preranaya 19.134 315 = jiva, isvara-tattva—kabhu nahe ‘sama’ 18113 187
hrsikena hrsikesa- 19.170 352 jivera dharma—nama-deha-svaripe ‘vibheda’ 17.132 69
hunkara kari’ yamunara jale 0113 jhanpa 19.79 286  jvalad-agni-rasi yaiche sphulingera ‘kana’ 18.113 187
hunkara kariya uthe, bale ‘hari’ ‘hari’ 18.177 218
K
1
kabhu bhakti-rasa-sastra karaye likhana 19.131 313
10003 nahi, tabu tatha rahila dina-dase 17.100 52  kabhu kudje rahe, kabhu rahe gramantare 18.44 151
ihan mali sece nitya sravapadi jala 19.155 337  kahan haite paile tumi ei prema-dhana?” 17.165 89
ihara karana more kaha krpa kari’ 17.128 67 “kaha, —tahan kaiche rahe rapa-sanatana? 19.125 310
ihara vistara mane kariha bhavana 19.235 396  kaiche asta-prahara karena sri-krspa-bhajana?”’ 19.126 310
inhake puchiya, tabe mariha sabare 18.171 216  kaiche rahe, kaiche vairagya, kaiche bhojana? 19.125 310
inhara iccha ache ‘sarva-tirtha’ karite 17.16 9 kala ५2512 pare sei,—loke kahe ‘pira’ 18185 222
inhara sange ache vipra eka ‘bhrtya’ 17.17 9  kalenavrndavana-keli-varta 19.119 306
inhare sange 12/19 yadi, sabara haya ‘sukha’ 17.18 10  kaliya-dahe matsya mare, deuti jvaliya 18.104 182
‘inho na sparsiha, inho jati ati-hina! 19.69 280 ‘kaliya-hrade’ snana kaila ara praskandana 18.71 167
inhe pathe karibena seva-bhiksa-krtya 17.17 9  kaliya-sire nrtya kare, phana-ratna jvale 1894 177
ista-gosthi kari’ prabhura nimantrana kaila 19.247 401  ‘kaliyera sarire krsna kariche nartana’! 18.105 183
isvara-jiidna, sambhrama-gaurava pracura 19.220 388  karn prati kathayitum ise 1998 295
‘ISvara-svabhava’ tomara taka nahi yaya 18.119 191  kandhe cade, kandhe caddya, kare krida-rana 19.223 390
itidrk-svalilabhir ananda-k unde 19.230 394  kanta-bhave nijanga diya karena sevana 19.232 395


--- Page 425 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 423
kantaka-durgama vane anga ksata haila 17.222 122 kipa kari’ tenho mora nilaye aila 17.167 90
kanyakubja-daksinatyera vaidika brahmana 18.133 198  krpamrtenabhisiseca devas 19119 306
‘karma’, 03737 ‘yoga’ age kariya sthapana 18.196 227  krpara samudra, dina-hine dayamaya 17.75 37
karonya-matra hate, kantha chinda, bahirvasa 19.129 312  krpate durthara mathaya dharila carana 19.51 271
karya chadi’ rahila tumi gharete vasiya 19.21 257  ‘krspa’ bala, ‘krsna’ bala—bale uccaihsvare 17.205 114
‘kasipure’ na vikabe tanra bhavakali 17.120 63  ‘krsna’ bali’ pade sei mahaprabhura paya 18.209 233
kaste-srstye dhenu saba rakhila goyala 17.197 111 krspa-bhakta—niskama, ataeva ‘santa’ 19.149 328
‘kataka’ dahine kari’ vane pravesila 17.24 12 ‘krspa—bhakta-vasa’ guna kahe aisvarya-jiani-19.229 393
katite cahe, gaudiya saba kanpite lagila 18.166 214  krsna-bhakti-rasa haya amrta asvadane 18.181 360
kautuka dekhiya prabhu hasite lagila 17.43 22 krsna-bhakti-rasa-madhye € pafica pradhana 18.185 364
keha anna ani’ deya bhattacarya-sthane 17.59 30  ‘krsna-carana’-kalpa-vrkse kare arohana 19.154 336
keha bhame pade, keha karaye citkara 17.33 17 ‘krsna chadibena’ —jani’ rukminira haila trasa 19.201 376
keha dugdha, dadhi, keha ghrta, khanda ane 17.59 30  ‘krsna’ darasana kariha kali ratrye yana” 18.102 181
keha kande, keha hase, keha nace, gaya 19.39 265  krsnadasa kahe, —amara ghara ei grame 18.173 217
keha nahi kahe, sanigera brahmana na jane 18.4 131 krsnadasa kahe, —mui grhastha pamara 18.85 173
keha yadi dese yaya dekhi’ vrndavana 19.124 309  krspadasa—rajaputa, nirbhaya se bada 18.167 214
keha yadi sanga la-ite pache uthi’ dhaya 17.6 4 ‘krsna dekhi’ aila?’—prabhu tanhdre puchila 18.103 182
keha yadi tanra mukhe Sune krsna-nama 17.48 25 ‘krsnakaha’bali’prabhujala pheli’ marila 17.31 15
kesagra-sata-bhagasya 19.140 320  ‘krsna’ kaha, ‘krsna’ kaha, —kaila upadesa 18.206 231
kesagra-sateka-bhaga punah satarsa kari 19.139 319  ‘krsna’ kahi’ vyaghra-mrga nacite lagila 17.40 21
kesava-bharati-sisya, loka prataraka 17.116 61  krsna-katha, krspa-nama, nartana-ullasa 19129 312
‘kesava’-sevaka prabhuke mala paraila 17.160 87  krsna-kathaya prabhura maha-premauthalila 19.63 278
‘kes’ snana kari’ *kaliya-daha’ ydite 18.83 172  krsna kene darasana dibe kali-kale? 18.101 181
‘kevala‘rasuddha-prema ‘aisvarya’ na jane 19.203 377  krsna—krpalu, amaya bahuta krpa kaila 17.69 35
kevala ‘svarapa-jiana’ haya santa-rase 19.219 388  krsna-krpa vina kona ‘suk ha’ nahi haya” 17.75 37
kichu deva-marti haya parvata upare? 1859 160  krsna-krpdya 2/7 paya rasa-sindhu-pare 19.236 397
ki likhiyache sese kaha nirnaya kariya 18.198 228  ‘krsna’‘krsna’ bali’ keha gadagadi yaya 19.39 265
kintu 8/1 eka mui ‘svapna’ dekhinu 18.87 174  ‘krsna krsna kaha’ kari’ prabhu yabe balila 17.40 21
kintu ama-dunhara suna eka nivedane 17.9 5  ‘krsna’‘krsna’ kahi’ tatha haite uthi’ gela 17.122 64
kintu kahon ‘krsna’ dekhe, (८2/00 ‘bhrama’ 18.108 184  ‘krsna’ ‘krsna’ kahi’ vyaghra nacite lagila 17.29 14
kintu tomara prema dekhi’ mane anumani 17.172 93 krsna-lila-kalera sei vrksa puratana 18.76 169
kintu yadi latara sange uthe ‘upasakha’ 19.158 341  krspa-mantre karaila dui purascarana 19.5 248
ki tomara hrdaye ache, kaha mora pasa 19.22 257  krsnpa-nama diya kaila premete unmatta 17.46 23
kona chale gopala asi’ utare apane 18.43 151  krspa-nama, krsna-guna, krsna-lila-vrnda 17.135 72
kona mate raja yadi more kruddha haya 19.14 252  ‘krspa-nama’, ‘’krsna-svarapa’—duita ‘samana’ 17.130 68
koti-granthe ‘ananta’ likhena tahara vistara 17.231 126  krsna-nama laya, nace hana unmatta 18.122 192
koti-janmera papa gela, ‘pavitra’ ha-ila 18.205 231  krsna-nama-prema diya loka nistarila 17.151 83
koti-jaani-madhye haya eka-jana ‘mukta’ 19.148 327  krsna-nama-prema diya loka nistarila 18.128 196
koti-karma-nistha-madhye eka ‘jiani’srestha 19.147 326  krsna-nama-prema diya lokere nacaya 17.152 83
koti-mukta-madhye ‘durlabha’ eka krsna- 19.148 327  krsna-nisth, trsna-tyaga—santera ‘dui’ gupe 19.215 386
krida-kandukatari yena 18.38 149  krsna-prema tanha, yanha tanhara 'sambandha’17.173 93
krpa kari’ bala more ‘sadhya-sadhane’ 18.204 230  krsna-preme matta loka nija-ghare gela 18.127 196
krpa kari’ mora hate ‘prabhu’ bhiksa kaila 17.78 39  krsnatattva-bhaktitattva-rasatattva-pranta 19.115 304


--- Page 426 ---
424 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
krsnavese prabhura preme gara-gara mana 17.223 123 lokera sanghatta, ara nimantranera jarijala 18.141 202
krsna vina trsna-tyaga—tara karya mani 19.214 385 lokera sanghatta dekhi mathura chadiya 18.70 166
krsna yadi rukminire kaila parihasa 19.201 376 lokere puchila, parvata-upare yana 18.58 160
krsnaya krsna-caitanya- 19.53 272
‘krsne mati rahu’ bali’ prabhura vacana 19.93 293
M
krsnera karuna kichu na yaya varnane 19.49 270
krsnera sadrsa tomara akrti-prakrti 18.117 190  mad-bhaktah sva-pacah priyah 19.51 271
krsnera svaripa-sama—saba cid-ananda 17.135 72 mad-guna-sruti-matrena 19.171 352
krsnera visva-rapa dekhi’ arjunera haila bhaya 19.198 374  ‘madhava’ dekhiya preme kaila nrtya-gana 17.149 82
krsnere dekhilaloka,—iha 'mithya’ naya 18.107 183  madhava-purirasisya seita brahmana 18.129 197
krsne seve, krsne karaya dpana-sevana! 19.223 390 madhavendra-purira ‘sambandha’ dhara—jani 17.172 93
krta-samvandanau putrau 19.197 373  madhu-purira loka saba prabhuke dek hite ila 17.187 106
ksane huhunkara kare, —sirhhera garjana 17.112 59  madhura kantha-dhvani suni’ aise mrgi-gana 17.34 18
ksaneke ihan vaisa, bandhi’ rakhana sabare 18.171 216  madhura-rase bhakta-mukhya—vraje gopi- 19.191 371
ksane nace, hase, gaya, karaye krandana 17.112 59  madhura-rase —krsna-nisthd, sevaatisaya 19.231 395
kundera ‘madhuri’—yena radhara ‘madhurima’18.11 = 135  madhu-vana, tala, kumuda, bahula-vana gela 17.193 109
kundera ‘mahima’—yena radhara ‘mahima’ 18.11 135  madhyahna kari’ asi’ kare ‘akrare’ bhojana 18.78 170
kundera mrttika 1205 tilaka karila 18.14 136 madhyahna karite vipra prabhure kahila 19.58 274
kurvanty ahaitukirh bhaktim 17.140 76  madhyahna-snana kaila manikarnikaya asi’ 17.82 41
madhye eka 'Sisu’ haya tribhanga-sundara 18.60 161
magha-masa lagila, ebe yadi yaiye 18.145 204
L ‘mahabhagavata’-laksana suni bhagavate 17.110 58
mahaprabhu 3113 suni’ ila tanra sthane 19.61 276
‘labha’, ‘puja’, ‘pratisthadi’ yata upasakha-gana 19.159 341  mahaprabhu aila suni sista jana 19.254 404
laksa-guna prema bade, bhramena yabe vane 17.227 124  mahaprabhu cali’ cali’ 2115 varanasi 19.244 400
laksa-koti loka tahan haila ama-sange 17.73 36
laksa laksa loka aise prabhura milane 19.38 265 mahaprabhu dekhi’ ‘satya’ krsna-darasana 1898 179
laksanarh bhakti-yogasya 19.172 353  mahaprabhu dui-bhai tanhare milaila 19.65 278
mahaprabhura bhare nauka kare talamala 19.81 287
laksa-sankhya loka aise, nahika ganana 17.188 106  mahaprabhura yata 0303 0903 bhakta matra 19.123 309
‘laksmi’ dekhi’ ei sloka padena gosani 1864 163  mahaprabhu tahan suni’ anandita haila 19.37 264
lata avalambi’ mali ‘kalpa-vrksa’ paya 19.162 345
lila-sthala dek hi’ tahan gela ‘Sesasayi’ 18.64 163  mahaprabhu tarre yadi ‘bhiksa’ magila 17.181 97
lobhi kayastha-gana raja-karya kare 1916 252  maha-premavese nace prabhu pade kandi’ 17.56 29
maharastriya vipra aise prabhu dekhibare 17.101 52
loka-bhida-bhaye prabhu ‘dasasvamedhe’ 19.114 303  maharastriya vipra asi’ tanhare milila 19.253 404
loka-bhide svacchande nare ‘kirtana’ karite 18.79 170  maha-sukha pana, ye dina rahena nirjane 17.64 33
loka ‘hari’ ‘hari’ bale, kolahala haila 17.160 87
lokakahe,—marti hayagophara bhitare 18.59 160 ‘mahavana’giyakailajanma-sthana-darasana 18.67 164
loka kahe, —ratrye kaivartya naukate cadiya 18.104 182  mahavidya, gokarnadi dekhila vistara 17.191 108
mahisi-gana, laksmi-gana, asankhyaganana 19.191 371
loka kahe, —‘sannyasi tumi jangama-narayana 18.109 184  ‘makara-pancasiprayage’kariha siicana 18.146 205
loka kahe, —tomate kabhu nahe ‘jiva’-mati 18117 190
loke kahe, —krsna prakata kaliya-dahera jale! 18.94 177  makare prayage-snana kata dina paiye 18.145 204
loke kahe prabhu dekhi’ hana vismaya 17.161 88 mali hana kare sei bija aropana 19.152 333
lokera nistara kaila apane bhramiya 17.52 27 ’mamata’ adhika, krsne atma-sama jana 19.225 391


--- Page 427 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 425
mamatadhikye tadana-bhartsana-vyavahara 19.227 392 more krpa kara, mufi—ayogya pamara 18.201 229
manari tanoti saha-go-ganayos tayor yat 18.34 146 more Sisya kari’ mora hate ‘bhiksa’ kaila 17.167 90
mandira chadi’ kufije rahe, kibagramantare 18.31 = 144 more tumi bhiksa 0९/19, ei mora ‘Siksa’ ^ 17.177 95
manogatir avicchinna 19.171 352 mrga-mada vastre bandhe, tabu na lukaya 18.119 191
‘manusya nahe, inho—krsna’—karila nirdhdra 19.100 296  mrga-mrgi mukha dekhi’ prabhu-ariga cite 17.198 111
mari’ ddriyache, yatira saba dhana 1373 18.165 213  mrgera gala dhari’ prabhu karena rodane 17.207 115
mata, 83783, bhakta-gane dekhibaeka-bara 17.70 35  mrgera pulaka ange, asru nayane 17.207 115
mata, ganga bhakte dekhi’ sukhi hailamana 17.72 36  mygi-vyadhite ami kabhu ha-i acetana 18.184 221
mathura aila lokera karite nistara 17.163 89  makari karoti vacalari 17.80 40
mathura asiya kaila ‘visranti-tirthe’ snana 17.156 85  mukha-vasa diya prabhure karaila $ayana 19.90 291
‘mathurd’ calite pathe yatha rahi’ yaya 17.152 83 mukhe mukha diya kare anyonye cumbana 17.42 22
mathura-nikate aila—mathura dekhiya 17.155 85  mukhe phena pade nasaya svasa ruddha haila 18.162 212
‘mathura’-padmera pascima-dale yanra vasa 18.18 138  muktanam api siddhanari 19.150 330
mathuréra ghare-ghare kara’na nimantrana 18.129 197 muni chara, more tumi sarge lana aila 17.78 39
mathurara yata loka brahmana sajjana 18.130 197
marcchita hana tenho tahani padila 19.242 399
mathurd ydibara chale asena jharikhanda 17.53 27 ‘markha’-loka karibeka tomdra nindana 17.183 98
matta-hasti-yatha aila karite jala-pana 17.30 15  “markhera vakye ‘markha’ haila pandita haia 18.100 180
‘maya’, ‘brahma’ sabda vina nahi Suni kane 17.95 48
mayavadi-gana yate maha-bahirmukhe 17.143 78
mayaradi paksi-gana prabhure dekhiya 1744 22 N
mayarera kantha dekhi’ prabhura krspa-smrti 17.218 121 nace, kunde, vyaghra-gana mrgi-gana-sange 17.41 21
mayarera nrtya prabhu dekhe kutahale 17.217 120 17306730106 calila sloka padiya 18.33 145
milane ‘rasala’ haya amrta madhura 18.182 360  ndcite nacite pathe prabhu cali’ yaya 17.224 123
misra kahe, —‘prabhu, yavat kasite rahiba 17.99 51 nama cintamanih krsnas 17.133 71
misra krpa kari’ more sunana krsna-katha 17.96 50  nama-prema diya kaila sabara nistara 17.54 28
misra-putra raghu kare pada-samvahana 17.90 46 nama, rapa, guna tanra, saba—anupama 17.113 59
misrerasakha tenho prabhura parva dasa 17.92 46  nama-sankirtana kare madhyahna-paryanta 18.80 171
mitranivajitavasa- 17.39 20  nama-sankirtane seha nahe kona dine 19.130 312
mleccha-bhaye 3113 gopala mathura-nagare = 18.47 152 ‘nama’, ‘vigraha', ‘svaripa’ —tina eka-rapa 17.131 69
mleccha-desa, keha kahan karaye utpata 18.217 237 name ‘bhaktas catur-vedi 19.50 270
mleccha-gana asi’ prabhuravandila carana 18.181 220 namo maha-vadanyaya 19.53 272
mleccha-gana dekhi’ mahaprabhura ‘bahya’ 18.180 220 7373 sloka padi’ uthe, pade bara bara 19.47 269
mleccha kahe, —yei kaha, sei ‘satya’ haya 18.199 228  ‘nandisvara’ dekhi’ preme ha-ila vihvala 18.57 159
mleccha-pathana ghoda haite uttarila 18.163 212 78 paraye ‘ham caliturh 19.208 380
mlecchera hrdaye yena lage seladhara 18.178 219  narayana-parah sarve 19.216 386
moksadi ananda yara nahe eka ‘kana’ 18.195 226  naukara upare prabhu nacite lagila 19.80 287
mora ghara vina bhiksa na kariba kati 19.250 403  naukate kaliya-jiiana, dipe ratna-jfidne! 18.106 183
mora icchd haya— ‘hana vaisnava-kinkara’ 18.86 173  nija-bhrame markha-loka kare kolahale 18.101 181
mora nimantrana vind anya na maniba’ 17.99 5] nijaghare lana prabhure bhiksa karaila 19.248 402
“mora sahaya kara yadi, tumi-dui jana 17.4 3 nija-grhe anila prabhure sarigete lana 19.84 289
mora $akti nahi, tomara sarge yaite 19.29 261  nijajiane satya chadi’ ‘asatye satya-bhrama’ 18.98 179
mora yata karya-kama, saba kaila nasa 19.22 257  nija-krta krsna-lila-sloka padila 19.95 294


--- Page 428 ---
426 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
nijanurape prabhur eka-rape 19.121 308 patsaha dekhiya sabe sambhrame uthila 19.19 256
nija-sastra 09001" tumi vicara kariya 18.198 228  patsara age ache mora ‘sata jana’ 18.169 215
nikate asiyacha tumi, yaha vrndavana 19.240 398 ‘pavanadi’saba kunde snana kariya 18.58 160
nikate yamuna vahe $itala samira 18.77 169 phala-male vyadjana kare, vanya nana saka 17.63 32
nilacale chila yaiche premavesa mana 17.226 124  phula-phala bhari’ dala pade prabhu-paya 17.201 112
nimantrana lagi’ loka kare hudahudi 18.148 206 prabhate uthiyayabekarilagamana 19.238 398
nirantara avesa prabhura na dekhiye bhala 18.141 202 prabhu-age duhkhi haia kahe vivarana 17.123 65
nirantara dunhe cinti tomara carana 17.97 50 prabhu-age kahe,—ei thak cari-jana 18.181 220
‘nirantara krspa-nama’ jihva tanra gaya 17.111 59  prabhu-age kahe loka, —sri-krsna dekhila 1897 178
nirantara premavese nirjane gamana 17.67 34 ‘prabhu ail’ Suni’ candrasekhara ila 17.91 46
nirjana-vane (216 prabhu krsna-nama (205 17.25 13 prabhu caliyachena bindu-madhava-darasane 19.38 265
nirjharete usnodake snana tina-bara 17.66 34  prabhu-darasane sabe ‘krsna-bhakta’ ha-ila 19.109 301
‘nirvisesa-brahma’sthape svasastra uthana 18.186 222  prabhu dekhibare gramera saba-loka aila 19109 301
‘nirvisesa-gosani’ lana karena vyakhyana 18.200 228 prabhu dekhi’ dare pade dandavat hana 19.46 268
niscaya kariya haila hrdaye ullasa 17.84 42  prabhu dekhi’ haila tanra kichu vismaya (78/02 17.83 42
‘nisiddhacara’, ‘kutinati’, ‘jiva-hirhsana’ 19.159 341 prabhu dekhi’ karila loka carana vandana 18.93 176
nivrtta (1905 rahe sabe jani’ prabhura mana 17.23 12 prabhu dekhi’ premavesa ha-ila dunhara 19.47 269
natana kaupina-bahirvasa paraila 19.86 289 prabhu dekhi’ sabara mane haila bhaya-kanpa 19.79 286
ndtana sangi ha-ibeka, —snigdha yanramana 17.14 7  prabhu dekhi’ vindavanera sthavara-jarigama 17.202 113
prabhu dekhi’ vindavane vrksa-lata-gane 17.200 112
P prabhu dubaila krsna-premera vanyate 19.40 266
prabhu-guna gana kare preme matta hana 17.148 81
palaiba bali" sanatanere bandhila 19.27 259  prabhu jala-krtya kare, age hasti sila 17.31 15
pale-pale vyaghra, hasti, gandara, sokara-gana 17.26 = 13 prabhu janena—dina panca-sata sei rahiba 19.251 403
parica-rasa ‘sthayi’ vyapi rahe bhakta-mane 19.188 369 prabhu kahe, -- 2/1 mora hafidche nimantrane’ 17.102 53
pancaratre, bhagavate ei laksana kaya 19.169 351
panca-sata jana asi’ kare nimantrana 17.58 30 prabhu kahe, —bhala tattva sikhaila more 19.105 299
prabhu kahe, —kaha ‘krsna’ vyaghra uthila 17.29 14
pafica-vidha-bhakte gauna sapta-rasahaya 19.187 365  prabhu kahe, —kahan haite karila agamana? 18.93 176
para kari’ bhattacarya calila 205 18.157 210  prabhu kahe, —'kahan paila ‘krsna darasana?” 18.109 184
parama santosa prabhura vanya-bhojane 17.64 33 prabhu kahe, —ke tumi, kahan tomara ghara? 18.85 173
‘parari-brahma’-‘paramatma‘-jAana pravina 19.218 387
parampardya ‘vaisnava’ haila sarva-dese 17.49 25  prabhu kahe, —“mayavadi krsne aparadhi 17.129 68
prabhu kahena, —kaha, tenho pade krsna-lila 19.99 296
parapara-sanya gabhira bhakti-rasa-sindhu = 19.137 317  prabhu kahena, —thak nahe, mora “53181 jana 18.183 221
parvate nd cade dui—riapa-sanatana 18.45 152 prabhu kahe, —nija-sargi kanho na la-iba 17.13 7
‘pascima’-dese taiche saba ‘vaispava’ karla = 17.153 84  prabhu kahe, —sanatanera hafidche mocana 19.57 274
‘pascime’ asiya kaila yavanadi dhanya 18.213 235
pathana kahe, —tumi pascima mathuradui- = 18.172 216 [03800 kahe, —sruti, smrti, yata rsi-gana 17.184 99
prabhu kahe, —suna, rapa, bhakti-rasera 19.136 317
‘pathana-vaisnava bali’ haila tanra khyati 18.211 234 prabhu kahe, —tomara kartavya, amara vacana 19.240 398
pathe gabhi-ghata care prabhure dekhiya 17.194 109 10388 kahe, —tomara sastra sthape ‘nirvisese’ 18.189 223
pathe yahan yahan haya yamuna-darsana 17.154 85
pathe yaite bhattacarya saka-mala-phala 17.57 29  prabhu kahe,— “tumi ‘guru’, ami ‘Sisya’-praya 17.170 92
patheyaite kare prabhu ucca sankirtana 17.34 18  prabhu kahe, —upadhyaya, srestha mana’ 19.101 297
pati-sutanvaya-bhratr-bandhavan 19.210 381 prabhu kahe, —utha, krspa-nama tumi la-ila 18.205 231


--- Page 429 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 427
prabhu kahe, —'visnu’ ‘visnu’ 1/1 na kahiba! = 18.111 186  prabhu tare krpa kaila alingana kari 18.88 174
prabhu-kantha-dhvani Suni’ aise mrgi-pala 17.197 111 prabhu tanre sneha kari’ krpa prakasila 19.253 404
prabhu-karne krsna-nama kahe uccakari’ 17.221 122 prabhu tara arigamuche, sloka pade range 17.35 18
prabhuke bedaya asi’ hurikara kariya 17.194 109  prabhu tare uthana kaila alingana 17.85 42
prabhuke sunana krsnera guna-sloka pade 17.209 116  prabhu uthi’ tarre krpaya kaila alingana 17.93 47
prabhu krpa (८211 yaiche rdpa-sanatane 19.122 308 prabhuyabe vrndavana karena gamana 19.11 250
prabhu-krpa pana dunhe dui hata yudi’ 19.52 271 prakanda-sarira, Suddha-kaficana-varana 17.107 57
prabhu lana 8০13 visvesvara-darasane 17.86 43 prakasananda-age kahe caritra tanhara 17.105 56
prabhu na dekhilanija-ganera bandhana 18.179 219  prakasananda sripada sabhate vasiya 17.104 54
prabhu pathaila tarre karite bhojane 19.91 292 prakrtendriya-grahya nahe, haya sva-prakasa 17.134 71
prabhu-prema-saundarya dekhi’ loke 1820 139  prasanna hana 3073 diba, nd maniba 'dubkha’ 17.7 4
prabhura avasista-patra-prasada paila 1889 175 prasiddha patha chadi’ prabhu upapathe calila 17.24 = 12
prabhura avesa haila madhava-darasane 19.41 266 prastave kahilun gopala-krpara akhyana 18.55 158
prabhura carana dhari’ karenarodana 17.85 42  pratah-kale aise loka, tomdre na paya 18.149 206
prabhura caranodaka savarnse kaila pana 17.88 44  pratah-kale akrare asi’ randhana kariya 18.134 199
prabhura darasane suddha hafache tarra 17.123 65  pratah-kale asi’ rahe gramera bahire 19.245 400
prabhura gamana-riti parve ye likhila 18.56 159  pratah-kale bhakta-gana prabhu na dekhiya 17.22 12
prabhura gambhira-svare yena prati-dhvani 17.206 114  pratah-kale bhavya-loka prabhu-sthane aila 18.103 182
prabhuramahima dekhi’ loke camatkara 19.43 267  pratah-kale mahaprabhu pratah-snana kaila 18.155 209
prabhura pratape tara eka pasa haya 17.27 14 pratah-kale prabhu ‘manasa-ganga'ya kari’ 18.32 145
prabhura premavesa, ara prabhava bhakti-sara 19.76 = 285  prate prabhu-sarige aila jala-patra lana 18.90 175
prabhura premavesa dekhi’ brahmana— 17.225 124  prate uthi mathura calila gaurahari 17.146 81
prabhura premavesa dekhi’ loke camatkara = 17.157 86  prate vindavane (2115 ‘cira-ghate’ snana 18.75 169
prabhura raksa lagi’ ৮1013 ha-ila cintita 17.225 124  prathame gopala lana ganthuli-grame khuila 18.29 143
prabhura rapa-prema dekhi’ ha-ila camatkara 18.84 172  prathamei toma-sange 211 gauda haite 17.16 9
prabhura rapa-prema dekhi’ haya camatkare 17.101 52  prathamei upsakhara karaye chedana 19.161 344
prabhura‘sesanna’ misra savamse khaila 17.91 46  prati vrksa-lata prabhu karena alingana 17.204 114
prabhura $০53 prasdda-patra dui-bhai paila 19.59 275  prayaga-paryanta durhe toma-sange yaba 18.216 236
prabhuravaricha parna sabakarilagopale 18.41 150  prayage ail bhattagosanire lana 19.113 303
prabhura virahe tine ekatra miliya 17.148 81  ‘prayage’ siya prabhu kaila veni-snana 17.149 82
prabhura ye 303 haya, sei sire dhari” 18.151 207  prayage ८21210०, ihan na diba rahite 19.111 302
prabhure bhiksa dena salagrame samarpiya ~~ 18.134 199  prayage prabhura lila nari varnibara 19.43 267
prabhure dekhiya mleccha karaye vicara 18.164 213 prema-bhakti pdya sei caitanya-carane 19.256 405
prabhure miliya gela apana-bhavane 193 247 prema dehki’ upadhydyerahaila camatkara 19.100 296
prabhure marcchita dekhi’sei tabrahmana 17.219 121 prema ‘gupta’ karena, bahire na prakase 17.50 26
prabhure nimantrana kari’ghare bhiksa ५/2 17.89 45  premalapair drdhatara-parisvanga-rangaih 19.120 307
prabhu-sange cale, nahi 00306 dhenu-gana 17.196 110 prema matta hana tenho karena nartana 19.107 300
prabhu-sange madhyahne akrara tirthe aila 18.89 175  premanande nace, gaya, saghana hunkara 17.157 86
prabhu-sange nrtya kare premavista hana 17.158 87 ‘prema-phala’ paki’ pade, mali asvadaya 19.162 345
prabhu-sange rahe grha-stri-putrachadiya 1890 175 prema-seva kari’ tusta kailaprabhuramana 17.81 40
prabhu sri-carana dila tanhara mathaya 18.209 233  premdsmin bata radhikeva labhate yasyarn = 18.12 135
prabhu tanre kahila, ‘kaha krspera varnana’ 19.94 293 premavese krsnera kaila sarvanga-sparsana 1862 162


--- Page 430 ---
428 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta
premavese mahaprabhu bhamite padila 17.218 121 raghunatha-bhatta-gosani, ara lokanatha 18.49 154
premavese mahaprabhuha-ila vihvala 19.78 286 raghupati upadhyaya namaskara kaila 19.97 295
premavese nace prabhu hari-dhvani kari’ 19.42 267 raja kahe, —tomara sthane vaidya pathdilun = 19.20 257
premavese nrtya kare ardhva-bahu kari’ 18.177 218  raja-karya chadila, na yaya raja-dvare 19.15 252
premavese prabhu kare kirtana-nartana 18.36 147 raja more priti kare, se—mora bandhana 19.13 251
premavese prabhura deha-mana ayuyaila 19.99 296 rajaputa-jati, —grhastha, yamuna-pare grama 18.82 171
premavese prabhura mana haila talamala 18.68 165 rajaputa-jati mudi, o-pare mora ghara 1886 173
premavese prabhure karena namaskara 18.84 172 rajaputa-lokera sei grame vasati 18.26 142
premavese prabhu tanre kaila alingana 19.107 300 ‘ramadasa’ adi pathana—cakara tanhara 18.208 233
premavese prabhu yabe karena citkdra 18.178 219 ‘ramadasa’ bali’ prabhu tara kaila nama 18.207 232
premavista hana sloka padite lagila 19.73 283 ramananda-pase yata siddhanta sunila 19.116 305
prema vrddhi-krame nama—sneha, mana, 19.178 357 ramananda-svardpa-sange nibhrte yukati 183 3
preme gara-gara mana ratri-divase 17.229 125 rasa-gana-madhye tumi srestha mana’ kaya? 19.104 299
preme matta cali’ 313 govardhana-grama 18.17 138 rasamrta-sindhu-granthera mangalacarane 19.133 314
preme matta haila sei nace, bale ‘hari’ 18.88 174 rasa-sthali dekhi’ preme marcchite ha-ila 18.72 167
preme matta nace loka kari’ hari-dhvani 17.189 107 rati bhede krsna-bhakti-rase (22769 bheda 19.184 361
preme prabhu kare radha-kundera stavana 186 132 1211 gadha haile tara ‘prema’ nama kaya 19.177 356
premi krspadasa, ara seita brahmana 18.158 210 ratre mahaprabhu kare manete vicare 18.22 140
‘premonmade pade gosani madhya-yamunate 19.41 = 302 1306 (61700 svapna 0९/6/€, —prabhu 8/1 ghare 19.245 400
premonmattan sahonnrtyan 17.1 2 ratrye uthi’ vana-pathe palana yaba १75 3
priya-svarape dayita-svarape 19.121 308 = (५५/05 siddhi-vraja-vijayita satya-dharma 19.165 347
punah krsna-rati haya duita prakara 19.192 371 rapa gosani dui-bhaiye karaila bhojane 19.88 290
[00730 sari kahe suke kari’ (02110252 17.215 119 1009 gosani nilacale pathaila dui-jana 19.11 250
punah suka kahe, —krsna ‘madana-mohana’ 17.213 118  rdpa-gosaiira chota-bhai—parama-vaisnava 19.36 264
punarapi sei vipra prabhure puchila 17.124 65 rapa-gosarire Siksa kara’na sakti saficariya 19.114 303
pundarikaksa, 12002, ara laghu-haridasa 18.52 156 rdpa-gosani se-divasa tathani rahila 19.58 274
puri-dvaye, vaikunthadye —aisvarya-pravina 19.193 371 1009 kahena, —tenho 09701 haya raja-ghare 19.56 273
puri-gosanira ye acarana, sei dharmasara 17.185 100 rdpa-sanatana sabara krpa-gaurava-patra 19.123 309
“puri-gosani tomdra ghare karyachena bhiksa 17.177 95 1006 8003 kari’ taha saba saficarila 19.116 305
‘puri madhu-puri vara’ —kahe upadhyaya 19.102 297 ‘rapera milana’ sva-granthe likhiyachena 19.118 306
parnah suddho nitya-mukto 17.133 71
‘parnaisvarya-prabhu-jidna’ adhika haya dasye19.219 388 9
purnananda-prapti tanra carana-sevana 18.195 226
parvapara-vidhi-madhye ‘para’—balavan 18.197 227 5983 dina premavese nrtya-gita kaila 18.63 162
parva-ratrye jagannatha dekhi’ ‘aja’ lana 17.21 11 saba gopi haite radha krsnera preyasi 18.7 133
saba khandi’ sthape ‘isvara’, ‘tanharasevana’ 18.196 227
‘parve suniyachi prabhu karyachena sannyasa’ 17.84 = 42 saba loka dekhite ila ascarya suniya 18.19 139
purve vrndavana yaite karilana vicara 17.70 35 sabare rakhiba, yena keha nahi yaya 17.6 4
purve yena ‘daksina’ yaite loka nistarila 17.153 84
puspadi dhyane karena krsne samarpana 17.204 114  sabare upadesa kare ‘nama-sankirtana’ 1881 171
saba-sane krida kare hana tara vase 17.203 113
R saba sikhaila prabhu bhagavata-siddhanta 19.115 304
sabe asi’ kahe, —krsna pailun darasana 1896 178
radha-sange yada bhati 17.216 120 sabe ‘eka’-mata nahe, bhinna bhinna dharma 17.184 99
raga-anuraga, bhava, mahabhava haya 19.178 357 sabe ‘krsna’ ‘hari’ bali’ nace, kande, hase 17.49 25


--- Page 431 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 429
sabe ‘krsna’ kahe, sabara haila premavesa 18.206 231  ‘sannydsi’—nama-matra, maha-indrajali! 17.120 63
55 ca mene tadatmanam 19.207 380 sannyasira sanga-bhaye na manena nimantrana17.103 53
sac-cid-dnanda-deha, parna-brahma-svardpa 18.191 224  sannyasira sarige bhiksa kahan na kariba 19.251 403
sad-aisvarya-parna krsna haya saryopama 18.112 187  sanodiya-ghare sannyasi na kare bhojana 17.179 96
sad-darsana-vyakhya vind katha nahi etha 17.96 50 santa-bhakta—nava-yogendra, sanakadi ara 19.189 369
sadhana-bhakti haite haya ‘rati‘ra udaya 19.177 356  santa-dasya-rase aisvarya kahan uddipana 19.195 372
sadhana karile prema utpanna na haya 19.175 355 santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, madhura-rasa 18.185 364
‘sadhya-sadhana-vastu’ nari nirdharite 18.202 229  santa-rase— ‘svardpa-buddhye krsnaika- 19.211 382
sa eva bhakti-yogakhya 19.174 354  santa-rati, dasya-rati, sakhya-rati ara 18.183 361
sagane prabhure bhatta naukate cadana 19.77 286  santera guna dasye ache, adhika—‘sevana’ 19.221 389
sahasra-guna prema bade mathura darasane 17.227 124  $antera guna, dasyera sevana—sakhye dui 19.222 389
‘sahasra-vadana’ yarira nahi pa‘na anta 18.223 240  $antera svabhava—krsne mamata-gandha- = 19.218 387
“sahite na pafi ami lokera gadabadi 18.148 206 59300383003 ‘dgantuka’ paiye karane 19.188 369
sahite na pari 71471 viraha-tarange’ 19.239 398  ‘sarasvati’ ei vakye ‘satya’ kahaila 18.97 178
sahite na parimu sei ‘duste’ra vacana 17.183 98  sarat-kala haila, prabhura calite haila mati 17.3 3
Saila dekhi’ mane haya—ei ‘govardhana’ 17.55 29 42/14 padaye tabe radhika-varpana 17.211 117
sakala dekhiye tante adbhuta-kathana 17.107 57  sarkard, sita, michari, uttama-michari ara 19.179 359
sakala desera loka ha-ila ‘vaisnave’ 17.51 26  sarvabhauma bhattacarya—pandita prabala 17.119 63
‘sakara-gosani’—sevya, karo nahi jana 18.200 228  sarva-gopisu saivaika 188 133
sak heti matva prasabham yad uktarm 19.199 375  ‘sarvaisvarya-parpateriho—syama-kalevara 18.190 224
sakhya-bhakta—sridamadi, pure bhimarjuna 19.190 370  ‘sarvajiia isvara’ tumi dila darasana 17.97 50
sakhya-bhave dharstya ksamapaya kariya 19.198 374  ‘sarva-srestha, sarvaradhya, karanera karana 18.193 225
sakhyera asankoca, ldlana-mamatadhikya haya 19.231 395  sarva-tattva-nirapane ‘pravina’ karila 19.47 305
sakhyera 80103 -- ‘asankoca’, ‘agaurava’ sara 19.227 392  sarvatha-niscita—inho krsna-avatara 17.163 89
saksat bhramaye ebe sei vrndavane 17.228 125  sarva-tirthe haila tanra parama-mahattva 18.212 234
saksat dekhila loka—nahika sarhsaya 18.95 177  ‘sarvatmd&’, ‘sarvajia’, nitya sarvadi-svarapa 18.191 224
salokya-sarsti-samipya- 19.173 354  sarvatra gahiya bule mahaprabhura kirti 18.211 234
samatvenaiva vikseta 18.116 190  sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari 19.170 352
sambhrame 35373 diya rajare vasaila 19.19 256  sastre likhiyache, keha la-ite na paraya 18.199 228
“Samo man-nisthata buddheh” iti sri-mukha- 19.211 382  sattvika-vyabhicari-bhavera milane 18.181 360
Samo man-nisthata buddher 19.213 384  saundaryadi dekhi’ bhattera haila camatkara 19.76 285
Samo man-nisthata buddher 19.212 383  saundaryam lalanali-dhairya-dalanam lila 17.210 116
sanatana kahe, —nahe ama haite kama 19.23 258  savamse sei jala mastake dharila 19.86 289
sanatanakahe,—tumisvatantra gaudesvara 19.26 259 sa yat pramanar kurute 17.178 95
sanatana-mukhe krsna ama sikhaila 17.74 37 5€ amrtanande bhakta saha dubena pane 19.229 393
sanatana vyaya kare, rakhe mudi-ghare 19.9 250  sehatomara nama jane. —apane kahila 17.125 65
sanatane kahe, —tumi (21० mora sathe 19.28 260  5€ bhakta, tahar asi’ dekhaye tanhare 18.44 151
‘sanatanera varta kaha’ — tarhare puchila 19.55 273 sei dui-jana prabhura sarge cali’ 3/3 18.218 237
saficarya rape vyatanot punah sa 19.1 246 56 grame giya kaila gopala-darasana 1836 147
sandhya-kale akrare asi’ bhiksa nirvahila 18.74 168 sei jala-bindu-kana lage yara gaya 17.32 17
sarge cale, 'krsna’ bali’ nace matta hana 17.44 22 sei-kdle tapana-misra kare ganga-snana 17.83 42
sarge gopala-bhatta, dasa-raghunatha 18.49 154 sei ‘krsna’ ‘krsna’ kahe, preme nace, gaya 17.32 13
sannyasi—cit-kana jiva, kirana-kana-sama 18.112 187 sei krsna-preme matta, tare tribhuvane 18.123 193


--- Page 432 ---
430 Sri Caitanya- caritamrta
sei kunde yei eka-bara kare snana 18.10 134  sri-gopala-dasa, dra dasa-narayana 18.51 155
sei-mata pascima 0९43, preme bhasaila 18.221 238  sri-radheva hares tadiya-sarasi 18.12 135
sei-mata vrndavane tavat dekhila 18.56 159  sri-radhikayah priyata surapata 17.212 118
sei mleccha-madhye eka parama gambhira 18.185 222 $ri-rapa-gosani ila sri-vrndavane 18.54 158
sei pathe prabhu 120 kariye payana 18.144 203  sri-rapa-gosani tabe naukate bhariya 196 248
sei preme matta haya, kare krsna-sankirtana 18.219 238  sri-rapa-hrdaye prabhu Sakti saficarila 19.117 305
se-ratrirahila haridevera mandire 18.22 140  sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 17.234 127
sei saba loke prabhu prasada karila 18.127 196  sri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 18.229 242
sei sei sevanera 103/) nama—‘palana’ 19.226 391  $ri-rapa-raghunatha-pade yara asa 19.257 406
sei svapna parateka toma asi’ painu 18.87 174  Ssri-rapa-sanatana rahe ramakeli-grame 19.3 247
sei ta brahmane prabhu sangete la-ila 17.192 108  $ri-rapa $iksa dila Sakti saficariya 19135 315
seita ‘gosani’ tumi—saksat ‘iSvara’ 18.201 229  $ri-rapa sunila prabhura niladri-gamana 19.10 250
seita ‘pasandi’ haya, dande tare yama 18.115 189  sri-rdpa-upare prabhura yata krpa haila 19.255 405
seita pathana saba ‘vairagi’ ha-ila 18.210 234  sri-rapa-vallabha dunhe asiya milila 19.45 268
sei tine sange cale, prabhu nisedhila 17.147 81  sri-rape dekhiya prabhura prasanna haila 19.48 269
sei vijuli-khanna haila ‘maha-bhagavata’ 18.212 234  sri-uddhava-dasa, dra madhava—dui-jana 18.51 155
sei vipra nimantriya nila nijalaya 19.44 268  ‘“rivana’ dekhi’ punah gela ‘loha-vana’ 18.67 164
sei vipra—nirbhaya, se—mukhe 0303 dada 18.167 214  sri-yadava-acarya, ara govinda gosani 18.50 155
sei vipra prabhuke dekhaya tirtha-sthana 17.190 107  srsti, sthiti, pralaya tariha haite haya 18.192 225
sei vipra vahi’ nibe vastrambu-bhajana 17.19 10 $rutim apare smrtim itare 19.96 294
sei vipre, krsnadase, prabhu vidaya dila 18.215 236  stabdha गवे mala-sakha badite na paya 19.160 343
sei vipre sadhe loka nimantrana nite 18.132 198  sthanu-puruse yaiche viparita-jiane 18.108 184
sei vrksa-nikate care bahu gabhi-gana 18.160 211  sthavara-jarigama mili’ kare krspa-dhvani 17.206 114
seka-jala pana upasakha badi’ yaya 19.160 343  sthayibhave mile yadi vibhava, anubhava 18.180 359
se-kale vallabha-bhatta rahe adaila-grame 19.61 276  sthala-saksma-jagatera tenho samasraya 18.192 225
se-saba gramera lokera haya ‘prema-bhakti’ 17.47 24 stri-bala-vrddha, ara ‘candala’, ‘yavana’ 18.121 192
se-saba laksana prakata dekhiye tanhate 17.110 58  sucih sad-bhakti-diptagni- 19.74 284
Sesa-ratre uthi’ prabhu calila lukana 17.21 11 ‘“Suddha-bhakti’ haite haya ‘prema’utpanna 19.166 348
‘sevd’ kari’ krsne sukha dena nirantara 19.220 388  sudurlabhah prasantatma 19.150 330
seva kari’ nrtya kare vastra udana 17.87 44 suka-mukhe Suni’ k¢snera varnana 17.211 117
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau 17.136 73 Suka, pika, bhriga prabhure dekhi’ ‘paficama’ 17.199 112
Sighra asi’ more tarra diba samacara 19.12 251 suka-sarika prabhura hate udi’ pade 17.209 116
Sikhi-gana nrtya kari’ prabhu-age yaya 17.199 112 suka-sari udi’ punah gela vrksa-dale 17.217 120
Silarh sarva-jananurafjanam aho yasyayam 17.210 116  sukhaanubhavi’prabhukahena vacana 17.67 34
‘Sisya’ kari’ tanra bhiksa kaila angikara 17.180 97  sukhe prema-phala-rasa kare asvadana 19.163 346
Sivananda-senera putra ‘kavi-karnapara’ 19.118 306 saksmanam apy aharn jivah 19.142 321
snana bhiksadinirvahakarena abhyase 17.229 125  suna, bhattacarya, “ami gelana bahu-desa 17.68 34
‘soro-ksetre, age yana kari’ ganga-snana 18.144 203  suni’anandita hailaupadhyayera mana 19.94 293
soro-ksetre asi’ prabhu kaila garga-snana 18.214 235  suni’ananditavipra nacite lagila 17.174 93
sraddha kari’ ei katha sune ye jane 19.256 405  suni’ caitanyera sange ha-ila pagala 17.119 63
Sraddha kari’ Suna 103, ‘satya’ kari’ mana’ 18.226 241  suni’ hasi’ kahe prabhu, —saba ‘satya’ haya 1895 177
sravana-kirtana-jale karaye secana 19.152 333 sunileo bhagya-hinera na haya pratiti 18.225 241
sri-gopala darasana kaila bahu-rarige 1853 157  suni’ mahaprabhu isat hasite lagila 18.218 237


--- Page 433 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 431

suni’ mahaprabhu mane ananda pana 18.61 161 (৪8০6 dui bhai vindavanere calila 19.243 400
suni’ mahaprabhura maha-premavesa (02112 18.161 212 tabe ‘khela-tirtha’ dekhi’ ‘bhandiravana’ Gili 18.66 164
Suni’ mahaprabhura maha premavesa haila 19.95 294 (०७९ kruddha hana raja kahe ara-bara 19.24 258
Suni’ mahaprabhu tabe isat hasila 17.124 65 tabu likhibare nare tara eka kana 17.232 126
Suni’ mahaprabhu tanre bahu prasarsila 19.73 283  tabe mahaprabhu gela ‘sri-kamyavana’ 18.55 158
suni’—‘mahdprabhu’ yabena sri-vindavane 17.98 51  tabe mahaprabhu hasi’ balila vacana 17.176 94
suni’ prabhu kaila tanra carana vandana 17.169 91  tabe mahaprabhu sei brahmane lana 17.164 89
“suniydchi gauda-desera sannyasi—‘bhavuka’ 17.116 61  tabe mahaprabhu tarre nikate vasaild 19.55 273
Suniya gramera loka cintita ha-ila 18.29 143  tabe mangala haya, —ei bhala yukti haye 18.142 203
suniya pathana mane sarkoca ha-ila 18.176 218  tabe mala-sakha badi’ yaya vrndavana 19.161 344
Suniya prakasananda bahuta hasila 17.115 60 tabe prasamisiya kahe sei bhakta-gana 19.126 310
Suniya $ri-rapa likhila sanatana-thani 19.32 262 tabe rapa gosaii saba nija-gana lana 18.48 153
Suniya tad-anurapa kariba vyavahara 19.12 251  tabe sei dui cara rapa-thani 2112 19.31 262
Suniya vismita vipra kahe bhaya pana 17.171 92 (9806 sei pathana cari-janere bandhila 18.166 214
Suska ruti-cana vicaya bhoga parihari’ 19.128 311 (986 sei prasada krsnadasa paila sesa 19.89 291
sustha hana prabhu kare arga-kandayana 17.196 110 tabe sei vipra prabhuke bhik sa karaila 17.187 106
satra-rape kahi, vistara na yaya varnana 19.136 317 (986 sukha haya yabe garnga-pathe yaiye 18.150 207
$vado ‘pi sadyah savandya kalpate 18.125 194  tabe tanra pade rapa kare nivedana 19.238 398
Sva-pako ‘pi budhaih slagyo 19.74 284 (386 tare bandhi’ rakhi’ karila gamana 19.30 261
sva-prema-sampat-sudhayadbhuteham 19.54 272  tabe tanre kahe prabhu capada mariya 18.100 180
svarga, moksakrsna-bhakta ‘naraka’kari’mane19.215 386 (306 vipra prabhure (305 5115 nija-ghare 17.175 94
svargapavarga-narakesv 19.216 386 tabe yaya tad-upari ‘goloka-vrndavana’ 19.154 336
svarapa-gosani sabdya kaila nivarana 17.23 12  tadiyesita-jiesu bhaktair jitatvari 19.230 394
svardpa kahe, —ei balabhadra-bhattacarya 17.15 8 taha dekhi’ jidna haya— ‘ei narayana 17.109 58
‘svariipa’-laksane tumi—vrajendra-nandana’ 18.126 195 (3038 dekhi’ mahaprabhura ullasita mana 18.160 211
svasukha-nibhrta-cetas tad vyudastanya- 17.138 75 (405 dekhi’prabhura kichu sunite hailamana 17.208 115
‘svatantraisvara’ tumi—svayam bhagavan” = 17.29 = 39 (3803 diya kara sighra dtma-vimocane 19.34 263
svavidya-samvrto jivah 18.114 188 (2/0 ke kahite pare ksudra jiva hana 18.224 240
svayambhu, visrama, dirgha-visnu, bhatesvara 17.191 108 = (2/0 khandi’ ‘savisesa’ sthapiyache sese 18.189 223
tahan ‘govardhana’ dekhi’ ha-ila vihvala 1815 137

Syamam eva param rapa 19.106 300

‘Sydmam eva (01317) rapan’ —kahe upadhydya 19.101 297 (303) haite mahaprabhu ‘khadira-vana‘aila ~~ 18.63 162
Syama-rapera vasa-sthana srestha mana’ kaya? 19.102 297  tahan jhanpa diya pade preme acetana 17.154 85
tahan lila-sthali dekhi’ 8০13 ‘nandisvara’ 18.57 159

tahan sei anna bhattacarya kare paka 17.63 32

T tahan sei kalpa-vrksera karaye sevana 19.163 346
tabe ami yana dek hi sri-vrndavana 17.4 3 tahan sunili—gopala gela ganthuli grama 18.35 146
tabe ara sloka suka karila pathana 17.213 118 (3087 tahan snana kari’ premavista haila 17.193 109
tabe asi’ dekhe bindu-madhava-carane 17.86 43 tahan vina ei premara kahar nahi gandha 17.173 93
tabe avyahati haya, karilun niscaya 19.14 252 tahan vistarita haa phale prema-phala 19.155 337
tabe bhattacarya sei brahmane lana 18.139 201 1308 suni’ prabhura haila vismaya-premollasa 17.215 119
tabe bhattacarya tare ‘sambandha’ kahila 17.174 93 (308 vighna kari’ vana-pathe 12075 ila 17.74 37
tabe bhatta mahaprabhure nimantranakailda 19.65 278  taicheradha-kunda priya ‘priyara sarasi’ 18.7 133
tabe cali’ 313 prabhu ‘sumanah-sarovara’ 18.15 137 tam matvatmajam avyak tari 19.205 378


--- Page 434 ---
432 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta
tanha 1204 rapa-gosani prayage aila 19.37 264 19005 tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya 19.72 282
tanhara carane priti— ‘purusartha-sara’ 18.194 226 thakura lafia bhaga’, asibe kali yavana’ 18.28 143
tanhara mahima-pratapa na pari varnite 17.106 56 tina-bdre 'krsna-nama’ na dila tara mukhe 17.127 66
tanhdra vacana prabhu angikara (2112 17.20 11 ‘tina’ marti dekhila sei gopha ughadiya 18.61 161
tanhare puchila kichu nibhrte vasiya 17.164 89 tine 'bheda’ nahi, —tina ‘cid-ananda-rapa’ 17.131 69
tan-nistha durghata buddher 19.212 383 tire nrtya kare kunda-lila sanariya 1813 136
tanra bhaktye haya jivera samsara-tarana 18.193 225 tirtha ‘lupta’ jani’ prabhu sarvajiabhagavan ~~ 18.5 132
tanra mukhe ana sune tarira mukhe dna 17.48 25 tirtha-vasilutha’, dra caha’ maribara 18.175 217
tanra sange anyonye, tarra 53786 ana 18.220 238 tiruhitd pandita, bada vaisnava, mahasaya 1992 292
tanra seva vind jivera 73 ydya ‘samsara’ 18.194 226 titiksa duhkha-sammarso 19.213 384
tanra vipra vahe jala-patra-bahirvasa 17.65 33 toma dekhi’ jihva mora bale ‘*krsna-nama’ 18.203 230
tanre alingiya prabhu naukate cadila 19.242 399 toma dekhi’ krsna-preme jagat pagala 18.120 192
tarre prasna karena prabhura parisada-gana 19.124 309 10773 dekhi’ mukha mora bale ‘krsna’ ‘hari’ 17.128 67
tanre radha-sama ‘prema’ krsna kare dana 18.10 134 toma dekhi’ sarva-loka ha-ila nistara 18.110 185
tan-sabare krpa kari’ prabhu ta’ calila 18.210 234  tomdra ‘bada bhai’ kare dasyu-vyavahara 19.24 258
tapana-misra Suni’ asi’ prabhure 1011118 19.247 401  tomdra carana-sangapunah kahan paba? 18.216 236
“tara age yabe ami tomara nama la-ila 17.125 65  tomadra dhana lailatomdya pagalakariya 18.182 221
tara madhye avese prabhu karila gamana 17.26 13 tomdra ‘dosa’ kahite kare namera uccdra 17.126 66
tara madhye manusya-jati ati alpatara 19.145 324  ‘tomara grama mdrite turuka-dhari sjila 18.27 143
tara madhye mleccha, pulinda, bauddha, 19.145 324  tomara nama suni’ haya ‘Sva-paca’‘pavana’ = 18.124 193
tara madhye ‘sthavara’, ‘jangama’—dui bheda 19.144 323  tomdra pandita-sabara nahi sastra-jidna 18.197 227
tara sama suksma jivera ‘svarapa’ vicari 19.139 319  ‘tomdra prasade ami eta sukha paila’ 17.76 38
tara sastra-yuktye tare prabhu (८०115 khandana 18.187 223  tomdra sastre kahe €$€ ‘eka-i isvara’ 18.190 224
tara tale pindi-bandha parama-cikkana 18.76 169  ‘tomdra sukhe dmara sukha'—kahilddpane 17.9 5
tarko ‘pratisthah srutayo vibhinna 17.186 105 tomdre ‘bhiksd’ diba—bada bhagya se amara 17.182 98
ta-sabake tahan chadi’ age cali’ gela 17.43 22 tomdre na pana loka mora matha khaya 18.149 206
ta-sabara priti dekhi’ prabhu bhavavese 17.203 113 tomad-sabara ‘sukhe’pathe habe mora ‘sukha’ 17.7 4
tasmai deyam tato grahyam 19.50 270 tomate susnigdha bada, pandita, sidhu, arya 17.15 8
tasya hareh pada-kamalam 19.134 315  tomaya cakhaite tara kahi eka ‘bindu’ 19.137 317
tasyah suduhkha-bhaya-soka-vinasta-buddher 19.202 376  trayya copanisadbhis ca 19.204 378
tasyaravinda-nayanasya padaravinda- 17.142 = 77 = triveni-upara prabhura vasa-ghara sthana 19.60 275
tatas cantardadhe krsnah 19.209 380  trtiya-prahare loka pdya darasana 18.81 171
tate mali yatna kari’ kare avarana 19.157 340  “tumi dmdya ani’ dekhaila vindavana 18.153 208
tathapi puri dekhi’ [2/2 ‘vaispava’-acara 17.180 97  tumi—isvara, nahi tomara vidhi-vyavahara 17.182 98
tathapi tarra darsana-sravana-prabhave 17.51 26  tumiyadiuddhara’, tabe ha-ibe uddhare 19.56 273
tumi yaiche taiche chuti’ isa tahan haite 19.33 263
tato gatva vanoddesarn 19.208 380
tavad bhakti-sukhasyatra 19.176 355 uU
tenatavim atasi tad vyathate na kim svit 18.65 163
tenho dandavat kaila, prabhu kaila alingana = 19.62 277
tertho kahena, —“tumi 4८50094 tumi 17.77 38  ucchrikhala-loka-sange dui-loka-nasa* 17.121 63
uddesa karite kari dig-darasana 17.232 126
tenho kahe, yabe tumi devataya duhkha dite 19.29 261  udvigna ha-ila prana, sahite na pari 18.151 207
tentula-tale vasi’ kare nama-sarkirtana 18.78 170  updade vd chinde, tara sukhi’ yaya pata 19.156 338
tentuli-talate asi’ karila visrama 18.75 169  upagiyamdna-mahatmyam 19.204 378


--- Page 435 ---
Index of Bengali and Sanskrit Verses 433
upajiya bade lata ‘brahmanda’ bhedi’ yaya 19.153 335  vipra-grhe asi’ prabhu nibhrte vasila 19.45 268
ardhva bahu kari’ bale—bala "hari" ‘hari’ 19.42 267  vipra-grhe gopalera nibhrte sevana 18.30 144
‘utha, utha, rapa, aisa’, balila vacana 19.48 269  ‘vipra-grhe’ sthala-bhiksa, kahan madhu-kari 19.120 311
‘uttama brahmana’ eka sarige avasya cahi 17.11 © ৮013 kahe,—pathana, tomara patsara dohai 18.168 214
vipra kahe, —prayage prabhu 1275 yai 18.143 203
uttara na aise mukhe, maha-stabdha haila 18.188 223
‘tha, utha, rapa, isa’, balila vacana 19.48 269  vipra kahe, —$ripada $ri-madhavendra-puri = 17.166 90
uvaha krsno bhagavan 19.206 379 ৬1013 saba nimantraya, prabhu ndhi mane 17.102 53
vipre upahasa kari’ kahite lagila 17.115 60
‘viraja’, ‘brahma-loka’ bhedi’ ‘para-vyoma’ 19.153 335
\" visaya-kapa haite kadila toma dui-jane 19.49 270
vaidika, yajiika tumi kulina pravina! 19.69 280  visrambha-pradhana sakhya—gaurava- 19.224 390
vaidya-jati, likhana-vrtti, varanasi-vasa 17.92 46 = vrajavasi loka ‘goloka’ darsana kaila 18.136 200
vaidya kahe, vyadhi nahi, sustha ye 0९८01140 19.20 257  vrajendra-vrajesvarira kaila carana vandana 18.62 162
vallabha-bhatta tan-sabare karena nivarana 19.40 302  vrddha-kale rapa-gosani na pare ydite 18.46 152
vamas tamarasaksasya 18.38 149  vrksa-dile suka-sari dila darasana 17.208 115
vamsi-dhari jagan-nari- 17.214 119 vrksa-lata—praphullita, sei dhvani suni’ 17.45 23
‘vana’ dekhibare yadi prabhura mana haila 17.192 108  ‘vrndavana (2113 prabhu’—asiya kahila 19.31 262
vana dekhi’ bhrama haya—ei ‘vrndavana’ 17.55 29 ‘vrndavana calila sri-caitanya-gosani 19.32 262
vana-pathe ani’ amaya 0903 suk ha dila 17.69 35  vrndavana chadiba’ jani’ premavesa haila 18.155 209
vana-pathe duhkhera kahan nahi pai lesa 17.68 34  vrndavana-gamana, prabhu-caritraananta 18.223 240
vana-pathe yabena prabhu sri-vindavana 19.10 250  vrndavana-guna-varnana sloka padila 17.38 20
vana-pathe yaite nahi ‘bhojyanna’-brahmana 17.12 6 vrndavana haite aise kari’ kolahale 18.92 176
vana-pathe yaite tomara nahibe kona 17.18 10 vrndavana haite tumi gauda-desa diya 19.241 399
vaicha haila gopalera saundarya dekhite 18.46 152  vindavana haite yadi prabhure kadiye 18.142 263
vanya-vyaiijane prabhura dnandita mana 17.61 32 vrndavana-sobha dekhe yamunara nira 18.77 169
varanasi calibare prabhura haila mana 19.237 397  vrndavana yaite pathe haila sata-guna 17.226 124
vasa-nistha kaila candrasekharera ghara 19.252 404  vrndavane asi’ prabhu vasiya ekanta 18.80 171
vasila, sabara patha-sranti dekhiya 18.159 211 vindavane dubena yadi, ke uthabe tanre? 18.140 202
vasi’ mahaprabhukichu karena vicare 18.135 199  vrndavane haila prabhura yateka premera 17.231 126
vasudeva-devakira krsna carana vandila 19.196 373  vrndavane ha-ild tumi krsna-avatara 18.110 185
vétsalya-bhakta—mata pita, yata guru-jana 19.190 370  vrndavane ‘krsna’ 511, —sei ‘satya’ haya 18.107 183
vatsalya-rati, madhura-rati,—ei paficavibheda 18.184 361  vindavane punah ‘krsna’prakata ha-ila 18.91 175
vétsalya-sak hya-madhure ta’ kare sankocana 19.195 372  vrndavane sthira-caran 18.1 130
vatsalye gabhi prabhura cate saba-ange 17.195 110  vindavaniyam rasa-keli-vartarh 19.1 246
vdtsalye santera guna, dasyera sevana 19.226 391  vrsabharh bhadrasenas tu 19.206 379
‘vatula’ na ha-io, ghare rahata vasiya 18.102 181  vyaghra-mrga anyonye kare alingana 17.42 22
vayah kaisorakar dhyeyam 19.106 300  vyaghra-mrgi mili’ cale mahaprabhura satha 17.37 19
‘vayah kaisorakarh dhyeyam’—kahe 19.103 298  vyatanuta krpaya yas tattva-dipam puranam 17.138 75
veda-nisiddha papa kare, dharma nahi gane 19.146 325
veda-nistha-madhye ardheka veda ‘mukhe’ 19.146 325 Y
‘vedanta’ padana bahu sisya-gana 1205 17.104 54
‘vedanta’ Sravana kara, na ydiha tanra pasa 17.121 63 yac cavahasartham asat-krto ‘si 19.200 375
vihari gopa-naribhir 17.214 119  yadi vaispava-aparadha uthe hati mata 19.156 338


--- Page 436 ---
434 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta

yad yad acarti srestas 17.178 95 yas tu narayanarn devari 18.116 190
yadyapi bhattera age prabhura dhairya haila 19.82 288  yatakichu Isvarera sarva sal-laksana 17.108 57
yadyapi prabhu loka-sanghattera trase 17.50 26  yatha radha priya visnos 188 133
yadyapi ‘sanodiya’ haya seita brahmana 17.179 96  yat-krpa tamaharh vande 17.88 40
yadyapi vrndavana-tyage nahi prabhura mana 18.152 208  yatra naisarga-durvairah 17.39 20
yahan 1373 yaha tumi, tahani yaiba" 18.154 209  yat te sujata-caranamburuham stanesu 18.65 163
yahan nadi dek he (3037 manaye —‘kalindi’ 17.56 29  yavat premnarh madhu-ripu-vasikara- 19.165 347
yahan sanya vana, lokera nahika vasati 17.62 32 yavat tomdra haya kasi-pure sthiti 19.250 403
yahan tahan loka saba kahite lagila 18.91 175 ye-gramerahena prabhu, tathayabrahmana 17.58 30
yahan vipra nahi tahan 'sadra-mahajana’ 17.60 31  yeibhakta janera dekhite haya ‘bhava’ 18.42 150
yahan yei payena tahan layena sakala 17.57 29  yeigramadiya yana, yahankarenasthiti 17.47 24
yah prag eva priya-guna-ganair gadha-baddho 19.120 307  yeiicchi, sei kariba, naha ‘paratantra’ 17.8

yaiche bija, iksu, rasa, guda, khanda-sara 19.179 359  yei kunde nityakrsna radhikara sange 18.9 134
yaiche dadhi, sits, ghrta, marica, karpara 18.182 360 yei madha kahe, —jivaisvara haya ‘sama’ 18.115 189
yaiche taiche chuti’ tumi 2153 vindavana’ 19.35 264  yei tanre dekhe, kare krspa-sankirtana 17.109 58
ydite eka vrksa-tale prabhu saba lara 18.159 211  yei tanre dekhe, sei isvara kari’ kahe 17.118 62
yamalarjuna-bhangadi dekhila sei sthala 18.68 165  yei tarka kare ihan, sei—'markha-raja’ 18.227 241
yamuna dekhiya preme pade jhanpa diya 17.150 83  yeitomaraeka-barapdya darasana 18.121 192
yamuna para (1377 ‘bhadra-vana’ gela 18.66 164 yeiyei jana prabhura paila darasana 18.219 238
yamunara ‘cabbisa ghate’ prabhu kailasnana 17.190 107  yei yei kahila, prabhu sakali khandila 18.188 223
yamunara jala dekhi’ cikkana syamala 19.78 286 yenativrajya trigunari 19.174 354
yanhara darsane loke preme matta hana 17.162 88 ye tomaraiccha, amiseitakariba 18.154 209
yan-namadheya-sravananukirtanad 18.125 194 ye yei dosa kare, deha’ tara phala 19.26 259
yarra age trna-tulya cari purusartha 19.164 346 yoda-hate dui-janakahite lagila 18.215 236
yanra iccha, prayage yana karibe nimantrapa’ 19.112 303 yo ‘jidna-mattam bhuvanari dayalur 19.54 272
yarra yata sakti tata pathare santare 17.233 127 yuktikarilakichu nibhrte vasiya 18.139 201


--- Page 437 ---
General Index
Numerals in bold type indicate references to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta’s
verses. Numerals in regular type are references to its purports.
A Ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavita-bhis
verses quoted, 336
Ananta
writes millions of books on Caitanya,
Absolute Truth 126
according to Mayavada philosophy, Anger
69-70 absent in Vrndavana, 20
constituents of, 72 as indirect mellow, 365
explained by Prakasananda Sarasvati, Animals
55-56 induced to chant Hare Krsna, 2, 15-21,
has many incarnations, 298 23
living entity always fragmental part of, killing of as weed to devotional creeper,
188 342
three features of, 327-328 live in friendship with humans in
Vedanta ultimate conclusion of, 50 Vrndavana, 20
See also: Krsna, Supreme Lord of Vrndavana greet Caitanya, 110-121
Acchedyo ‘yam adahyo ‘yam Annakata-grama
verses quoted, 324 Bhakti-ratnakara quoted on, 142
Adaila-grama Copala Deity stayed at, 142
Vallabha Bhatta stayed at, 276-277 Anubhava
Adau gurv-asrayam thirteen categories of, 360
quoted, 350 Anugrahyasya dasatval
Adi-varaha Purana quoted, 366
quoted on Kamyavana, 158 Anupama Mallika
Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rapam as younger brother of Rapa Gosvami,
quoted, 298 263, 264
Agaraoyalas Anyabhilasita-sanya
as same community as svarna-vaniks, as beginning of pure devotional service,
96 385
Ahar-mama-buddhi Anyabhilasita-sanyam jAana
quoted, 189 verses quoted, 331
Akrara Aprarabdha-phalarm papam
saw Vaikuntha under water, 200 quoted, 49
Akrara-tirtha Arista-grama
Caitanya stayed at, 166 Aristasura killed at, 131
location of, 200 Arjuna
Allahabad as devotee in fraternity, 370
See: Prayaga begs forgiveness for offenses, 374-375
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya Aryan
description of rasas summarized in, description of, 325
392-293 one who chants holy name is an, 283
summary of Chapter Nineteen in, 245 Asat-sanga-tyaga-ei vaisnava-acara
summary of Chapter Eighteen in, 129 quoted, 340
435


--- Page 438 ---
436 ওঃ Caitanya-caritamrta
Association Bali
of Vaisnavas with Mayavadis, 53 as mahdajana, 105
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya becomes Benares
mad in Caitanya’s, 63 See: Varanasi
Athdto brahma-jijidsa Bengal
quoted, 342 Balabhadra Bhattacarya accompanied
Atheist Caitanya from, 9
as foolish and punishable, 189 toured by Caitanya, 27
Ati bhakti corera laksana Bhadrasena
quoted, 8 carried Vrsabha on shoulders, 379
Atma Bhadravana
uttered by impersonalists, 68 Caitanya visited, 164
Atmocitair vibhavadyaih Bhagavad-gita
quoted, 366, 367, 368 cited on existence of living beings
Attachment everywhere, 318
to Krsna categorized, 371-372 cited on hearing Vedanta, 50
to Krsna difficult without santa-rati, 383 cited on Krsna as goal of Vedic knowl-
to Krsna's lotus feet as santa stage, 383 edge, 103
Atyaharah prayasas ca cited on veda-vada-rata, 103
verses quoted, 340 peace formula in, 329
Aurangyeb quoted on Absolute Truth, 99
as emperor who attacked Kesavaji tem- quoted on aim of Vedic knowledge, 326
ple, 86 quoted on all-pervasiveness of the Lord,
362
B quoted on Arjuna dishonoring Krsna,
375
quoted on bhakti, 348
Balabhadra Bhattacarya quoted on eternality of soul, 319
accepted as Caitanya’s companion, quoted on exemplary acts, 95
10-11 quoted on fragmental living beings, 320
accompanies Caitanya, 11 quoted on Krsna as power of powerful,
amazed at activities of animals, 21 256
as Caitanya’s cook, 30, 32, 140, 290 quoted on Krsna helping devotee, 316
as Caitanya’s menial servant, 33 quoted on Krsna in the heart, 16
asks Caitanya to go to Prayaga, quoted on Krsna’s desires, 349
148-151, 206-208 quoted on mahatmas, 100
chastised by Caitanya, 179-181 quoted on oneness of God, 99
compared with Garuda, 39 quoted on perfect knowledge, 328
fears jungle animals, 14 quoted on personalism, 55
kept Caitanya from drowning, 201 quoted on preaching, 350
qualifications of, 8-9 quoted on qualities of soul, 324
Rapa ate at house of, 275 quoted on realizing Supreme Brahman,
worshiped by Tapana Misra, 44 74
Balakrsna quoted on sage’s equal vision, 16
as son of Viththala, 154 quoted on those fit for preaching, 334
Balarama quoted on total surrender, 49
as son of Rohini, 379 quoted on whimsical action, 64
carried on Pralamba'’s shoulders, 379 Bhakti
feared by Devaki and Vasudeva, 374 characteristics of, 353-354


--- Page 439 ---
General Index 437
Bhakti Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Krsna realized on platform of, 74 cited on unwanted creepers, 343-344
two side effects of, 352 told his disciples to write books, 314
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu Bhaktivinoda Thakura
introduction quoted, 315 cited on devotee as desireless, 329
mellows named in, 360 cited on retirement of Sanatana, 253
quoted on adbhuta-rasa, 367 cited on thirteen categories of
quoted on dasya-rasa, 366 anubhava, 360
quoted on devotee as liberated, 316 quoted on surrender to Krsna, 103-104
quoted on five ratis, 361-364 quoted on the tongue as enemy,
quoted on hasya-bhakti-rasa, 367 384-385
quoted on karmic reaction, 48 Bhaktya mam abhijanati
quoted on Krsna lifting Govardhana Hill, quoted, 74, 99, 348
149 Bhandiravana
quoted on madhura-bhakti-rasa, 367 Caitanya visited, 164
quoted on material desire, 356 Bharati-sampradaya
quoted on mellows, 365 Caitanya belongs to, 61
quoted on purification of the tongue, Bhava
73 Caitanya situated in, 671
quoted on sadhana-bhakti, 356 Bhavartha-dipika
quoted on sakhya-bhakti-rasa, 366-367 cited on God and conditioned soul,
quoted on santa-bhakti-rasa, 365 188
quoted on $anta-rati, 383 quoted on form and mercy of the Lord,
quoted on side effects of bhakti, 352 40
quoted on symptoms of bhakti-yoga, Bhima
49 as devotee in fraternity, 370
quoted on vatsalya-bhakti-rasa, 367 Bhisma
Bhakti-ratnakara as mahajana, 105
lists devotees who accompanied Rapa Bhoktararm yajia-tapasam
Cosvami, 157 verses quoted, 328
quoted on Akrara-tirtha, 166 verses quoted, 329
quoted on Annakita-grama, 142 81708316173 Gosvami
quoted on Ganthuli-grama, 148 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 155
quoted on Govinda-kunda, 148 Bilvavana
quoted on Kamyavana, 158 See: Srivana
quoted on Khadiravana, 162 Bindu Madhava
quoted on Khela-tirtha, 164 temple of at Prayaga, 265
quoted on Lohavana, 165 visited by Caitanya and Tapana Misra,
quoted on Mahavana, 165 43
quoted on $rivana, 165 Blasphemy
Bhakti-sandarbha of Mayavadis, 79
quoted on pasandis, 189 of Prakasananda Sarasvati against
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Caitanya, 61-64, 67
cited on enjoying results of pious ac- Body, material
tivities, 326 Krsna in guise of human being with, 379
cited on Govinda-kunda, 148 those absorbed in are pasandis, 189
cited on impure heart, 355 Brahma
cited on straightforward speech of pure appreciates opulence of Vrndavana, 21
devotee, 98 as mahajana, 105


--- Page 440 ---
438 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta
Brahma-bhdtah prasannatma Caitanya Mahaprabhu
quoted, 74 as original spiritual master, 180
Brahma-kunda as son of Nanda Maharaja, 191
Bhattacarya cooked food at, 140 assumed color of Radharani, 272
Brahman belongs to Bharati-sampradaya, 61
as topic of conversation at Varanasi, 48 considered by no one an ordinary
devotional creeper penetrates, 335 human being, 191
jnani attracted from pleasure of realiza- Deity of in Kuruksetra, 239
tion, 73 described by Rapa Gosvami, 26
knowledge of is imperfect, 328 establishes personalism on the basis of
Kumaras attached to understanding, the Koran, 224-228
77-78 found Deities in cave, 160-162
Mayavadis imagine form of, 185 mystic power of, 62-63
realization in $anta-rasa, 388 name uttered by impersonalists, 68
the Lord worshiped as, 378 people astonished at personal beauty
uttered by impersonalists, 68 of, 139
Brahmana personally followed behavior of Madha-
as puffed up with false prestige, 276 vendra Puri, 103
Caitanya bestows mercy upon proportional increase of ecstatic
Maharastriya, 404 symptoms in, 124-126
Caitanya refused invitation of, 52-53 sense perception of awakened, 131
characteristics of developed by devo- transcendental qualities of, 57-60
tional service, 284 whatever spoken by is nectar, 104
how to become, 195 Caitanya-bhagavata
meets with Prakasananda Sarasvati, quoted on Prakaéananda Sarasvati, 54
56-64 Caitanya-candrodaya
only accepts invitations from other, 31 quoted on meeting of Rapa and
Brahma-sarhita Caitanya, 307-308
quoted on forms of Krsna, 298 Caitanya-caritamrta
quoted on Goloka, 336 hearing about the Lord through, 27
quoted on karma, 48 Candidasa
quoted on Syamasundara form, 298 as mahajana, 105
quoted on vision of pure devotee, 26 Candrasekhara
Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan Caitanya resides at home of, 404
quoted, 327 greets Caitanya, 400-402
Brhan-naradiya Purana identification of, 47
quoted on chanting, 194 Caturtham kamyaka-vanari
Brayuh snigdhasya Sisyasya verses quoted, 158
quoted, 9 Chanting
as beginning of devotional service, 356
C Caitanya’s holy name, 26-27
immediately upon seeing Caitanya, 58
of Hare Krsna by animals, 2
Caitanya Mahaprabhu of Hare Krsna spreads in the West, 80
always associates with His internal of ‘Krsna’ not possible for Mayavadis,
soldiers, 181 67-68
as Krsna, 89, 195, 272, 297 performed by jungle animals, 15-21
as omniscient, 131 power of loud, 23


--- Page 441 ---
General Index 439
Chanting Dekhaha khadira-vana vidita jagate
received through disciplic succession, verses quoted, 162
25 Dekha nanda-yasoda-alaya mahavane
Cira-ghata verses quoted, 165
Caitanya visited, 169 Dekha, $rinivasa, ei akrdra gramete
Compassion verses quoted, 166
as indirect mellow, 365 Demigods
Conditioned souls devotional service not meant for, 335
agitated by urges of tongue and Krsna worshiped like, 378
genitals, 384 one should not become devotee of,
as treasurehouses of tribulations, 188 349
can’t understand spirit with material pure devotee should not worship, 351
senses, 72 worship Supreme Lord, 55
difference between body and form of, Demons
69 accept demons as mahdjanas, 101
Conjugal love make God impersonal, 55
as supermost mellow, 299, 300 Desires
santa-rasa-bhakta gives up material,
385-386
D Determination
as only protection against fall down, 8
Deva-dravinadi-nimittaka-‘pasanda’
Danda-grahana-matrena naro narayano quoted, 189
quoted, 185 Devahati
Dasasvamedha-ghata instructed by Kapiladeva on Sankhya
Caitanya instructed Rapa Gosvami at, philosophy, 195
304 Devaki
Dasya-rati as devotee in parental love, 370
described, 362-363 fears Krsna and Balarama, 374
Dattatreya Devata-pajita bilvavana sobhamaya
as impersonalist, 189 quoted, 165
considered mahdjana by /73/775, 101 Devi Durga
Death Brahman imagined as by Mayavadis,
consciousness at determines next body, 185
319 Devotees
of one at Manikamika 41 as desireless, 328-330
Yamaraja as superintendent of, 189 as the Lord's maintainers, 392-393
Deccan as worshipable, 270-271
Caitanya ate at house of brahmana of, behavior of as criterion for all other
268 behavior, 103
Deities behavior of establishes religious prin-
at Bindu Madhava, 43 ciples, 100
Caitanya excavates from cave, 160-162 change names after initiation, 232
at Pavana Lake found by Caitanya, empowered feel themselves low, 316
160-162 European and American are purified,
Deity worship 195
everyone should engage in, 349 examples of in different rasas, 370-371
necessary for neophytes, 333-334 impersonalists can become, 77-79


--- Page 442 ---
440 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta
Devotees Dharma
material opulence of, 331 as devotional service, 100
minds of compared to Ganges, 353 Dharmah projjhita-kaitavo’tra
must constantly serve Krsna favorably, quoted, 99
349 Dharma-sthapana-hetu sadhura vyavahara
must give up company of nondevotees, quoted, 103
340 Diplomacy
offer body in service in conjugal love, as weed to devotional creeper, 342
395 Disciplic succession
santa-bhakti-rasa, 366 Vaisnavas made through, 25
santa-rasa present in all, 387 Disease
see heaven, hell, liberation equally, 386 Prakasananda Sarasvati attacked with
three kinds of, 48-49 leprosy, 55
worship the Lord as Supreme Per- Diti
sonality of Godhead, 378 pregnancy of, 78
Devotional creeper Durjaty-arambhakarh papam yat
growth of, 335-338 quoted, 48
mad elephant offense kills, 339 Durvasa
must be defended, 340-345 considered mahajana by janis, 101
weeds growing with, 341-345 Dvadasaditya
Devotional service Caitanya visited, 167
as dharma, 100 Dvapara-yuga
as dormant within everyone, 333 Krsna appears in, 181
beginning of pure, 385 Dvaraka
begins with chanting and hearing, 356 attachment in awe and reverence in,
can't be used for material purpose, 335 372
compared to blazing fire, 284 Mathura is better than, 298
controls the Supreme Lord, 347-348 rasas of devotees in, 370-371
described in Koran, 225-226 Dve vidye veditavya iti, ha sma
is on absolute platform, 99 verses quoted, 254
knowledge and renunciation through, Dvija Haridasa
255 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157
mahatmas engage in, 101
means preaching Bhagavad-gita, 349
must be unmotivated and uninter- E
rupted, 100
not dependent of material conditions, Ecstatic symptoms
316 concealed by Caitanya, 26
pure not attained with contaminated devotees overwhelmed by, 151
heart, 355 imitated by pretenders, 61
results of, 49 manifested by Caitanya, 58-59
Rapa empowered in philosophy of, of Caitanya at Gokula, 165
304-397 of Caitanya at Govardhana, 138
seed of planted by spiritual master, 334 of Caitanya at Govardhana Hill, 145
six activities which spoil, 341 of Caitanya at Jharikhanda, 29
superficial is fruitless, 355 of Caitanya at Kesi-tirtha, 167-168
Supreme Lord understood by, 74 of Caitanya at Nandiévara, 159


--- Page 443 ---
General Index 441
Ecstatic symptoms Fear
of Caitanya at Radha-kunda, 136 advanced devotee devoid of, 16-17
of Caitanya before Copala Deity, as indirect mellow, 365
147-148 devotee of Narayana has no, 386
of Caitanya before Harideva Deity, 139 felt by Rukmini, 376
of Caitanya before Mohammedan of jungle animals by Balabhadra Bhat-
soldiers, 219 tacarya, 14
of Caitanya in Yamuna River, 85 of Vasudeva and Devaki, 374
of Caitanya on hearing flute, 212 Food
of Caitanya on leaving Vindavana, Balabhadra Bhattacarya prepares
209 Caitanya’s, 30, 32
of Caitanya seeing Mathura, 85 people not satisfied with Krsna's, 384
of Caitanya seeing peacocks, 121 See also: prasada
of Caitanya with cows, 110 Form of Krsna
of Caitanya with trees of Vindavana, denied by impersonalists, 55
113-114 original as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, 366
of deer embraced by Caitanya, 115 universal manifested to Arjuna, 374
of Mohammedans, 232 Fruitive workers
of universe seeing Caitanya, 192 desire material enjoyment, 328-329
Ecstasy of many one may be wise, 326-327
as aspect of prema, 358
of trees and creepers in Vindavana,
112-113 G
Educational systems
two kinds of, 254
Ei chaya gosani yara Canesa
quoted, 339 Brahman imagined as by Mayavadis,
Ei ramyavane krsna-lila 185
verses quoted, 158 Ganges
Se sri-govinda-kunda-mahima aneka Caitanya put on boat in, 303
verses quoted, 148 Caitanya’s tears like flow of, 59
Eko bahanam yo vidadhati kaman confluence of Yamuna and, 82
quoted, 188 Tapana Miéra bathes in, 42
Elements Ganthuli-grama
material qualities evolve in material, Caitanya saw Gopala Deity at, 147
396 location of, 148
sound vibration in material, 387 Garuda
Envy Balabhadra Bhattacarya compared with,
advanced devotee devoid of, 17 39
Evarh parampara-praptam Caudiya-sampradaya
quoted, 350 mahajanasin, 105
Gayatri
murmered by Caitanya, 16
F Chanasyama
as son of Viththala, 154
Faith Giridhara
as part of sadhana-bhakti, 357 as son of Viththala, 154


--- Page 444 ---
442 इ Caitanya-caritamrta
Goddess of fortune Govardhana Hill
seen by Caitanya at Sesasayi, 163 as best of devotees, 146
Goddesses of fortune Caitanya became mad embracing,
as devotees in conjugal love, 371 137-138
Gokula Caitanya circumambulated, 145
Caitanya visited, 165 Caitanya would not climb, 141, 151,
GCokulananda temple 153
established by Lokanatha dasa Gopala Deity worshiped on, 91
Gosvami, 155 Jharikhanda hills taken as, 29
Gokulesa non-different from Krsna, 153
as son of Viththala, 154 Govardhana village
Goloka Vrndavana Caitanya visited, 138
Brahma-sarhhita quoted on, 336 Govinda
devotional creeper enters, 335-338 as name of Krsna, 298
See also: Vrndavana resides in Goloka with Radha, 336
Gopa-gopi bhuijayena kautuka apara Govinda Gosvami
verses quoted, 142 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 155, 156
(0০313 Bhatta Gosvami as son of Viththala, 154
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 154 Govinda-kunda
as disciple of Prabodhananda Sarasvati, Caitanya bathed in, 147
55 location and qualities of, 148
as mahajana, 105 Govinda-lilamrta
Gopala Deity quoted on qualities of Radha and Krsna,
Caitanya visits, 147-150 117-120
came down from Govardhana Hill, quoted on wonderful activities of
141-158 Caitanya, 273
moved due to fear of Mohammedans, Guravo ye harer asya
145 verses quoted, 363
moved to Ganthuli, 143-144 Guru-krspa-prasada
remained in Viththale$vara temple one quoted, 332
month, 153
returned to His own temple, 150
satisfied all desires of Caitanya, 150 H
stayed in Annakata-grama, 142
went to Mathura, 153 Happiness
worshiped on Govardhana Hill, 91 as dependent upon Krsna’'s mercy, 38
Gopinatha not attained by whimsical action, 64
as son of Vallabha Bhatta, 154 of devotees as Caitanya's, 4-5
Gopis of Krsna and devotee compared to
as chief devotees in conjugal love, 371 ocean of nectar, 393
cheated by Krsna, 382 of the Lord from ddasya-rasa-bhakta, 389
glorified Krsna and Balarama, 146 Hare Krsna
hunted by Krsna in bushes, 295 chanted by animals, 2
plunges into ocean of nectar, 394 power of loud chanting of, 23
verse spoken by, 163-164 Harer nama harer nama
Gosvamis verses quoted, 194
represented by one’s spiritual master, Hari
339 See: Krsna


--- Page 445 ---
General Index 443
Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya Holy name
quoted on real brahmana, 284 living entities maddened by hearing,
Hari-bhakti-vilasa 23-24
quoted on devotees as worshipable, of Caitanya, 26-27
270-271 of Krsna not chanted by Mayavadis,
quoted on pasandis, 190 67-68
Haridasa Thakura offenses against, 189-190
as mahgjana, 101 one must be empowered to spread, 304
cited on delivering trees and plants, 23 qualities of, 71-72
Deity worship not necessary for, those who listen to deliver three worlds,
333-334 193
Harideva Deity wonderful effect of chanting, 283
as incarnation of Narayana, 138 Human beings
Caitanya offered obeisances to, cannot become Narayana, 185
138-139 divisions of, 325-328
Caitanya stayed at temple of, 140 have chance to understand Supreme
‘Hasta’, ‘pada’, ‘'mukha’ mora Brahman, 342
verses quoted, 54
Heart
Caitanya entered ২0095, 305 1
devotional creeper situated in, 336
direct mellows situated in devotee’s,
369 Ignorance
Krsna in everyone's, 16 doesn’t preclude attaining transcenden-
love for Krsna manifests within, 397 tal love, 397
of Rapa Gosvami impregnated with _ leads to sin, 49
spiritual potency, 246 iha yasya harer dasye karmana
Heavenly planets verses quoted, 316
$anta-rasa devotee doesn't desire eleva- Impersonalists
tion to, 386 as represented by Prakasananda
Hladini potency Sarasvati, 55-56
accompanies Supreme Lord, 188 can become devotees, 77-79
Holy name Incarnations
as absolute and blissful, 69 Absolute Truth has many, 298
as all-auspicious, 60 Independence
Caitanya sells, 79-80 Caitanya’s, 5
chanted by Bheels, 28 Indra
chanted by moving and non-moving bathed Krsna at Govinda-kunda, 148
creatures, 115 Krsna worshiped like, 378
chanted by women, children, etc., 193 Initiation, spiritual
chanted immediately upon seeing as part of sadhana-bhakti, 357
Krsna, 58 devotees raised to brahminical platform
chanting of received through disciplic by, 31
succession, 25 Intelligence
chanting of spreads in the West, 80 of Rukmini lost, 376
dog-eaters become saints by hearing, International Society for Krishna Conscious-
124 ness
Krsna present when uttered, 70 business of to publish books, 314


--- Page 446 ---
444 $ri Caitanya-caritaimrta
Tsana K
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156
I$varah sarva-bhatanarn hrd-dese
quoted, 337, 362
Tévara Pur? Kacnapada
as spiritual master of Caitanya, 96 Lokanatha dasa Gosvami as resident of,
155
J Kala Krsnadasa
fell victim to a woman, 7-8
Kaliya Lake
Jagad-guru Caitanya bathed in, 167
bogus Mayavadis known as, 232 Kali-yuga
Jagannatha Deity false religionists in, 326
visited by Caitanya, 11 Krsna never appears as Himself in, 181
Jagannatha Puri Kamyavana
Rapa Cosvami sent to, 399 Caitanya visited, 158-159
Jaimini Kapiladeva
considered mahdajana by karmis, 101 as mahajana, 105
Jalaja nava-laksani sthavara instructed Devahati in pure Sankhya
verses quoted, 318-319 philosophy, 195
Janaka Lord Krsna in form of, 353
as mahajana, 105 Karma
Jaya and Vijaya devotees not subject to, 48
cursing of, 78 material desires result of, 386
Jayadeva transmigration according to, 332-333
as mahdjana, 105 Karma-kandiya
Jharikhanda devotees do not follow processes of,
Caitanya passed through forest of, 2 205
limitations of land of, 24 Karmani nirdahati kintu ca
taken as Vrndavana, 29 quoted, 48
uncivilized people of, 28 Karma-yoga
Jiva Gosvami described in Koran, 226
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 155 Karmis
as author of Bhakti-sandarbha, 189 cannot understand devotional service,
as mahajana, 105 103
cited on becoming brahmana, 195 no end of desire for, 329
Jhana perfection of unattractive compared to
described in Koran, 226 bhakti, 348
material desires result of, 386 Kasi
two meanings of, 349 as name for Varanasi, 41
JAanis Caitanya arrives at, 41
attracted by mellows of Krsna's Caitanya sells holy name in, 79-80
pastimes, 73 sentimentalism not in demand in, 63
desire liberation, 328-329 Kasi-khanda
not liberated, 327-328 quoted on Manikarnika, 41
perfection of unattractive compared to Kataka
bhakti, 348 Caitanya passes by, 13
Junior Haridasa Kavi-karnapara
committed suicide at Prayaga, 156 as son of Sivananda Sena, 306


--- Page 447 ---
General Index 445
Kayastha community Krsna
53173 03735 clerks belonged to, 253 eternally situated in Goloka Vrndavana,
Kesava Bharati 336-338
Caitanya as disciple of, 61 feared by Devaki and Vasudeva, 374
Kesavaji first met Radha at Ganthuli-grama, 148
Caitanya saw Deity of, 86 fresh youth as best age of, 229, 300
Kesavaji gives prema to whoever bathes in
history of the temple of, 86 Radha-kunda, 135
Kesi-tirtha holy name of not chanted by
Caitanya visited, 167 Mayavadis, 67-68
Khadiravana hunted gopis in bushes, 295
Caitanya visited, 162 identifies Himself with living beings, 321
one who visits is elevated to Visnuloka, jiva never equal to, 186
162 mercy of upon Caitanya, 35
Khela-tirtha never appears as Himself in Kali-yuga,
Caitanya visited, 164 181
Klesa-ghni subhada moksa one gets spiritual master by grace of,
quoted, 49 332-333
Knowledge opulences of not considered in kevala
artificial should not be cultivated, stage, 377
351 played at Khela-tirtha, 164
results in equal vision, 16 presents Himself as ordinary child,
the supreme, 325 378-379
through devotional service, 255 protects His devotees, 329
transcendental and material, 254-255 qualities of chanted by parrots,
Vedas as material, 254 115-120
Koran satisfied if spiritual master is satisfied,
as revealed scripture, 224 350
establishes personal God, 224 Krsna bada dayamaya
saintly Mohammedan wanted to speak quoted, 384
on, 222 Krsna-Balarama temple
scholars of not advanced, 227 foreigners attracted to, 86
Krsna Krsnadasa Brahmacari
animals induced to chant name of, accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157
15-21 Krsnadasa Kavirdja
appears in Kali-yuga as Caitanya, 181 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157
as nondifferent from His body and Krsna-sakti vind nahe tara
name, 69 quoted, 304, 316
as ocean of mercy, 38 Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
as original Personality of Godhead, 298 quoted, 298
attachment for, 371-372 Krsna-varpam tvisakrsnam
attracts the self-satisfied, 76 quoted, 181
birthplace of at Mathura, 166 Krsnendriya-priti-iccha dhare
birthplace of at Gokula, 165 quoted, 338
Caitanya as, 272, 297 Krti-sadhya bhavet sadhya-
cheats gopis, 382 verses quoted, 356
compared to sun, 187 Kumaras
dictates from within, 16 as examples of santa-bhaktas, 370
desires of, 349 as mahajanas, 105


--- Page 448 ---
446 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
Kumaras Lohajangha demon
changed by aroma of tulasi and saffron, killed at Lohavana, 165
77-78 Lohavana
Kumbha-mela Caitanya visited, 165
great festival at Prayaga every twelfth Lohavane krsnera adbhuta go-carane
year, 204 verses quoted, 165
Kundera nikata dekha nivida kanana Lokanatha dasa Gosvami
verses quoted, 142 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 154
Kuruksetra history of, 155
Caitanya visited, 239 Lotus feet of Caitanya
clasped by Tapana Misra, 43
washed by Tapana Misra, 44
L Lotus feet of Krsna
attachment to as santa stage, 383, 386
Laghu Haridasa compared to wish-fulfilling tree, 346
accompanied Rapa Cosvami, 156 devotional creeper takes shelter of,
Laksmi 336-337
See: Goddess of fortune Govardhana Hill jubilant when touched
Lamentation by, 146
of Rukmini, 376 Mayavadis commit offenses at, 70
Leaders tulasi offered at, 77
control undesirable elements, 385 Love
Liberation animals overwhelmed by ecstatic, 2
awarded by bathing in Govinda-kunda, as aspect of prema, 358
148 development of compared to states of
attained by remembering Lord Siva, 41 sugar, 359
definition of, 74 for spiritual master, 9
desire for as weed in devotional widely distributed by Caitanya, 272
creeper, 341 Love of God
devotees do not accept, 354 as dasya-bhakti-rasa, 366
from material bondage compared to crippled by opulence, 372
witch, 356 developed by hearing narration of Nine-
jAanis desire, 328-329 teenth Chapter, 405
of Bheels, 28 devotional creeper produces, 337-338
of trees and plants, 23 Prayaga innundated with, 266
$anta-rasadevotee doesn’tdesire, 386 qualities of conjugal, 395-396
Living entities qualities of parental, 391-394
actual position of, 70
as fragment of whole, 187
as seen by maha-bhagavata, 16-17 M
as social animals, 340
8,400,000 species of, 318-319 Mad-bhakta yatra gayanti
maddened by hearing holy name, 23-24 quoted, 70
never equal to Supreme Lord, 187 Madhava
should never be compared to Supreme accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156
Lord, 186 Madhavendra Puri
size of, 320-321 accepted Sanodiya Brahmana as disci-
transmigration of, 332-333 ple, 91
two divisions of, 323-324 as mahajana, 104


--- Page 449 ---
General Index 447
Madhavendra Puri Manikarnika
as spiritual master of Tévara Puri, 96 Caitanya bathes at, 41
behavior of as essence of religious prin- Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
ciples, 100 quoted, 349
installed Gopala Deity, 91 Manu
Madhu Pandita as mahajana, 105
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157 Material nature
Madhu-puri by bhakti one transcends modes of, 354
See: Mathura holy name not conditioned by laws of,
Madhura-rati 71
attachment for Krsna in conjugal love, Mathura
364 as supreme abode, 297-298
Madhya-khanda attachment in awe and reverence in,
quoted on Prakasananda Sarasvati, 55 372
Maghe masi gamisyanti Caitanya travels to, 28, 81
verses quoted, 204 Mathura-khanda
Maha-bhagavata quoted on Govinda-kunda, 148
sees everyone equally, 16-17 Mathura-mahatmya
Mahabharata quoted on Pavana Lake, 160
quoted, 106 Maya
worshiped by some, 294 as topic of conversation at Varanasi, 48
Mahajanas conditioned souls engaged by, 332
explanation of, 100-102 holy name not involved with, 71
offenders at feet of, 104 Mayavadis consider Krsna's activities as,
of Gaudiya-sampradaya, 105 67
Maha-mantra strength of, 8, 180
candala can perform sacrifices by Mayavadis
chanting, 194 accept invitations from brahmanas, 31
offensive chanting of, 343 as greatest offenders, 78-79
purification by chanting, 280-281 Caitanya won't associate with, 403
See also: Hare Krsna, Holy name can't understand Krsna's absolute
Maharastriya nature, 69-70
brahmana receives Caitanya’s mercy, don’t understand Vedanta, 50
404 material feelings of entail bereavement,
Mahatmanas tu marn partha 363
quoted, 100 meditation of, 48
Mahatmas Prakasananda Sarasvati as one of, 54
under protection of divine nature, 101 Sankaracarya as original sannyasi of, 55
Mahavana Vaisnavas avoid association with, 53
as Gokula, Krsna's birthplace, 165 Mellows
Caitanya visited, 165 conjugal love as best of, 299, 300
Makara-sankranti direct and indirect, 365
See: Magha-mela holy name as form of transcendental,
Mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhitah 71
quoted, 320 of Krsna's pastimes attract (7201, 73
Manasa-ganga Lake opulence sometimes prominent in, 373
Caitanya bathed in, 145 See also: Rasa
Manase nirvikalpatvam Mercy
verses quoted, 361 bestowed by Krsna on everyone, 332


--- Page 450 ---
448 ও Caitanya-caritamrta
Mercy Nanda Maharaja
ignorant can receive, 397 animals approach son of, 19
of Caitanya upon Candrasekhara, 47 as devotee in parental love, 370
of Krsna upon Caitanya, 35 Nandisvara
of Krsna upon poor, 38 as house of Nanda Maharaja, 159
of Lord distributed by spiritual master, Caitanya visited, 159
334 Narada Muni
Rapa and Sanatana empowered with as mahajana, 105
Caitanya'’s, 307 story of, 332-333
Miche mayara vase, yaccha bhese Narada-pancaratra
verses quoted, 103 quoted on side effects of bhakti, 352
Mind Narayana
Balabhadra Bhattacarya pacifies as incarnation of Absolute Truth, 298
Caitanya'’s, 40 devotee of has no fear, 386
Caitanya’s associate must have has own eternal form, 55
peaceful, 7-8 Mayavadi conception of, 185
devotees know Caitanya'’s, 12 worshiped on Vaikuntha planets, 337
is always suspicious, 342 See also: Visnu
of self-realized person is attracted to Narayana dasa
Krsna, 76 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156
Mitho harer mrgaksyas ca Narayanah paro’vyaktat
verses quoted, 364 quoted, 55,185
Modes of nature Narayana-parah sarve na
living entity conditioned by, 72 quoted, 331
Mohammedans Narottama dasa Thakura
became mendicants, 234 quoted on sadhu, 102
as unaware that the Lord's body is selected Lokanatha dasa Gosvamias his
worshipable, 229 guru, 155
Mohini stresses pleasing previous acarya, 339
kept a bucket of nectar at Prayaga, 204 Nasav rsir yasya mata na bhinnam
Monism quoted, 99
characterized by spiritual silence, 327 Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnu
Moon quoted, 104
scientists say there 15 no life on, 318 Nawab Hussain Shah
Mundaka Upanisad as mleccha-yavana, 256
quoted on two kinds of educational visits Sanatana at home, 255-260
systems, 254 Neha yat karma dharmaya
Mystic power verses quoted, 102
described in Koran, 227 Nicaih praudha-bhayat svayam
verses quoted, 148
Nita krodha-ratih pustirm
N quoted, 368
Nitya-siddha-krspa-prema ‘sadhya’
verses quoted, 333
Na ca tasman manusyesu Nrsirmha
quoted, 349 as incarnation of Absolute Truth, 298
Na jayate mriyate va kadacin Nyasadesa-vivarana
verses quoted, 319 Viththala as author of, 154


--- Page 451 ---
General Index 449
০ Parama-karana isvare 10০03 nahi mane
verses quoted, 104
Paramatma
Offenses realization in santa-rasa, 388
against holy name, 189-190 those in santa-rati attached to, 362
against holy name by Mayavadis, 67-68 See also: Supersoul
at feet of Vaisnava, 339 Parampara
of Arjuna against Krsna, 374-375 hearing Caitanya through, 27
of Mayavadis, 78-79 Parasya saktir vividhaiva srayate
Orn namo narayana quoted, 304
quoted, 185 Pasandi
Opulences explained, 189-190
cripple love of Cod, 372 Pastimes of Caitanya
of Krsna not considered in kevala stage, whoever argues about is a fool, 242
377 Pastimes of Krsna
of Krsna understood in dasya-rasa, 388 72/77 attracted by mellows of, 73
of Vrndavana appreciated by Brahma, Raghupati Upadhyaya composed verses
21 about, 294
sometimes prominent in mellows, 373 revived by Rapa Gosvami, 246
Orissa Ripa and Sandtana empowered to
attacked by Nawab Hussain Shah, 260 enunciate, 307, 308
toured by Caitanya, 27 Patafjali Rsi
considered mahajana by yogis, 101
Pathana Vaisnava
P- toured and glorified Caitanya, 234
Pavana Lake
Padmanabha Caitanya bathed in, 160
as father of Lokanatha dasa Gosvami, Pavane sarasi snatva
155 verses quoted, 160
Padma Purana Peace
quoted on holy name, 71 formula for in Gita, 329
quoted on Krsna’s presence, 70 Phaguya laiya keha ganthi
quoted on sin, 49 quoted, 148
verses quoted, 134 Prabhodhananda Sarasvati
Padyavali identification of, 55
quoted on supreme form of Krsna, 300 Prahlada Maharaja
verses of Raghupati Upadhyaya in as mahajana, 105
quoted, 294-295 Pragalbha
Paricadasi Citradipa as younger brother of Lokanatha dasa
quoted on size of soul, 321 Gosvami, 155
Paiica-daksinatya-brahmanas Prakdsananda Sarasvati
as pure brahmanas, 199 blasphemes against Caitanya, 61-64,
Parica-gauda brahmanas 67
as pure brahmanas, 199 discussed Vedanta-satra with Caitanya,
Panditah sama-darsinah 45
quoted, 74 explains impersonalism, 55
Paramaharnsas meets with a brahmana, 56-64
Bhagavatam meant for, 254 taught Vedanta philosophy, 54


--- Page 452 ---
450 $ri Caitanya-caritimrta
Prakrta-sahajiyas Purusa
won't read or hear scriptures, 314 the Lord worshiped as, 378
Pralamba Pustirh nija-vibhavadyair
carried Balarama on shoulders, 379 quoted, 369
Prasada
devotee conquers tongue by eating,
385 R
taken by Africans, 28
See also: Food Radha-kunda
Praskandana discovered by Caitanya, 131
Caitanya visited, 167 Krsna gives prema to whoever bathes
Prayaga in, 135
Caitanya visits, 82 lost to everyone's vision, 131
Magha-mela at, 204-205 prayers of Caitanya to, 132-136
Prayena veda tad idam na mahajano "yam qualities of, 134-136
verses quoted, 103 Radharani
Prayers as dearmost gopi, 133
by Krsnadasa Kavirdja, 257 as embodiment of ecstatic potency,
by Krsna to Vasudeva and Devaki, 336
373 Krsna disappears from, 381-382
of Caitanya to Govardhana Hill, 146 Caitanya assumed color of, 272
of Caitanya to Radha-kunda, 132-136 qualities of chanted by parrots, 118
offered by Balabhadra Bhattacarya, Raghu
38-40 as son of Tapana Misra, 46
of Rapa Gosvami to Caitanya, 272-273 massages Caitanya’s legs, 46
Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti Raghunatha Bhatta
verses quoted, 298 as mahajana, 105
Prem Krsnadasa Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 154
Pride as mahajana, 105
of Radharanti, 381 as son of Viththala, 154
Pundarikaksa Raghupati Upadhyaya
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156 Caitanya’s conversation with, 293-301
Pure devotees Rajaputa Krsnadasa
fulfill Krsna’s desires, 349 renounced family to serve Caitanya,
difficult to find, 327-328 175
emerged from seeing Caitanya, 26 spoke bravely to Pathana soldiers,
empowered by the Lord, 26 217-218
forget Krsna's opulences, 377 visited Caitanya, 172-175
have power to challenge high-caste Ramacandra
non-Vaisnavas, 98 vibration of holy name of, 41
not found at Kasi, 80 Ramadasa
purify by vibration, 25 as saintly Mohammedan, 232
situated in principal mellows, 369 Ramakeli
Purification Ripa and Sanidtana met Caitanya at,
by chanting Hare Krsna, 280-281 247
by worshiping the Lord's form, 55 Ramananda Raya
of the tongue, 73 Caitanya taught Rapa conclusions of,
through disciplic succession, 25 305


--- Page 453 ---
General Index 451
Ramananda Raya Rapa Gosvami
consultation of Caitanya with, 3 sent to Vrndavana and Jagannatha Pur,
Rasa 399
attachment to Krsna’s lotus feet as san- would not climb Govardhana Hill, 152
ta, 383-384, 386
material desires given up by one in san- ৪
ta, 385-386
qualities of dasya, 388-389
qualities of sakhya, 389-391 Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha
qualities of santa, 386-387 as original form of Supreme Lord, 306
Rasa-lila Sacred thread
performed on bank of Radha-kunda, of brahmanas, 195
134 Sacrifices
Krsna and Radharani leave, 381 can be performed by offenseless
Regulative principles chanter, 194-195
devotional creeper protected by, 340 Prayaga known for, 82
make one perfect, 342 Sadhana-bhakti
Rukmin? parts of described, 357
Krsna jokes with, 376-377 Saivatsaha-ratih sthayi
Religion quoted, 368
as following the orders of the Lord, Sakhi dunha vastre ganthi
325-326 quoted, 148
different types of for different bodies Sakhya-rati
and minds, 100 described, 363
genuine, enables one to love God, 99 Salagrama sila
mustlead to devotional service, 102 food offered to, 134
Renunciation Sama
of Prakdsananda Sarasvati as artificial, See: Santa-rati
61 Sambhu
through devotional service, 255 as mahajana, 105
Rohini See also: Siva
as mother of Balarama, 379 Sarsari-cintamanir atra yasmat
Rapa Gosvami quoted, 41
activities of in Vrndavana, 311-313 Samvit potency
as embodiment of Caitanya’s ecstatic accompanies Supreme Lord, 188
love, 308 Samyary masrnita-svanto
as mahdajana, 105 verses quoted, 357
associates of at Mathura listed, Sanatana Gosvami
154-157 activities of in Vrndavana, 311-313
cited on Prakdsananda Sarasvati, 61 as mahajana, 105
distribution of wealth by, 249-250 discussed Bhagavatam with brahmanas,
empowered in philosophy of devo- 253-255
tional service, 304-397 gave up government service, 252
excommunicated from brahmana Krsna's lesson through mouth of, 37
society, 281 would not climb Govardhana Hill, 152
fainting of, 399 Sankaracarya
quoted on taking shelter of guru, 350 accepts the Lord's form as transcenden-
revived Krsna's pastimes, 246 tal, 55
saw (00813 Deity at Mathura, 153 quoted on Narayana, 185


--- Page 454 ---
452 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Sankaracarya Senses
Sufi sampradaya derived from, 224 become purified as side effect of bhakti,
Sannyasi ‘prakasananda’ vasaye 352
verses quoted, 55 control of, 385
Sannyasis control of as dama, 384
as moving Narayana, 185 Krsna cant be understood by material,
Caitanya won't associate with 72-73
Mayavadi, 403 purified must engage in the Lord's ser-
Mayavadi, described as demons, 188 vice, 351
only accept invitations from brahmanas, Sesasayi
31 Caitanya saw Laksmi at, 163
Vaisnava avoid association with Sex
Mayavadi, 53 desire for in company of Caitanya, 7-8
Sanodiya brahmana overeating leads to illicit, 384
as disciple of Madhavendra Puri, Siddhi-vraja
90-91 unattractive compared to bhakti, 348
Caitanya stayed with, 166 Sin
danced with Caitanya, 87 three stages of, 49
spoke bravely to Pathana soldiers, tongue urges one to commit, 384
214-216 Siva
Santa-rasa Brahman imagined as by Mayavadis,
prevalent in Vaikuntha, 337 185
described, 362 earring of at Manikarnika, 41
Sarasvati River Sivananda Sena
not presently visible at Prayaga, 239 Kavi-karnapira as son of, 306
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya Sodasa-grantha
becomes a madman, 63 as book by Vallabha Bhatta, 276
Sarva-dharman parityajya Soro-ksetra
quoted, 49, 99 Caitanya visited, 236
Sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto Soul
quoted, 16 as eternal, 319
Sa vai (26417151 paro dharmo yato Gita quoted on qualities of, 324
quoted, 99-100, 325 Krsna simultaneously body and, 70
Scientists Smarta-brahmanas
bewildered by Krsna’'s external energy, accept Mayavadi sannydsis as
101 Narayana, 187
say there is no life on moon, 318 Spiritual master
Sei annamrta khao, radha-krsna anyone seeing Caitanya becomes, 193
quoted, 385 as transparent via medium, 180
Self-realization by grace of Krsna one gets, 332-333
as state of attachment to Krsna's lotus devotees engaged by, 350
feet, 383 disciple has love for, 9
Krsna attracts one from bliss of, 76 Cosvamis represented by one's, 339
limited pleasure of, 74 one can keep direct company with, 340
Sense gratification plants seed of devotional service, 334
desire for as weed to devotional Sravana-kirtana
creeper, 341 devotional creeper watered by,
offensive chanting leads to, 343 333-334, 336, 337-338


--- Page 455 ---
General Index 453
Sridama Srimad-Bhagavatam
as devotee in fraternity, 370 quoted on receiving knowledge from
carried on Krsna's shoulders, 379 spiritual master, 9
Sridhara Svami quoted on size of soul, 320, 322-323
as mahajana, 105 quoted on Sukadeva Gosvami, 75
ऽ Gopala dasa quoted on those fit to discuss
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156, 157 Bhagavatam, 254
ডা Govinda quoted on Vasudeva and Devaki's fear,
, accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157 374
Sri-krsna-caitanya-vani—amrtera dhara quoted on Vindavana, 21
, quoted, 104 quoted on worship of the Lord, 378
Srimad-Bhagavatam spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami, 75
as spotless Purana, 254 Sridhara Svami most well-known com-
as transcendental knowledge, 254-255 mentator on, 105
cited on jAanis as not liberated, 327 Subodhini commentary on, 154
discussed by Sanatana and brahmanas, symptoms of first-class devotee in, 58
253-255 Srimad-bhagavatarh puranam
highest religion described in, 325-326 verses quoted, 254
list of twelve mahajanas in, 105 Sri Paramananda Bhattacarya
on unauthorized mahajanas, 102-103 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 157
quoted on animals approaching Krsna, ऽ Vallabha
19 See: Anupama Mallika
quoted on bhakti, 352-354 57 Vallabha Bhatta
quoted on cheating religions, 99 descendants of listed, 154
quoted on controlling senses, 384 Srivana
quoted on devotee of Narayana as Caitanya visited, 165
peaceful, 330, 331 Srrigara-rasa-mandana
quoted on devotees’ vision, 386 Viththala as author of, 154
quoted on dharma, genuine religion, Stavavali
99-100 quoted on Annakata-grama, 142
quoted on effect of chanting holy quoted on Covinda-kunda, 148
name, 283 Sthayibhava
quoted on Covardhana Hill, 146 as combined stages of love, 359
quoted on Krsna as ordinary child, 379 Sthayibhavo vibhavadyaih
quoted on Krsna as original Personality quoted, 366-367
of Godhead, 298 Subodhini-tika
quoted on Krsna cheating gopis, 382 as book by Vallabha Bhatta, 276
quoted on Krsna joking with Rukmini, as commentary on S$rimad-Bhagavatam,
377 154
quoted on Krsna's appearance in Kali- Sudama
yuga, 181 as devotee in fraternity, 370
quoted on Krsna's disappearance from Sadras
Radharani, 381 Bheels lower than, 28
quoted on Krsna's lotus feet, 163-164 Sufis
quoted on Kumaras, 78 as Mohammedan impersonalist
quoted on power of holy name, 195 sampradaya, 224
quoted on Pralambasura episode, 380 Suffering
quoted on realizing Absolute Truth, 255 nullified by devotional service, 49


--- Page 456 ---
454 ও Caitanya-caritamrta
Sukadeva Gosvami Syamasundara
as mahajana, 105 as the supreme form, 297-300
as son of Vyasadeva, 75
speaks Bhagavatam, 75 T
Sumanah Lake
Caitanya saw Govardhana Hill from,
137 Tac chraddadhanah munayo
Supersoul verses quoted, 255
knowledge of is imperfect, 328 Talakhadi
the Lord worshiped as, 378 Lokanatha dasa Gosvami resident of,
See also: Paramatma 155
Supreme Brahman location of, 155
can be understood in human life, 342 Tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane
Supreme Lord verses quoted, 339
accompanied by potencies, 188 Tapana Misra
all-pervasive potency, 336-337 as father of Raghu, 46
as sac-cid-ananda, 40 pastimes of Caitanya with, 42-46,
as situated in everyone's heart, 362 402-404
controlled by devotional service, 348 speaks Krsna-katha to Candrasekhara,
desires of, 349 50
has multi potencies, 304 Tara madhye jihva ati
imitators of, 102 quoted, 384
impersonal feature relished by santa- Tate chaya darsana haite ‘tattva’ nahi jani
bhakti-rasa devotees, 366 quoted, 104
known by Vedanta philosophy, 55 Tathapi tanra darsana
living entity never becomes, 188 quoted, 27
Mayavadi conception of, 185 Tejas tejasvinam aham
qualities of described in Koran, 224-228 quoted, 256
worshipable on absolute platform, 99 Tesam satata-yuktanar
worshiped by demigods, 55 verses quoted, 316
Surrender Transmigration
as relief from sinful reaction, 49 according to karma, 332-333
Suvarna-vaniks due to consciousness at time of death,
belong to same community as 319
Agaraoyalas, 96 Tiveni
Sun Caitanyaresided at, 275
living beings on, 319, 324 Tulasi
Svado ‘pi sadyah savanaya kalpate grows profusely in Vindavana, 109
quoted, 195 self-realized persons attracted by aroma
Svarapa Damodara of, 77-78
as friend of Rapa Gosvami, 308
as mahajana, 105
consultation of Caitanya with, 3, 11 uU
Svasmad bhavanti ye nyanas
, verses quoted, 362 Uddhava
Svetasvatara Upanisad instructed on giving up material desire,
quoted on size of soul, 321 385
Syama-kunda Uddhava dasa
discovered by Caitanya, 131 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156


--- Page 457 ---
General Index 455
Uddisya devata eva Vasistha
verses quoted, 189 considered mahajanaby jianis, 101
Upadesamrta Vasudeva
quoted on Mathura, 298 as devotee in parental love, 370
six causes of falldown listed in, 340-341 fearsKrsna and Balarama, 374
Upanisads Vatsalya-rati
greatness of Krsna understood through, description of, 363-364
378 Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah
quoted, 55,103, 326
Vedanta
Vv philosophy meant for devotees, 50
philosophy taught by Prakasananda
Vaikuntha Sarasvati, 54
seen by Akrara under water, 200 Supreme Lord known by philosophy,
attachment in awe and reverence in, 55
372 Vedanta-satra
goddesses of fortune in, 371 as transcendental knowledge, 254
Mathura is superior to, 298 discussed by Caitanya and Prakasanan-
Narayana worshiped on planets in, 337 da Sarasvati, 45
Vaikunthaj janito vara madhu-puri Viththala’s commentary on, 154
quoted, 298 Vedas
Vaisnavas as material knowledge, 254
avoid association with Mayavadis, 53 blasphemy of as offense, 189
fit to discuss Bhagavatam, 254 cited on impersonalists, 55
Kumaras become, 77-78 Krsna worshiped by followers of,
made through disciplic succession, 25 378
offenses at feet of, 339 not always in agreement, 99
only accept invitations from other, 31 Veda-vada-rata
Vaisnpavera kriya-mudra vijineha qualities of, 103
quoted, 338 Veni Madhava
Vaisyas Caitanya visits temple of, 82
subdivisions of, 96 Vibhavadyais tu vatsalyam”
Vaksyamanair vibhavadyaih quoted on vatsalya-bhakti-rasa, 367
quoted, 367, 368 Vidvan-mandana
Vallabha Bhattacarya Viththala as author of, 154
Caitanya ate at house of, 289-291 Vidyapati
went to see Caitanya, 276-277 as mahajana, 105
Vallabhacarya-sampradaya Vidya-vinaya-sampanne
has influence in Vrndavana and Bom- quoted, 16
bay, 276 Vihaya visayonmukhyarir
Vani Krsnadasa verses quoted, 362
accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 156 Vijali Khan
Varaha as son of king, 233
as incarnation of Absolute Truth, 298 became very advanced devotee, 235
Varanasi surrendered to Caitanya, 233
as name for Kasi, 41 Viraja River
Caitanya detained at, 51-52 devotional creeper goes beyond, 335
Candrasekhara resided in, 47-48 Vidate tad-anantaram
topics of conversation at, 48-50 quoted, 74


--- Page 458 ---
456 $ri Caitanya-caritamrta
Visnu Vrndavana
Brahman imagined as by Mayavadis, twelve forests of listed, 109
185 Vindavana dasa Thakura
earring of at Manikarnika, 41 cited on imposter brahmanas, 101
Visnu Purana Vrsabha
quoted on species of living entities, carried on Bhadrasena’s shoulders, 379
318-319 Vyaktarh masrnatevantar-
Visnu Svami verses quoted, 357
as mahajana, 105 Vyasadeva
quoted on God and conditioned soul, as father of Sukadeva Gosvami, 75
188 an incarnation of Krsna, 50
Visrama-ghata Bhagavatam as mature contribution of,
Caitanya bathed in, 86 255
Visvanatha Vyavasdyatmika buddhir ekeha
as physician, 41 quoted, 334
Viévesvara
visited by Caitanya and Tapana Misra,
43 w
Viththala
completed his father’s unfinished Women
books, 154 become spiritual masters, 193
Viththatesvara temple Kala Krsnadasa victim of, 7-9
Copala Deity remained in one month, World, material
153 desire to enjoy like a witch, 356
Vivarta-vada enjoyment in, 102
explained, 185 gardener of devotional creeper remains
Vivasvan in, 337-338
Brahman imagined as by Mayavadis, siddhis attractive in, 348
185 World, spiritual
Vrajendra-varyarpita-bhogam-uccair not attained by whimsical action, 64
verses quoted, 142 understanding position in as liberation,
Vindavana 74
activities of Rapa and Sanatana in, Worship
311-313 of Balabhadra Bhattacarya, 44
attachment without reverence in, 372 of Supreme Lord by demigods, 55
Caitanya prepares to visit, 3 of the Lord by different classes of men,
Caitanya takes Jharikhanda forest as, 17 378
Caitanya visited, 167
crowd accompanies Caitanya en route
to, 37 Y
Jharikhanda taken as, 29
rasas of devotees in, 370-371
Rapa and Sanatana empowered to carry Yadava Acarya
out work in, 307 accompanied Rapa Gosvami, 155
Rapa Gosvami revived Krsna's pastimes Yadunatha
in, 246 as son of Viththala, 154
Rapa Gosvami sent to, 399 Yad yad vibhatimat sattvari
transcendental quality of, 20 verses quoted, 256


--- Page 459 ---
General Index 457
Yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah
quoted, 64 quoted, 334, 350
Yamuna Yasyatma-buddhih kunape tridhatuke
bathing ghatas and holy places of listed, verses quoted, 103
107-108 Yatha pasanda-margena dattatreyarsabha
Caitanya jumped in, 286-287 quoted, 189
confluence of Ganges and, 82 Yatrabhisikto bhagavan
Jharikhanda rivers taken as, 29 verses quoted, 148
Yamaraja Yogamaya
as mahdjana, 105 Krsna's opulence forgotten by, 378
as the superintendent of death, 189 Yogendras
Yarn yarn vapi smaran bhavam as examples of santa-bhaktas, 370
quoted, 319 Yogis
Yasoda desire material opulence, 328-329
as advanced in devotional service, perfection of unattractive compared to
348 bhakti, 348
as astonished at Krsna's opulence, worship the Lord as Supersoul, 378
378 Yudhisthira Maharaja
as devotee in parental love, 370 quoted on truth in heart of pure devo-
bound Krsna with rope, 379 tee, 105-106


--- Page 460 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in this world
in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent
devotional scholar and the founder of sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic In-
stitutes), liked this educated young man and convinced him to dedicate his life to
teaching Vedic knowledge. Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven
years later (1933) at Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura requested
Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge through the English language. In
the years that followed, Srila Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-
gita, assisted the Gaudiya Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance,
started an English fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and
checked the galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and
struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never stopped;
it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion, the
Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title “Bhaktivedanta.” In
1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada retired from married life, and four
years later he adopted the vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his
studies and writing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana,
where he lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and writing.
He accepted the renounced order of life (sannydsa) in 1959. At Radha-Damodara,
Srila Prabhupada began work on his life's masterpiece: a multivolume translation
and commentary on the eighteen thousand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam
(Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada came to the
United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual master. Since that time,
His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes of authoritative translations,
commentaries and summary studies of the philosophical and religious classics of
India.

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, $rila Prabhupada
was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great difficulty that he
established the International Society for Krishna Consciousness in July of 1966.
Under his careful guidance, the Society has grown within a decade to a world-
wide confederation of almost one hundred dsramas, schools, temples, institutes
and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrindavana, an experimental Vedic com-
munity in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of New Vrndavana,
now a thriving farm community of more than one thousand acres, his students
have since founded several similar communities in the United States and abroad.

459


--- Page 461 ---
460 ওল Caitanya-caritamrta

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and second-
ary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in Dallas, Texas. The
school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the beginning of 1975 the enroll
ment had-grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large international
center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also the site for a
planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the magnificent Krsna-
Balarama Temple and International Guest House in Vrndavana, India. These are
centers where Westerners can live to gain firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his books. Highly
respected by the academic community for their authoritativeness, depth and
clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in numerous college courses. His writ-
ings have been translated into eleven languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
established in 1972 exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus
become the world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and
philosophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most recent
work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary—completed by Srila
Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali religious classic ऽतं
Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada has circled
the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to six continents. In
spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada continues to write prolifically.
His writings constitute a veritable library of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature
and culture.


--- Page 462 ---
(continued from front flap)

Madhya-lila (the middle period), the
longest of the three, is a detailed narration of
Sri Caitanya’s extensive and eventful travels
throughout India as a renounced mendicant,
teacher, philosopher, spiritual preceptor and
mystic. Finally, Antya-lila (the final period)
concerns the last eighteen years of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s manifest presence, spent in
semiseclusion in Jagannatha Puri, Orissa.
During these final years, Sri Caitanya drifted
deeper and deeper into trances of spiritual
ecstasy unparalleled in all of religious and
literary history, Eastern or Western.

, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, was a great saint and
a confidential disciple and student of
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the renowned
ascetic saint who was one of the most inti-
mate disciples of Sri Caitanya. He com-
menced work on the text while in his late
nineties and in failing health, as he vividly
describes in the text itself: “I have now be-
come too old and disturbed in invalidity.
While writing, my hands tremble. | cannot
remember anything, nor can | see or hear
properly. Still | write, and this is a great
wonder.” That he nevertheless completed,
under such debilitating conditions, the
greatest literary gem of medieval India is
surely one of the wonders of literary history.

The English translation and commentary is
the work of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished scholar and teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought.
He himself is a disciplic descendant of Sri
Caitanya, and his intimate familiarity with
the precepts of Caitanya Mahaprabhu emi-
nently qualifies him to present this impor-
tant classic to the English-speaking world.
The ease and clarity with which he ex-
pounds upon Sri Caitanya’s precepts lures
even a reader totally unfamiliar with Indian
religious tradition into a genuine under-
standing and appreciation of this profound
and monumental work.

The entire text, with commentary, pre-
sented in seventeen lavishly illustrated
volumes by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
represents a contribution of major impor-
tance to the intellectual, cultural and
spiritual life of contemporary man.


--- Page 463 ---
| |
| . |
MADHYA-LILA |
\ Volume 7 |
A |
নে পা 5
9 भा
54 करः सदम _
( 8 कक.) कुः A CAITANYA
NY 0 VEEP QE®E nnn
ity 5 ५. » # AC ;
& ८.9 ६ । च
# 4 1 No 4 ५९५ # । The
oy ` p2 ৭৬১ 4 - त
2) १ चे श~ ४ of
Pt == «ইল এ ী২ = Zod Cutenye
“SZ व... त व = 440०44८
যে 1 -
> Ta PY Loa EE > Ip
— कि BRAM eER © 2
Oey = << JRE
i সে & LN VS
By 1, ~ A HIS DIVINE GRACE
: AL . ন্ট ACBhaktivedanta
0 a নি कः Swami
৬ Tas ~ pd Prabhupada
সে, ০৯. Ric: - न प
क „न. ”চং ; ४
¦ ह চষে
= কু পাপা 0 রা ar LAE
व=. Pee | ৮
১২ 4 न, on > ^.
< = < / | ९ NE as er
1 06 0 21: Tine. fe:
91 Caitanya-caritamytais the authorized work on the life and teachings of क्षा
Krsna Caitanya—the philosopher, saint, spiritual preceptor, mystic and divine
incarnation who pioneered a great social and religious movement in Sixteenth
Century India. His teachings, which embody the highest philosophical and
theolgoical truths, have affected centuries of religious and philosophical
thinkers until the present day.
This translation and commentary on the original Bengali text is the work of
His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (pictured above), the
world’s most distinguished scholar and teacher of Indian thought and culture
and author of the best-selling Bhagavad-gita As It Is. This translation of Sr7
Caitanya-caritdmyta represents a contribution of major importance to the एर
intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of contemporary man. BHAKTIVEDANTA
BOOK TRUST

